

1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of Agriculture
     (USDA) policy and approach to Enterprise Architecture (EA) in support of the Clinger-
     Cohen Act of 1996, 40 United States Code (U.S.C.) Section 11101 et seq.; E- Government
     Act of 2002, 44 U.S.C. § 3501; The Common Approach to Federal Enterprise Architecture
     (“Common Approach”); Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA),
     Public Law (P.L.) 113-291 § 831-837; Federal Information Security Modernization Act of
     2014 (FISMA 2014), 44 U.S.C. § 3551; and various Office of Management and Budget
     (OMB) guidance documents.

2. SCOPE

     This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, and others who work
     for, or on behalf of, USDA and are responsible for the development, implementation, and
     oversight of information technology (IT) and Enterprise Architecture.

3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This DR supersedes DR 3185-001, Enterprise Architecture, dated July 29, 2019.

  b.   This policy is effective immediately and remains in effect until superseded or expiration.

  c.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their policies and procedures
       with this DR within 6 months of the publication date.

  d.   EA procedures will be provided in the companion Departmental Manual(DM) 3185-001,
       Enterprise Architecture Procedures.

4. BACKGROUND

  FITARA requires Chief Information Officers (CIO) to have a significant role in Information
  Technology (IT) decisions,including annual and multi-year planning, programming,
  budgeting, execution, reporting, management, governance, and oversight functions.

5. POLICY

  USDA’s EA is an asset that captures and contextualizes information and data regarding the
  Department’s and its Mission Area, agency, and staff office business operations, capabilities,
  and supporting technologies. EA supports and provides information for USDA’s IT
  investment and management processes and seeks to reduce unnecessary duplication of both
  material expenditures and efforts.

  a.   Mission Area, agency, and staff office Enterprise Architects must comply with
       legislative mandates, Federal initiatives, and oversight requirements, which includes the
       Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework Version 2 (FEAF v2) taxonomy and the
       Technology Business Management Council, Technology Business Management
       Taxonomy.

  b.   USDA’s Mission Area, agency, and staff office Enterprise Architects will:

       (1) Align with and support the business and operational needs, requirements, and
           priorities expressed through the USDA Strategic Plan Fiscal Years 2022-2026;

       (2) Conform to the USDA Standards Profile as approved by the Enterprise Architecture
           Committee (EAC). Usage of unapproved standards may occur if the responsible
           Mission Area, agency, or staff office has received an exception via theUSDA Office
           of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) Acquisition Approval Request process;

       (3) Incorporate security controls for all systems and applications to ensure the
           authorization, integrity, completeness, and accuracy of transactions;
       (4) Be designed and implemented in the context of the USDA EA and carried out to
           create a more responsive and cost-effective Government;

       (5) Install a robust configuration management process that must be in place forsystems,
           applications, and data;

       (6) Ensure data is an asset that has value to the enterprise and is managed accordingly;

       (7) Utilize the Enterprise Architecture Visioning Environment (EAVE) to develop and
           maintain the Mission Area, agency, and staff office IT asset inventory and their
           attributes;

       (8) Identify legacy systems which include IT assets with an expected decommission
           date of less than 5 years;

       (9) Maintain legacy system classifications within EAVE (e.g., expected decommission
           dates, actual decommission dates and an expected decommission reason) for all
           applicable IT assets within the Mission Area, agency, and staff office inventory;

       (10) Develop and maintain the Mission Area, agency, and staff office application
            roadmap or strategy to support strategic goals and technology modernization
            efforts, to include modernizing legacy systems by re-architecting, rebuilding, or
            replacing; and

       (11) Provide the OCIO, Information Resource Management Center (IRMC), Enterprise
            Architecture Division (EAD) with the most current Mission Area, agency, and staff
            office application roadmap or strategy for inclusion into the USDA OCIO Target
            Architecture to facilitate effective decision-making.

6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA CIO will:

       (1) Appoint a Chief Enterprise Architect (CEA) for USDA;

       (2) Provide sufficient support to ensure the USDA’s EA is effectively and efficiently
           governed;

       (3) Ensure that the EA program complies with applicable laws, OMB policies and
           memorandum, USDA policies and procedures, and has an effective governance
           process; and

       (4) Ensure that EA practices, principles, and information are incorporated into IT
           governance, portfolio management, capital planning, investment management, and
         other processes related to the planning, acquisition, maintenance, end of life and
         disposition of IT.

b.   The IRMC Associate Chief Information Officer will:

     (1) Address USDA’s information and IT requirements as collaborative and integrated
         processes, and work in concert with the USDA EAC;

     (2) Implement, manage, monitor, maintain, and report on USDA’s infrastructure and
         office automation technology base (i.e., its shared services environment); and

     (3) Ensure tight integration of USDA’s EA, Capital Planning and Investment Control
         (CPIC), program management, and IT waiver processes.

c.   USDA OCIO CEA will:

     (1) Disseminate and make available the contents of the USDA’s EA program;

     (2) Serve as the Enterprise Architecture Executive Steering Committee (EA ESC)
         Chair and direct and oversee all meetings;

     (3) Serve as the Chair and oversee and establish EAC Integrated Project Teams to
         address specific processes, work, or issues;

     (4) Provide day-to-day management and stewardship of USDA’s EAD;

     (5) Conduct periodic reviews of Mission Area, agency, and staff office EA activities;

     (6) Coordinate USDA’s EA-specific responses to internal and external oversight
         organizations (Government Accountability Office, General Services
         Administration, OMB, National Institute of Standards and Technology, and other
         organizations or Federal agencies);

     (7) Oversee an Enterprise Architecture Repository (EAR) that supports enterprise IT
         decision making andreporting activities;

     (8) Align USDA Classifications and Standards with OMB EA Standards for
         compliance. This can be integrated with the USDA EAR; and

     (9) Ensure creation and dissemination of a detailed operating procedures, policies, and
         other core EA artifacts that define the operation of the EAD.

d.   The USDA Enterprise Architecture Executive Steering Committee (EA ESC) will:

     (1) Be chaired by the USDA CEA;
     (2) Be comprised of three to five voting members from the USDA CIO Council;

     (3) Provide overall strategic direction and guidance for USDA’s EA;

     (4) Serve as the Department’s senior governing body for EA and be primarily
         responsible for facilitating the development and prioritization of EA strategies;

     (5) Serve as an adjudicating authority for the resolution of any issues that arise from or
         are identified by the EAC;

     (6) Assist in the establishment of a shared understanding of current EA challenges
         within the USDA and potential solutions for overcoming them; and

     (7) Facilitate agreement on a future-state vision for the USDA’s EA.

e.   The USDA EAC will:

     (1) Be chaired by the USDA CEA;

     (2) Be comprised of one voting member from each agency and staff office;

     (3) Collaborate with Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices in the creation,
         maintenance, and updating of EA-related standards, guidelines, directives, policies
         and procedures within USDA;

     (4) Establish EA value and performance measures;

     (5) Assess compliance with, completeness of, and benefits derived directly and
         indirectly from the use of the USDA EA; and

     (6) Develop and maintain EA reference models and make recommendations to the EA
         ESC and the USDA’s CIO Council for improvements to USDA’s EA domains.

f.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs will:

     (1) Ensure collaboration and coordination of EA functions across agency and Mission
         Area leadership, Enterprise Architects, and the USDA CEA;

     (2) Appoint and oversee data content stewards to ensure the accuracy and timeliness of
         data content in the USDA;

     (3) Align each IT project with USDA’s EA vision, principles, and standards; is
         consistent with agreements reached through collaborative decision-making
         processes; and is represented in the EAR; and

     (4) Develop internal policies, procedures, and controls to support the EA function.
  g.   Agency and Staff Office IT Directors and Program Managers will:

       (1) Incorporate EA policies, requirements, and standards into agency and staff office IT
           governance and CPIC processes;

       (2) Implement and maintain business, performance, application, data, infrastructure,and
           security configuration settings and controls;

       (3) Ensure Enterprise Architects and decision makers share a consistent understanding
           of the unique requirements for each EA subject area; and

       (4) Stay current on trends, developments, and innovations pertaining to EA-related
           tools, methods, and frameworks in the public and private sectors.

7. INQUIRIES

  All inquiries regarding this DR will be directed to the USDA OCIO IRMC EAD at
  enterprise.architecture@ocio.usda.gov.

                                           -END-
                            APPENDIX A

                 ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

AAR      Acquisition Approval Request
ACIO     Associate Chief Information Officer
CEA      Chief Enterprise Architect
CIO      Chief Information Officer
CPIC     Capital Planning and Investment Control
DR       Departmental Regulation
DM       Departmental Manual
EA       Enterprise Architecture
EAC      Enterprise Architecture Committee
EAD      Enterprise Architecture Division (OCIO-IRMC component)
EAR      Enterprise Architecture Repository
EAVE     Enterprise Architecture Visioning Environment
ESC      Executive Steering Committee
FEAF     Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework
FISMA    Federal Information Security Modernization Act
FITARA   Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
GAO      Government Accountability Office
GPEA     Government Paperwork Elimination Act
GSA      General Services Administration
IPT      Integrated Project Team
IRMC     Information Resource Management Center (OCIO component)
IT       Information Technology
NIST     National Institute of Standards and Technology
OCIO     Office of the Chief Information Officer
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
P.L.     Public Law
PM       Program Management
TBM      Technology Business Management
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture

                                 A-1

                                          APPENDIX B

                                         DEFINITIONS

Enterprise Architecture (EA). A strategic information asset base which defines the mission,
the information necessary to perform the mission, the technologies necessary to perform the
mission,and the transitional processes for implementing new technologies in response to
changing mission needs. The EA includes baseline architecture, target architecture, and a
sequencing plan. It is a framework for streamlining business processes, information flows,
applications, and infrastructure to support Agency and interagency goals. (Source: OMB,
Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource)

An EA is the explicit description and documentation of the current and desired relationships
among business and management processes and IT. It describes the “current architecture”
and “target architecture” to include the rules and standards and systems life cycle
information to optimize and maintain the environment which the agency or staff office
wishes to create and maintain by managing its IT portfolio. The EA must also provide a
strategy that will enable the Mission Areas, agency, or staff office to support its current state,
and act as the roadmap for transition to its target environment. These transition processes
will include a Mission Area, agency, or staff office, CPIC process, Mission Area, agency,
and staff office EA planning process, and Mission Area, agency, and staff office systems life
cycle methodologies. The EA will define principles and goals and set direction on such
issues as the promotion of interoperability, open systems, public access, and compliance with
the Government Paperwork Elimination Act (GPEA), 44 U.S.C. § 3504, end user
satisfaction, and IT security. The MissionArea, agency, or staff office must support the EA
with a complete inventory of Mission Area, agency, and staff office information resources,
including personnel, equipment, and funds devoted to information resources management
and IT, at an appropriate level of detail. (Source: OMB, Circular A-130)

Federal Enterprise Architecture. A business-based framework for Governmentwide
improvement developed by the OMB to facilitate efforts to transform the Federal Government
toone that is citizen-centered, results-oriented, and market-based. The Federal EA is
constructed through a collection of interrelated “reference models” designed to facilitate
cross-agency analysis and the identification of duplicative investments, gaps, and
opportunities for collaboration within and across Federal Agencies. These models are defined
as: Performance Reference Model, Business Reference Model, Application Reference Model,
Infrastructure Reference Model, Data Reference Model, and Security Reference Model.
(Source: OMB, Common Approach)

Legacy System. A legacy system is identified as a system that is outdated or obsolete and
may also be based on outdated technologies but is critical to day-to-day operations. A legacy
system, in the context of computing, refers to outdated computer systems, programming
languages, or application software that are used instead of available upgraded versions. A
legacy system is also known as a legacy platform. (Source: Federal Information Security
Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA 2014))

                                               B-1

                                    APPENDIX C

                        AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES

The Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, 40 United States Code (U.S.C.) Section 11101, et
seq.,as amended

E-Government Act of 2002, 44 U.S.C. § 3501, December 17, 2002

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA 2014), 44 U.S.C. § 3551,
December 18, 2014

Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), Public Law (P.L.)
113-291, Title VIII, Subtitle D, §§ 831-837, December 14, 2014

Government Paperwork Elimination Act (GPEA), 44 U.S.C. § 3504, October 21, 1998

OMB, Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource, July 28, 2016

OMB, The Common Approach to Federal Enterprise Architecture, “Common Approach”
May 2, 2012

OMB, Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework Version 2 (FEAF v2), January 29, 2013

Technology Business Management Council, Technology Business Management (TBM)
Taxonomy, March 1, 2018

USDA, Standards Profile

USDA, DM 3185-001, Enterprise Architecture Procedures (forthcoming)

USDA, DR 3105-001, USDA Chief Information Officers Council, April 6, 2016

USDA, DR 3107-001, Management of USDA IT Enterprise Initiatives, May 12, 2016

USDA, DR 3130-010, United States Department of Agriculture Enterprise Information
Technology Governance, April 20, 2021

USDA, DR 3130-011, Information Technology Program and Project Manager
CertificationRequirements, February 4, 2016

USDA, DR 3130-013, Information Technology Capital Planning and Investment Control,
May 24, 2021

USDA, DR 3180-001, Information Technology Standards, January 5, 2021

                                         C-1

USDA, Enterprise Architecture Committee Charter, Version 1.02, May 5, 2016

USDA, OCIO Target Architecture, September 14, 2021

USDA, USDA Strategic Plan Fiscal Years 2022-2026

                                        C-2

