

1. PURPOSE

   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes rules and guidelines per 29 Code of Federal
   Regulations (CFR) Part 1614, Federal Sector Equal Employment Opportunity by which the
   United States Department of Agriculture (USDA or Department) will process administrative
   complaints of employment discrimination.

2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

   This Regulation replaces DR 4300-007, Processing Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO)
   Complaints of Discrimination, dated July 12, 2016.

3. SCOPE

  a.    This DR covers all informal, formal and class complaints of alleged employment
        discrimination filed by USDA employees, former employees, and applicants for
        employment against USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices.

  b.    The DR institutes the provisions of 29 CFR Part 1614 and the U.S. Equal Employment
        Opportunity Commission’s (EEOC), Equal Employment Opportunity Management
        Directive 110 (EEO MD-110), Federal Sector Complaints Processing Manual.

4. POLICY

  a.    It is USDA’s policy to provide a workplace free from discrimination and harassment
        based on race, color, national origin, age (40 and older), disability, sex (including
        pregnancy), protected genetic information, religion, retaliation for engaging in
        protected activity, political beliefs, or marital, familial or parental status.

  b.    Complaints alleging discrimination on the bases of political beliefs, marital, familial or
        parental status, and retaliation for filing complaints on these bases are only processed
        within the Department. They are not appealable to EEOC or any other non-USDA
        agency or Department. Individuals bringing complaints on these bases will have access
        to the USDA complaint resolution process, including counseling, Alternative Dispute
        Resolution, investigation, and a Final Agency Decision.

  c.    It is also USDA’s policy to process complaints of employment discrimination in a fair
        and timely manner, in accordance with legal requirements and per DR 4710- 001,
        Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR), encourage the use of ADR to resolve
        discrimination complaints as early as possible.

5. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a. The Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights (ASCR) will:
       (1)   Provide leadership;
       (2)   Provide oversight over all areas of the EEO program;
       (3)   Exercise authority over all areas of the EEO complaint process for USDA as
             described below;
       (4)   Implement the pre-complaint process for staff offices;
     (5) Ensure Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices follow all civil rights policies,
         directives, procedures, rules, and regulations as well as findings, and decisions;

     (6) Hold Mission Area, agency, and staff office Heads and Administrators accountable
         for civil rights performance;

     (7) Ensure employees working in USDA’s civil rights offices and in the Office of the
         Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights (OASCR) (including contract employees and
         consultants) are knowledgeable of current civil rights laws and Federal regulations.
         Methods include access to up-to-date training and technical assistance;

     (8) Issue policies, directives, procedures, rules, and regulations to ensure the
         Department meets its civil rights compliance and enforcement obligations; and

     (9) Assess Mission Area, agency, and staff office compliance with this DR.

b.   Mission Area and Agency Heads will:

     (1) Establish an EEO compliance and enforcement program per the policies, directives,
         procedures, rules, and regulations issued by the ASCR;

     (2) Provide resources, such as, trained, and qualified staff to ensure the Department
         meets it’s EEO responsibilities;

     (3) Evaluate employees on their cooperation and compliance with the EEO complaint
         process and the responsibilities outlined in this DR;

     (4) Implement the pre-complaint process (filed by Mission Area, or agency employees)
         except for Conflict of Interest complaints per Section 7, Conflict of Interest
         Complaints, of this DR and ADR per DR 4710-001;

     (5) Provide a written EEO counselor report to the OASCR designated division
         responsible for the acceptance or dismissal of EEO complaints and to the aggrieved
         person, on the date the Notice of Right to File (NRF) a Formal Complaint is issued
         to the aggrieved person;

     (6) Make the ADR process available to complainants at all stages of the EEO process
         in accordance with DR 4710-001; and

     (7) Verify the signature of all Inter-Agency Agreements (IAA) reimbursing OASCR in
         support of the EEO Complaints. The Mission Area or agency will provide
         reimbursement within 30 calendar days of the beginning of the fiscal year, or 30
         calendar days of receipt of their appropriations (if the appropriations have not been
         received by the beginning of the fiscal year), or will provide a written statement
         explaining why the funds have not been received, along with a date the funds will
         be received.
  c.   Staff Office Heads will:

       (1) Ensure an EEO compliance and enforcement program is being maintained in
           accordance with the policies, directives, procedures, rules, and regulations issued by
           the ASCR;

       (2) Maintain staff qualifications by providing up-to-date civil rights training;

       (3) Evaluate employees on their cooperation and compliance with the EEO complaint
           process and the responsibilities outlined in this DR;

       (4) Make the ADR process available to complainants at all stages of the EEO process
           in accordance with DR 4710-001; and

       (5) Verify the signature of all IAAs reimbursing OASCR in support of the EEO
           Complaints process. The staff office will provide reimbursement within 30
           calendar days of the beginning of the fiscal year, or 30 calendar days of receipt of
           their appropriations (if the appropriations have not been received by the beginning
           of the fiscal year), or will provide a written statement explaining why the funds
           have not been received, along with a date the funds will be received.

  d.   EEO Counselors will:

       (1) Advise the aggrieved person (verbally and in writing) of their rights and
           responsibilities, including the option to participate in traditional EEO counseling or,
           the ADR program;

       (2) Conduct counseling activities in accordance with instructions contained in the EEO
           MD-110 and this DR;

       (3) Prepare a written report concerning the issues discussed and actions taken during
           counseling; and

       (4) Attempt to resolve the complaint.

6. EEO COMPLAINTS

  a.   It is USDA’s policy to process all complaints of employment discrimination per 29 CFR
       Part 1614, EEO MD-110, and this DR. All complaints will be handled in a fair and
       impartial manner. When a complaint is filed about a matter, all documents relating to
       the matter will be held by OASCR until the complaint is closed and all rights to appeal
       have been exhausted.
     Information in a complaint file may be protected by the Privacy Act of 1974, 5 United
     States Code (U.S.C.) § 552a, as amended (the Act), and where the Act applies,
     information is not subject to disclosure.

b.   An employee or applicant may file an individual complaint of employment
     discrimination in accordance with this DR, if the individual or any specific class of
     individuals believe they have suffered discrimination in terms, conditions, or privileges
     of employment, due to:

     (1) An action or decision (including a failure to act or decide) by an official, non-
         employee or employee of USDA, and believes that this action or decision was
         motivated by a discriminatory intent based on their race, color, national origin, age
         (40 and older), disability, sex (including pregnancy), genetic information, religion,
         retaliation for protected activity, political beliefs, or marital, familial or parental
         status; or

     (2) A policy or practice that has a disparate impact on members of the above-mentioned
         protected groups. For class complaints, see Section 8, Class Complaints, below.

c.   Per EEO MD-110 and any individual internal official time policy, if applicable, Mission
     Areas, agencies, and staff offices will allow employees (informal aggrieved persons and
     formal complainants, representatives, and witnesses) reasonable time and opportunity
     during official business hours to participate in the EEO complaint(s) process in which
     they are a party, representative, or named as a witness.

d.   Individuals who file informal or formal EEO complainants must fully cooperate in the
     processing of the complaint (including the scheduling of and attending meetings and
     interviews, responding to correspondence, and providing requested material or
     information) and comply with all established timeframes.

e.   Per 29 CFR § 1614.107(a)(7), Dismissals of Complaints, failure to cooperate may result
     in dismissal of the entire complaint. Notice must be given to the union, where
     applicable, of formal discussions as defined by 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71, Subpart F: Labor-
     Management and Employee Relations, 5 U.S.C. § 7114(a)(2)(A), Representation Rights
     and Duties.

f.   Managers and supervisors are required to cooperate in all stages of the EEO complaint
     process, (including any resolution attempts of informal and formal complaints,
     scheduling of and attending meetings and interviews, responding to correspondence, and
     providing requested material or information) and comply with all established
     timeframes. Additionally, federal employees named as witnesses are required to
     cooperate in all stages of the EEO complaint process, as necessary (including scheduling
     of and attending meetings and interviews, responding to correspondence, and providing
     requested material or information) and comply with all established timeframes. EEO
     Counselors and investigators must be given access to original records. Per 29 CFR §
     1614.108, Investigation of Complaints, DR 4070-735-00, Employee Responsibility and
     Conduct (2007), and EEO MD-110 failure to cooperate may result in USDA or EEOC
     drawing an adverse inference that the requested information, or the testimony of the
     requested individual, would have reflected unfavorably on the party refusing to provide
     the requested information. Notice must be given to the union, where applicable, of
     formal discussions as defined by 5 U.S.C. § 7114(a)(2)(A).

g.   The EEO complaint process consists of the informal or pre-complaint and the formal
     process. Specific timeframes apply to each stage of the EEO complaint process.

h.   USDA encourages employees, and Mission Area, agency, and staff office Heads to
     informally resolve issues raised in EEO complaints and make the ADR process available
     to complainants at all stages of the EEO process, per DR 4710-001.

i.   Informal Complaint Processing

     (1) Initial Contact

         (a) An aggrieved person has the right to remain anonymous in the informal
             complaint process. An aggrieved person must contact a designated EEO
             Counselor within 45 calendar days of the alleged act of discrimination or, if the
             claim involves a personnel action, within 45 days of the effective date of the
             action. Only issues raised with an EEO Counselor (and claims like or related
             to the counseled issues) may be asserted in a formal complaint of employment
             discrimination.

         (b) The aggrieved person will proceed through the informal complaint stage using
             either traditional counseling or ADR.

         (c) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will offer ADR to all aggrieved
             persons at the informal (pre-complaint) stage except when a Mission Area,
             agency, or staff office documents instances where ADR may not be
             appropriate, such as an incident reasonably related to the complaint that
             involved workplace violence, sexual assault or battery, or other criminal
             activity (see DR 4710-001). If the aggrieved person elects to participate in
             ADR during the pre-complaint process, management’s participation is
             required.

         (d) For further information regarding ADR in the informal EEO complaint
             process, see 29 CFR Part 1614, EEO MD-110, and DR 4710-001.

     (2) Reports

         If there is no resolution at the informal stage, the EEO Counselor will issue a NRF
         to the aggrieved person. Within 15 calendar days from the date of issue, the EEO
         Counselor is required to provide a written counselor’s report to the division within
         OASCR responsible for the acceptance or dismissal of EEO complaints and to the
         aggrieved person. If the EEO Counselor report is not received within 30 calendar
         days of the issuance of the NRF, OASCR reserves the right to accept the complaint
         in its entirety. Each Mission Area, agency, and staff office bears the consequences
         for failure to timely submit an EEO Counselor report.

     (3) Posting EEO Counselor Contact and Complaint Processing Procedures

         Mission Area, agency, and staff office Heads must post a notice (conspicuously
         throughout each work location) and electronically on their webpages listing the
         name and address of its EEO Counselors and their current telephone number. The
         notice must outline the EEO complaint processing procedures and applicable time
         limits to start EEO counseling.

j.   Formal Complaint Processing

     The formal EEO complaint process consists of the following stages: intake (Acceptance
     and Dismissal Decisions); investigation; the complainant’s election for a Final Agency
     Decision (FAD) by OASCR or of a hearing before the EEOC; OASCR’s completion of
     a FAD, or Final Agency Order (FAO) based on a hearing decision issued by an EEOC
     Administrative Judge (AJ); the complainant’s election to file an appeal of the findings of
     any FAD or FAO; and Remand.

     (1) Intake (Acceptance and Dismissal Decisions)

         (a) After the Informal EEO complaint process, an aggrieved person must file a
             Formal EEO Complaint with the Department, in the manner provided in the
             NRF, within 15 calendar days of receipt of the NRF. The complaint does not
             need to be written or signed if it is submitted in an alternate format to
             accommodate the complaint filing needs of a person who has Limited English
             Proficiency (LEP) or a disability).

         (b) Submitting a Formal EEO Complaint after the required 15 calendar day
             timeframe may result in the dismissal of the complaint unless the timeframe is
             extended by OASCR. This time limit is subject to waiver, estoppel, and
             equitable tolling.

         (c) A formal complaint may be mailed, faxed, e-mailed, or submitted in person.
             Upon receipt, OASCR will acknowledge the complaint and subsequently
             notify complainants (and their designated representative) of dismissal or
             acceptance of their complaint(s) for investigation. The notification will also
             outline their appeal rights.

         (d) All formal EEO complaints must outline the counseled claim(s) and the
             complainant’s wish to pursue the formal EEO complaint process. Any
             complaint must also be signed by the complainant or their designated
             representative if that representative is an attorney.
(2) Investigation of Complaints

    (a) OASCR will notify the complainant and the respective Mission Area, agency,
        or staff office of the issues accepted for investigation. Additionally, OASCR
        will arrange for an investigation into the issues of the formal EEO complaint.
        The Report of Investigation (ROI) will include all relevant documentary
        evidence related to the accepted issues.

    (b) Except in mixed cases (see Section 6j, Mixed Case Complaint Processing),
        within 180 calendar days from the complainant’s filing of their complaint,
        OASCR will provide the complainant with a copy of the ROI.

    (c) If the complaint is amended prior to the issuance of the ROI, the Department
        will provide a copy of the ROI within 360 calendar days from the initial
        complaint filing date or 180 calendar days from the date the amendment was
        filed. If the 180 calendar days elapse without completion of the investigation
        the complainant has the right to elect a hearing directly with the EEOC or file a
        civil action in District Court.

    (d) Upon the issuance of the ROI, the complainant will be given the right to elect
        either a hearing before an EEOC AJ or a FAD on the merits by USDA.

(3) Final Agency Decision (Adjudication)

    (a) If the complainant elects a FAD or does not make an election for either a
        hearing or a FAD within the 30-calendar day timeframe, OASCR will issue a
        FAD on the merits of complaints of discrimination. OASCR must issue the
        FAD within 60 calendar days of either:

        1    The request for a final decision on the record; or

        2    The expiration of the 30-calendar day period for the complainant to
             request a hearing if no hearing or decision request is submitted; or

        3    Within 120 calendar days of the date of filing of a mixed case complaint
             (see Section 6j, Mixed Case Complaint Processing).

    (b) When an EEOC AJ issues a decision dismissing the hearing request, OASCR
        will issue a FAD within the appropriate period of time indicated by the AJ in
        his or her order or pursuant to the timeframes in Section (3)(a) above.

    (c) When an EEOC AJ issues a decision on the merits of the case (i.e., dismissal,
        or decisions with or without a hearing), OASCR will issue a FAO within 40
        calendar days after receipt of the AJ’s decision. For class complaints (see
        Section 8, Class Complaints), the OASCR will issue a FAO within 60 calendar
              days after receipt of the AJ’s decision. OASCR will not issue a FAD in these
              circumstances, but a FAO.

     (4) Hearing

         If the complainant elects an EEOC hearing, the request for a hearing must be
         submitted to the EEOC within 30 calendar days of receipt of the ROI. A copy of
         the request for a hearing must be submitted simultaneously to OASCR. The EEOC
         AJ assumes full responsibility for adjudicating the complaint including overseeing
         the development of the record as necessary and rendering a decision (e.g., finding,
         no finding, dismissal, or remand) and order.

     (5) Appeals

         (a) The complainant may file an appeal, with the EEOC Office of Federal
             Operations, within 30 calendar days of receipt of a FAD or a FAO issued by
             the OASCR. If no FAO is issued, the complainant can appeal the decision of
             an EEOC AJ upon the conclusion of the OASCR’s 40 calendar day review
             period.

         (b) Decisions on mixed-case complaints, and complaints filed on the bases of
             marital, familial or parental status, or political beliefs may not be appealed to
             the EEOC.

     (6) Remand

         A remand is an EEO complaint returned to USDA, by EEOC, for further action
         based on an appeal decision. USDA will process any remanded cases in accordance
         with EEOC Orders.

k.   Mixed Case Complaint Processing

     (1) In cases where the employee files a Mixed Case Complaint, in addition to following
         the procedures outlined in Section 6i, Formal Complaint Processing, as applicable,
         the aggrieved person must choose whether to pursue a mixed case complaint
         through the Federal sector EEO process administered by EEOC, a mixed case
         appeal subject to Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB) jurisdiction, or file a
         civil action in Federal District Court. Whatever action the individual files first is
         considered an election to proceed in that forum. 29 CFR § 1614.302(b), Mixed
         Case Complaints outlines procedures and timeframes to avoid duplication of
         efforts.

     (2) For further information on mixed case complaints, see 29 CFR § 1614.302.

l.   Posting of Violations and Statistical EEO Complaint Data
       (1) Mission Area, agency, and staff office Heads must post:

           (a) A notice of discrimination as ordered by the ASCR, an EEOC AJ, or a Federal
               District Court Judge in the event of a finding of discrimination, where
               designated by the order;

           (b) Within 90 days of a finding of discrimination and to remain online for at least
               one year, in accordance with the Elijah E. Cummings Federal Employee
               Antidiscrimination Act of 2020; and

           (c) Statistical data on the number of EEO complaints opened, filed, and resolved
               during the fiscal year using electronic media and other formats, on the Mission
               Area, agency, or staff office’s website.

7. CONFLICT OF INTEREST COMPLAINTS

  a.   All EEO complaints will be processed without conflicts of interest. USDA will take
       measures to prevent any such conflicts and, where possible, avoid perceived conflicts of
       interest. To ensure compliance with this requirement and to maintain the integrity of the
       EEO complaint program the same official(s) responsible for executing and advising on
       personnel actions may not also be responsible for managing, advising, or overseeing the
       EEO pre-complaint or complaint process. In addition, USDA will employ alternative
       complaint processing mechanisms, described below in this Section, to ensure complaints
       receive fair and impartial treatment.

  b.   The potential for a conflict of interest arises in cases where a Responsible Management
       Official (RMO) or complainant serves in a role that would prevent the fair and impartial
       processing of a complaint, or the appearance of a fair and impartial process. The ASCR
       will designate a unit within OASCR independent of the main EEO division of OASCR
       to process complaints that may raise a conflict of interest or a potential conflict of
       interest.

  c.   Per the guidance below, the conflict unit must be responsible for determining when a
       complaint meets the criteria for a conflict of interest. The conflict unit must have the
       discretion to return a complaint to the referring Mission Area, agency, or staff office to
       process by the main EEO division of OASCR if the conflict unit determines that no
       actual or perceived conflict of interest exists. For example, without limitation, the
       conflict unit may determine there is no actual or perceived conflict of interest where the
       conflict unit determines the alleged RMO is not in the complainant’s chain of command;
       if the conflict unit determines the RMO did not participate in the alleged discriminatory
       act; or where a complaint asserts that an alleged RMO engaged in discriminatory
       behavior but said complaint makes no allegations related to the specific actions of said
       alleged RMO.
d.   When a conflict of interest or a perceived conflict of interest arises, the conflict unit
     must ensure an appropriate alternate processing mechanism is used that takes the
     complaint outside the influence of the alleged conflicted RMO. Per the guidance below,
     the conflict unit may handle all or part of the EEO complaint process as appropriate to
     safeguard the integrity of the EEO complaint process, including referring complaints to
     a third party for processing. Third parties may include private contractors, USDA Civil
     Rights offices that do not report through the alleged RMO’s chain of reporting, or
     Federal agencies outside of the USDA.

e.   USDA will process conflict of interest complaints in accordance with the guidance set
     forth below.

     (1) The conflict unit will arrange for informal, pre-complaint processing and will
         ensure that formal complaints (including FADs) are processed by an appropriate
         third party, in cases where:

         (a) The alleged RMO or complainant is the ASCR, Deputy ASCR, Associate
             ASCR, and any person directly supervised by the ASCR;

         (b) The alleged RMO or complainant is any person employed in the conflict unit;

         (c) The alleged RMO or complainant is anyone employed in the Office of the
             Secretary; and

         (d) The alleged RMO or complainant is the Mission Area, Agency, or Staff Office
             Head, or anyone directly supervised by the Mission Area, Agency, or Staff
             Office Head, where applicable.

f.   The conflict unit will handle informal, pre-complaint processing and formal complaint
     processing either directly, or through a third party in all cases involving complaints
     brought by, or alleging discrimination committed by employees of OASCR, or other
     than those identified in Section 7e, above.

g.   The conflict unit will handle informal, pre-complaint processing and formal complaint
     processing either directly, or through a third party in call cases involving complaints
     brought by, or filed against an Agency Civil Rights Director, or filed against anyone
     directly supervised by an Agency Civil Rights Director.

h.   The conflict unit will handle administration and will track processing times for all
     complaints identified as conflict cases to ensure investigations are completed within the
     allocated 180 calendar days, and all other regulatory timeframes are met. The conflict
     unit will develop a manual that provides further guidance on EEO complaint processing.
8. CLASS COMPLAINTS

  a.   A class is a group of employees, former employees, or applicants for employment who,
       alleged to be or have been adversely affected by a personnel management policy or
       practice that discriminates against the group based on their race, color, religion, sex, , ,
       national origin, age, disability, or genetic information.

  b.   A class complaint is a written complaint of discrimination filed on behalf of a class by a
       class member (agent) who acts for the class during the processing of the class complaint.

  c.   The Department will process class complaints per 29 CFR § 1614.105, Pre-complaint
       Processing and 29 CFR § 1614.204, Class Complaints.

9. REMEDIES

  The policy of the Department is to attempt to make whole any individual who has been found
  to have suffered from discrimination. The Department will also attempt to resolve
  complaints, where the Mission Area, agency, or staff office deems it warranted, whether
  discrimination is explicitly found. Relief, up to and including the maximum possible relief,
  may be provided by a Mission Area, agency, or staff office to resolve the complaint at any
  stage.

10. RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION

  Nothing in this DR will prohibit any aggrieved person or complainant from filing an action in
  Federal District Court in accordance with the requirements of 29 CFR § 1614.407, Civil
  Action: Title VII, Age Discrimination in Employment Act, Rehabilitation Act, and the
  Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act. However, there are certain bases (marital,
  familial, or parental status, or political beliefs) that may not be within the jurisdiction of the
  Federal District Court, if raised as the basis of a discrimination claim. Aggrieved persons or
  complainants should become aware of applicable case specific deadlines and prerequisites
  for filing civil actions. The filing of a civil action with a Federal District Court will result in
  USDA dismissing any administrative claims alleging the same act of discrimination.

11. OTHER RELATED PROVISIONS

  a.   Civil Rights Data Base (DB)

       The ASCR is responsible for and has the authority to administer the Civil Rights DB for
       the Department. The Civil Rights DB is an electronic computerized system which tracks
       and provides reports on EEO complaints based on data collected from discrimination
       complaints filed by USDA employees and applicants for USDA employment.
   b.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Options

        Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may establish their own policies, directives,
        procedures, rules, and regulations for processing informal EEO complaints consistent
        with and in accordance with this DR. Any such document must be submitted to the
        ASCR for review and approval in writing, signed by the ASCR, prior to implementation.
        Notwithstanding approval by OASCR, any provision contained in a Mission Area,
        agency, or staff office’s policy, directive, procedure, rule, and regulation that is
        inconsistent with the provisions of this DR must be superseded by the provisions of this
        DR.

   c.   Training

        (1) All employees working in civil rights including political appointees, and collateral
            duty and full-time civil rights practitioners should participate in annual civil rights
            training as directed by the ASCR. Training topics include, but are not limited to,
            anti-harassment, reasonable accommodation, religious accommodation, age
            discrimination, LEP, new EEO counselors and investigators, refresher training for
            experienced EEO counselors and investigators, civil rights compliance reviews,
            Complying with MD-715 and Creating a Model EEO Program, No FEAR Act, and
            Civil Rights Enterprise System (CRES) System (Database) Management.

        (2) For further information on Civil Rights Training, see DR 4120-001, Annual
            Departmental Civil Rights Training.

12. INQUIRIES

   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will direct questions and inquiries about
   this DR to the Center for Civil Rights Operations (CCRO), Compliance Division by email at
   CCROCompliance@usda.gov.

                                              -END-
                                    APPENDIX A

                         ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

ADR           Alternative Dispute Resolution
AJ            Administrative Judge
ASCR          Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
CCRO          Center for Civil Rights Operations
CFR           Code of Federal Regulations
CRES          Civil Rights Enterprise System
DG            Departmental Guidebook
DR            Departmental Regulation
EEO           Equal Employment Opportunity
EEOC          Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
FAD           Final Agency Decision
FAO           Final Agency Order
FLRA          Federal Labor Relations Authority
IAA           Inter-Agency Agreement
LEP           Limited English Proficiency
MD            Management Directive
MSPB          Merit Systems Protection Board
NAD           National Appeals Division
No FEAR Act   Notification and Federal Employee Anti-Discrimination and Retaliation Act
NRF           Notice of Right to File
OASCR         Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
P.L.          Public Law
RMO           Responsible Management Official
ROI           Report of Investigation
U.S.C.        United States Code
USDA          United States Department of Agriculture

                                         A-1

                                         APPENDIX B

                                         DEFINITIONS

Agency. Organizational units of the Department, other than staff offices as defined below,
whose heads report to officials within the Office of the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Under
Secretaries, Assistant Secretaries, and Assistant to the Secretary. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-
001, USDA Departmental Directives System)

Agency Head. The administrator, chief, or director of an Agency who is the official named or
designated to have primary responsibility for the management of the Agency as delegated
under. (Source: 7 CFR Part 2.4, Delegation of Authority by the Secretary of Agriculture,
General Officers)

Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR). An array of techniques used to achieve consensual
resolution of disputes, generally with the assistance of a neutral third party. (Source: USDA,
Departmental Guidebook (DG) 0100-002, USDA Departmental Directives Definitions
Glossary)

Applicant. An individual seeking employment with USDA or its agencies. (Source: USDA,
DG 0100-002)

Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights (ASCR). The civil rights official for USDA with authority
per 7 CFR §2.25, Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights for the performance and oversight of civil
rights functions within USDA, including the authority and discretion to delegate civil rights
functions to Agency Heads and offices.

Basis. The ground(s) upon which an aggrieved person or complainant alleges that a USDA
official or employee has engaged in prohibited discriminatory behavior. (Source: USDA, DG
0100-002)

Civil Rights Director. An individual appointed by the Agency Head, that is responsible for the
implementation of an equal employment program and for federally assisted and federally
conducted programs to promote equal employment opportunity and to identify and eliminate
discriminatory practices and policies. For the purposes of this DR, the Civil Rights Director
will also serve as an EEO Director per 29 CFR § 1614.102(b)(4). (Source: USDA, DG 0100-
002)

Conflict of Interest Complaint. An EEO complaint involving facts or allegations that are
determined to pose an actual or perceived conflict between a responsible management official
or complainant’s position or personal interest, and USDA’s responsibility to administer a fair,
impartial investigative process and resolution of complaints. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

Employee. An individual employed or previously employed in any position within USDA.
Contractors, interns, and volunteers may be included under this definition; however, specific

                                               B-1

criteria must be met for them to be classified as an “employee” for EEO purposes. (Source:
USDA, DG 0100-002)

EEO Complaint Process. All actions and procedures undertaken in an EEO complaint,
including but not limited to, counseling, acceptance, dismissal, investigation, ADR, hearing,
final agency decision, appeal, remand, and the right to file a civil action. (Source: USDA, DG
0100-002)

EEO Counselor. Any agency or contracted employee who, serving as a neutral, provides an
aggrieved individual with their rights and obligations under equal employment opportunity laws,
gathers limited data and may attempt an informal resolution where ADR is not offered or
accepted, pursuant to 29 CFR Part 1614. (Source: EEOC, EEO MD-110)

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC). The agency responsible for
enforcing Federal laws making it illegal to discriminate against a job applicant or an employee
because of the person’s race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy), national origin, age (40
or older), disability, or genetic information. (Source: EEOC, Overview webpage)

Familial Status. An individual's family composition, including the makeup of their household,
or other family relationships. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

Formal EEO Complaint. A written statement of alleged employment discrimination filed after
the completion of the informal (pre-complaint) process that initiates the formal EEO complaint
process. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

Informal EEO Complaint. The first stage in the EEO complaint process that must take place
before the initiation of a formal complaint of discrimination in which the aggrieved person
exhibits intent to begin the EEO process by presenting allegations of discrimination to an EEO
Counselor. This term is commonly interchanged with the word “pre-complaint.” (Source:
USDA, DG 0100-002)

Issue(s). The action(s) or decision(s), including failure to act or decide, or policy(ies) that
allegedly violate(s) civil rights laws and policies that prohibit discrimination in USDA
employment or in the employment application process. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

Marital Status. The state of a person being married, unmarried (single, divorced,
widowed), or separated. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

Mission Area. A group of agencies with related functions that report to the same Under or
Assistant Secretary. Research, Education, and Economics (REE) is an example of a Mission
Area. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-001)

Mixed Case Complaint. A complaint of employment discrimination filed with a federal agency
based on race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, or genetic information

                                                 B-2

related to or stemming from an action that can be appealed to the MSPB. The complaint may
contain only an allegation of employment discrimination or it may contain additional allegations
that the MSPB has jurisdiction to address. (Source: 29 CFR §1614.302(b))

Parental Status. Status of an individual who, with respect to an individual who is under the age
of 18 or who is 18 or older but is incapable of self-care because of a physical or mental
disability, is a biological parent, an adoptive parent, foster parent, stepparent, custodian of a legal
ward, in loco parentis over such individual, or actively seeking legal custody or adoption of such
an individual. (Source: Executive Order 13152, Further Amendment to Executive Order 11478,
Equal Employment Opportunity in the Federal Government, May 2, 2000)

Responsible Management Official (RMO). The EEO ADR session official(s) who, according to
the complainant’s allegations, is (are) responsible for the action or made the decision that harmed
the complainant. An RMO may not be the designated Resolving Official in an ADR session.
The RMO is sometimes identified as the “Responding Management Official.” (Source: USDA,
DR 4710-001, Alternative Dispute Resolution)

Staff Office. Departmental administrative offices whose heads report to officials within the
Office of the Secretary. Staff offices provide support to Department officials and employees at
all levels and they support our programs and services by working with USDA agencies,
Congress, organizations, and tribal governments. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-001)

                                                 B-3

                                         APPENDIX C

                             AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES

Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, 29 U.S.C. § 621, as amended

Administrative Dispute Resolution Act of 1996, P.L. 104-320, October 19, 1996

Americans with Disabilities Amendments Act of 2008, P.L. 110-325, September 25, 2008 (EEOC
web page)

Civil Rights Act of 1964, P.L. 88-352, Title VII, Equal Employment Opportunity, July 2, 1964
(EEOC web page)

Civil Rights Act of 1991, P.L. 102-166, November 21, 1991 (EEOC web page)

Civil Service Reform Act of 1978, P.L. 95-454, October 13, 1978

Delegation of Authority by the Secretary of Agriculture, 7 CFR §2.25, Assistant Secretary for
Civil Rights

Delegation of Authority by the Secretary of Agriculture, 7 CFR §2.4, General Officers

EEOC, EEO MD-110, Federal Sector Complaints Processing Manual, August 15, 2016

EEOC, EEO MD-715, Federal responsibilities under Section 717 of Title VII and Section 501 of
the Rehabilitation Act, October 1, 2003

EEOC, Overview webpage

Equal Pay Act of 1963, P.L. 88-38, June 10, 1963 (EEOC web page)

Executive Order 13087, Further Amendment of Executive Order 11478, Equal Employment
Opportunity in the Federal Government, May 28, 1998

Executive Order 13152, Further Amendment to Executive Order 11478, Equal Employment
Opportunity in Federal Government, May 2, 2000

Executive Order 13672, Further Amendment to Executive Order 11478, Equal Employment
Opportunity in the Federal Government and Executive Order 11246, Equal Employment
Opportunity, July 21, 2014

Federal Sector Equal Employment Opportunity, 29 CFR Part 1614

    29 CFR §1614.102(b)(4), Agency Program

                                              C-1

    29 CFR § 1614.105, Pre-Complaint Processing

    29 CFR § 1614.107(a)(7), Dismissal of Complaints

    29 CFR § 1614.108, Investigation of Complaints

    29 CFR § 1614.204, Class Complaints

    29 CFR §§ 1614.301 – 310, Related Processes

    29 CFR § 1614.302, Mixed Case Complaints

    29 CFR § 1614.407, Civil Action: Title VII, Age Discrimination in Employment Act,
    Rehabilitation Act, and Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act

Federal Service Labor – Management Relations Statute, 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71, § 7114(a)(2)(A),
Representation, Rights and Duties, October 13, 1978

Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008, P.L. 110-233, May 21, 2008 (EEOC web
page)

Government Organizations and Employees, 5 U.S.C. § 301, Departmental regulations

Notification and Federal Employee Antidiscrimination and Retaliation (No FEAR) Act of 2002,
P.L. 107-174, May 15, 2002

Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978, P.L. 95-555, October 31, 1978 (EEOC web page)

Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. § 552a, December 31, 1974, as amended

Rehabilitation Act of 1973, P.L. 93-112, September 26, 1973

   Section 501, Employment of Individuals with Disabilities (EEOC web page)

   Section 505, Remedies and Attorneys’ Fees (EEOC web page)

USDA, HYPERLINK "https://www.ocio.usda.gov/document/departmental-guidebook-0100-002"DG
USDA Departmental Directives Definitions Glossary, September 26, 2018 Departmental
Directives Definitions Glossary, September 26, 2018

USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System, January 4, 2018

USDA, DR 4120-001, Annual Departmental Civil Rights Training, June 14, 2016

                                             C-2

USDA, DR 4300-004, Civil Rights Impact Analysis, October 17, 2016

USDA, DR 4300-008, Reasonable Accommodations and Personal Assistance Services for
Employees and Applicants with a Disability, October 27, 2020

USDA, DR 4330-005, Prohibition Against National Origin Discrimination Affecting Persons
with Limited English Proficiency in Programs Conducted by USDA, June 4, 2013

USDA, DR 4710-001, Alternative Dispute Resolution, April 5, 2006

                                           C-3

