                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                NUMBER:
     DEPARTMENTAL GUIDEBOOK                                     DG 4600-004
 SUBJECT: Foreign Visits and Assignments Vetting                DATE:
 Procedures                                                     February 1, 2023
                                                                EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of Homeland Security
                                                                February 1, 2026



Section                                                                                    Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                  1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                       1
3.   Scope                                                                                    2
4.   Background                                                                               2
5.   Procedures                                                                               2
6.   Inquiries                                                                               15

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                     A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                    B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                     C-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.   This Departmental Guidebook (DG) provides procedural guidance to support
          Departmental Regulation (DR) 4600-004, Foreign Visits and Assignments Vetting.

     b.   This DG provides user instructions for the Foreign National Vetting (FNV) application
          (App), a centralized case management tool for the risk assessment process applied to
          non-United States (U.S.) citizens, in accordance with DR 4600-004.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     a.   This DG is effective immediately when published.

     b.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must align their policies and procedures with
          this DG within calendar 180 days of the publish date.
3. SCOPE

  a.   This DG applies to all facilities owned or operated (e.g., owned, leased, or occupied) by
       the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) in the U.S., and to all Federal
       employees or any person not federally employed who visits or performs duties in
       partnership with or on behalf of USDA, such as a consultant, contractor, advisor,
       volunteer, student, or intern.

  b.   This DG also applies to designated Foreign Visits and Assignments (FVA) point-of-
       contact (POC) who will be responsible for submitting FNV requests.


4. BACKGROUND

  a.   The Secretary of Agriculture has delegated authority to the Director of the Office of
       Homeland Security (OHS) for matters relating to counterintelligence (CI) and insider
       threats (7 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) § 2.95, Director, Office of Homeland
       Security). Within OHS, the FNV process seeks to detect, deter, and protect against
       espionage, insider threats, and external adversaries in accordance with DR 4600-003,
       USDA Defensive Counterintelligence and Insider Threat Programs.

  b.   The FNV process is specifically conducted to assess risks from a national security, CI,
       and anti-terrorism perspective, prior to granting a non-U.S. Citizen access to the
       Department’s facilities, personnel, programs, information, or systems within the U.S. in
       accordance with criteria outlined in DR 4600-004. It includes queries against multiple
       intelligence community and law enforcement databases. It can support, but does not
       replace, investigative action conducted for credentialing, fitness, and suitability
       determinations.


5. PROCEDURES

  a.   Designating Agency Contacts

       (1) DR 4600-004 requires each Mission Area, agency, and staff office to identify at
           least one primary and alternate FVA POC who will be responsible for submitting
           FNV requests, also known as tickets, to OHS via the FNV App. FVA POCs may be
           Federal employees or contractors who have been deemed suitable to hold a
           minimum of a Public Trust position.

       (2) FVA POCs handling credentialing, fitness, and suitability determinations are
           uniquely positioned to identify non-U.S. Citizens who will onboard at USDA in a
           Federal or non-Federal (e.g., contractor, consultants, visiting scientist) position.
           Offices who manage volunteer programs that include foreign nationals or foreign
           exchange programs at USDA are also positioned to submit FNV tickets in advance
           of projected arrival dates.



                                               2
     (3) Each user requires a seat license to use the FNV App. Licenses are renewed
         annually each May and are allocated as requested by Mission Areas, agencies, and
         staff offices. OHS will validate the need for user licenses to the FNV App on an
         annual basis prior to the renewal period.

     (4) The FVA POCs directory may be requested by emailing FVALiaison@usda.gov.
         Any changes to the FVA POC directory must be emailed to
         FVALiaison@usda.gov.

     (5) OHS will provide training to all FVA POCs on FNV policy, vetting requirements,
         FNV App demonstration, and their roles and responsibilities. Access to the FNV
         App is not provided by OHS until the FVA POC has completed training.

b.   Accessing the FNV App

     (1) Designated FVA POCs are granted access to the FNV App by OHS. Following the
         completion of training, they will receive an email from OHS with the link to access
         the FNV App. Access to the FNV App is through eAuthentication using a personal
         identity verification (PIV) card, also known as a LincPass.

     (2) FVA POCs will only have access to the to the Mission Area, agency, or staff office
         records they service. Only the OHS Director, or their designee, and technical
         support will have access to all records in the FNV App.

c.   Creating a Ticket on a New Non-U.S. Citizen

     (1) FVA POCs will access the FNV App to submit a FNV ticket to OHS. Most of the
         required information on the non-U.S. Citizen is obtained from various forms
         completed for the background investigation process, such as:

         (a) Standard Form (SF) 85, Questionnaire for Non-Sensitive Positions;

         (b) SF 85P, Questionnaire For Public Trust Positions;

         (c) Optional Form (OF) 306, Declaration for Federal Employment;

         (d) Exchange visitor forms; and

         (e) Other research collaboration documents.

     (2) The user performs the following steps:

         (a) Login to the FNV App.




                                            3
    (b) On the home screen, leave the Search for Existing Foreign National field
        empty and click the New button to proceed.

    (c) On the Enter Foreign National (FN) Info (Step 1 of 4) screen, complete the
        required fields Personnel Type, Agency Name, and Purpose of Visit.

    (d) Personnel Type drop-down selections:

         1   “Advisory Committee” includes board members;

         2   “Federal Employee” includes Applicants;

         3   “IT Contractor” includes any contractor who is performing information
             technology (IT) related duties;

         4   “Non-IT Contractor” includes any contractor who is not performing IT
             related duties;

         5   “R&D or S&T Assignment” includes all formal arrangements to conduct
             Research and Development (R&D) or Science and Technology (S&T)
             related activities;

         6   “R&D or S&T Visitor” includes any visit involving R&D or S&T related
             discussions or activities; or

         7   “Visitor” includes any visit that is not associated with R&D or S&T
             related discussions or activities.

    (e) For Agency Name, select the appropriate Mission Area, Agency, or Staff Office
        the individual will be visiting or working with.

    (f) The Purpose of Visit field becomes fillable and required for Personnel Types
        “Visitor,” “R&D or S&T Assignment,” and “R&D or S&T Visitor.” Although
        someone on assignment is not a true visitor, it is included in this field to obtain
        a brief statement of the work they will be conducting per their arrangement.
        For R&D or S&T discussions or activities, please indicate the subject matter or
        related initiative that will be involved in the assignment or visit.

(3) When all required fields and any supplemental information has been completed,
    click on the Next button at the bottom of the screen.

(4) If the FNV App identifies that duplicate information belonging to an existing record
    has been entered for the Permanent Resident Card Number, Foreign Passport
    Number, and Visa Number fields, a warning message will be displayed upon
    clicking the Next button. To proceed with creating the duplicate non-U.S. Citizen




                                        4
         record, click the Next button. To create a new non-U.S. Citizen record, click the
         Previous button.

     (5) If the Next button is clicked before completing all of the required fields (marked
         with a red asterisk), a validation message will display, and the cursor will appear in
         the field missing data. The user will be able to click the Next button when the
         validation errors have been corrected.

     (6) See Section 5e, Entering Ticket Details, for more instructions.

d.   Creating a Ticket for a Non-U.S. Citizen with an Existing FNV App Record

     (1) On the tab labeled Home, in the Search for Existing Foreign National field, enter
         the name of the non-U.S. Citizen. Matching contact records will be displayed
         below the field. If an existing record is not located, create a new ticket.

     (2) If the top option of Show All Results for (name of the existing non-U.S. Citizen) is
         clicked, the user will be shown additional information on each search result. The
         results can be searched and filtered for any field shown.

     (3) Once the existing non-U.S. Citizen’s name is displayed, click on the name to
         populate it in the Search for Existing Foreign National field.

     (4) Click the New button to generate the ticket.

     (5) On the Enter Foreign National (FN) Info (Step 1 of 4) screen, complete the
         required fields Personnel Type, Agency Name, and Purpose of Visit.

         (a) Personnel Type drop-down selections:

              1    “Advisory Committee” includes board members;

              2    “Federal Employee” includes Applicants;

              3    “IT Contractor” includes any contractor who is IT related duties;

              4    “Non-IT Contractor” includes any contractor who is not performing IT
                   related duties;

              5    “R&D or S&T Assignment” includes all formal arrangements to conduct
                   R&D or S&T related activities;

              6    “R&D or S&T Visitor” includes any visit involving R&D or S&T related
                   discussions or activities; or




                                             5
              7    “Visitor” includes any visit that is not associated with R&D or S&T
                   related discussions or activites.

         (b) For Agency Name, select the appropriate Mission Area, agency, or staff office
             the individual will be visiting or working with.

         (c) The Purpose of Visit field becomes fillable and required for Personnel Types
             “R&D or S&T Assignment,” “R&D or S&T Visitor,” and “Visitor.” Although
             someone on assignment is not a true visitor, it is included in this field to obtain
             a brief statement of the work they will be conducting per their arrangement.
             For R&D or S&T discussions or activities, please indicate the subject matter or
             related initiative that will be involved in the assignment or visit.

     (6) Verify that any information auto-populated on the Enter Foreign National (FN)
         Info (Step 1 of 4) screen is still correct. When the information has been verified
         and all required fields completed, click on the Next button.

     (7) If the FVA POC enters any information in the Permanent Resident Card Number
         or Foreign Passport Number fields, additional required fields will appear for the
         expiration dates.

     (8) If the Next button is clicked before completing all of the required fields (marked
         with a red asterisk), a validation message will display, and the cursor will appear in
         the field missing data. The user will be able to click the Next button when the
         validation errors have been corrected.

     (9) See Section 5e, Entering Ticket Details, for more instructions.

e.   Entering Ticket Details

     The process for a new non-U.S. Citizen coming to USDA or for a non-U.S. Citizen who
     already exists in the FNV App is the same.

     (1) Complete all required fields on the Enter Submitting FVA POC Info (Step 2 of 4)
         screen.

         (a) Under FVA POC, search for and select the individual’s name.

         (b) The options for FNV Type are:

              1    “Initial,” indicating that this is the first vetting request conducted at USDA
                   for the individual;

              2    “Reciprocity,” indicating that there is already an existing favorable FNV
                   vetting result on record with USDA, or another Federal agency, within the
                   last 24 months. An expedited FNV ticket must be requested if the prior



                                             6
             foreign vetting result is within 30 calendar days of reaching 24 months;
             and

         3   “CV Check,” (Continuous Vetting), used by OHS to track follow-up
             subsequent vetting actions, per Section 5k, Continuous Vetting on Foreign
             Nationals, that follows.

(2) Click the Next button when all fields have been completed. If any required fields
    are not completed, a validation error message will be displayed. To return to the
    Step 1 screen to revise the non-U.S. Citizen’s information, click on the Previous
    button.

(3) Complete all required fields indicated by a red asterisk on the Enter Visiting/Duty
    Location (U.S. Location Only) Information (Step 3 of 4) screen. If the individual
    is working remotely in the U.S., select “Remote.”

    (a) The USDA Facility Name field references the General Services
        Administration’s listing of all USDA locations. As a location name may be
        different than what an employee is accustomed to and may show multiple sites
        across a location’s campus, it is recommended that the user enter the city and
        state of the location and select from the list of locations that appears. If a
        location appears to be missing from the selections, please email
        FVALiaison@usda.gov to inquire.

    (b) Enter the Projected Arrival/Start Date. For some individuals who arrived
        prior to the release of DR 4600-004, the projected arrival date may have
        already occurred. Those requests will be accepted.

    (c) Enter the Projected Departure Date. For Federal employees, this is left
        blank; for contractors and research assignments, enter the end date of the
        contract or arrangement.

    (d) The Actual Arrival Date and Actual Departure Date will be updated when
        known. For some individuals who arrived prior to the release of DR 4600-004,
        the actual arrival date may have already occurred. FVA POCs or hosts can
        provide this information to FVALiaison@usda.gov. OHS will utilize the web-
        based Security Entry Tracking System to obtain this information on Federal
        employees, contractors, and those here on assignment.

(4) Click the Next button when all fields have been completed. If any required fields
    are incomplete, a validation error message will be displayed.

(5) On the Enter Host/Supervisor (Step 4 of 4) screen, select a Mission Area, agency,
    or staff office from the Agency picklist. If the individual is on a “Research
    Assignment” or any type of visitor, enter the name of the host. If the individual is




                                       7
         any type of contractor, enter the name of the Contracting Officer’s Representative
         (COR). If the individual is a Federal employee, enter the supervisor’s information.

     (6) If the host, COR, or supervisor is an existing contact in the Outlook global address
         list, search for and select the name, which will auto-populate. If the name is not
         listed as an existing contact, enter information in the Host First Name, Host Last
         Name, and Host Email fields to create a new contact.

     (7) Click the Save button when all fields have been completed. If any required fields
         are incomplete, a validation error message will be displayed.

     (8) A Success! window will be displayed confirming that the ticket has been entered
         into the FNV App successfully. Click the Here hyperlink to review the ticket that
         was just created to conduct a quality review of the information entered.

f.   Submitting Ticket and Attachments to OHS

     (1) To submit the ticket, click the Submit to OHS button in the top right of the page.

     (2) A window will be displayed for the user to Add Attachments, such as a resume
         and passport photo. Attachments are not required, but resumes are preferred for
         individuals filling R&D or S&T assignments or positions. The additional
         documentation assists in the vetting process. If documentation is not provided but
         deemed necessary by the Insider Threat or CI Programs, it will be requested.

     (3) To attach any documentation, click on the Upload Files button in the pop up, then
         select the file to attach. When the file has been uploaded, click the Done button.

     (4) Another way to create an attachment is to drag and drop the file inside the Or Drop
         Files box on the window. Multiple files may be attached this way, and although
         they are not displayed in the window, they are visible in the Notes & Attachments
         section of the ticket.

     (5) When attachments have been successfully added to the ticket, or should the user
         prefer to provide no attachments, click the Save and Next button.

     (6) A window will appear to Expedite Vetting Ticket. If you would like to expedite
         the ticket, select the Expedite FNV? toggle. Another window will appear. Provide
         a brief justification for the expedite request. Select Submit.

     (7) If everything is submitted correctly, you will see Success! Select Finish to close
         the window.

     (8) After being submitted to OHS, the ticket moves to “Submitted to OHS” on the
         status progress bar. The user can view the ticket as it moves through the vetting




                                             8
         process, if needed, and will receive an email when the vetting process has been
         completed.

g.   Cancelling a Ticket

     If an individual cancels their planned visit or assignment, or a Federal employee
     withdraws their acceptance of a job offer or otherwise becomes inactive while the FNV
     process is underway, the FVA POC should cancel the active ticket in the FNV App. At
     a minimum, the FVA POC or host should email FVALiaison@usda.gov about the
     cancellation of the pending arrival.

     (1) Select My Submitted Tickets on the home screen, which will display the most
         recently submitted tickets. If a ticket is not displayed, click on the More button to
         open the full list of submitted tickets.

     (2) Click on the ticket number for the individual being cancelled.

     (3) Select the Mark FNV as Cancelled button in the upper right of the screen.

     (4) In the Mark FNV as Cancelled window, enter comments in the FNV Cancellation
         Reason text box, then click the Save button.

     (5) To return to the ticket without marking it as cancelled, click the X button.

h.   Requests for Additional Information

     If OHS requires additional information on a ticket to support the FNV process, the
     Chatter feature in the FNV App will be utilized. This creates a tracking log of the
     requests associated with the ticket. When a message is entered by OHS or an FVA
     POC, an email notification alert will be sent.

     (1) Click the Request Additional Information button in the upper right of the screen.

     (2) In the window that appears, complete the Comment to FVA POC field, then click
         the Send button. To exit the window without requesting additional information,
         click the X button.

     (3) The comments will be captured in the Chatter component on the right side of the
         page.

     (4) The FVA POC contact will be tagged in the comment and receive an email
         notification that a request for additional information has been made.

     (5) The ticket will move to Additional Info Requested on the status progress bar, and
         the Additional Info Requested field will be populated with the current date.




                                             9
i.   Recording OHS Vetting Actions

     During the FNV process, information may be searched by the CI Program or Insider
     Threat Program within OHS to identify any risks with the individual or associated
     business entity, such as foreign intelligence concerns or ties to foreign government-
     sponsored talent recruitment programs (FTRP)

     (1) Click the Set Vetting Data button in the upper right of the screen. The Set Vetting
         Data window will appear for the OHS user to indicate when various actions in the
         vetting process have been completed.

     (2) Click on one or more of the switch icons to indicate that the corresponding action
         has been completed. When a field indicates completion, additional required field(s)
         for that action will display that must be completed before saving the record.

     (3) When an action has been marked complete and the associated field updated, click
         the Save button.

     (4) If a required field(s) is not complete, a validation error message will be displayed.

     (5) After successfully saving the vetting data, the FNV Vetting Status progress bar
         will update based on the completed actions.

     (6) All additional fields entered on the Set Vetting Data window will be captured in
         the OHS Actions section of the ticket record.

j.   FNV Requests to the Federal Service Provider

     (1) FNV ticket information received by OHS is sent to our Federal service provider to
         conduct screening services through various intelligence indices checks.

     (2) Screening results from the Federal service provider are returned to OHS in less than
         30 calendar days but can be expedited for results in less than 1 week. Any adverse
         information identified during the assessment process is reviewed by OHS and may
         extend the response time for the final determination.

     (3) The screening result is entered into the FNV App, which automatically updates the
         status progress bar and sends an email to the host, COR, or supervisor with the
         vetting result, and a copy to the designated FVA POC.

k.   Continuous Vetting on Foreign Nationals

     (1) CV involves regularly reviewing an individual’s background to ensure there are no
         actionable issues following an initial favorable determination.




                                             10
     (2) For FNV purposes, OHS will conduct subsequent screening checks on any non-U.S.
         Citizen who is still active with USDA at a minimum of every 24 months.
         Additional vetting during the 24 month period can be conducted at any time as
         deemed necessary to address potential concerns.

     (3) The FNV App will automatically generate an email to the host or supervisor 30
         calendar days prior to the due date to confirm active status and request any changes
         in the individual’s information to support the updated screening.

l.   Reporting Status Changes

     (1) It is critical for the Department to maintain accurate records on who is accessing
         our facilities for the safety and security of Departmental personnel and assets.
         Maintaining up-to-date information on non-U.S. Citizens who are active with the
         Department supports our reporting, statistics, and ongoing vetting actions. We rely
         on the agencies to provide updated departure information on non-Federal
         employees (e.g., contractors, volunteers, research scientists).

     (2) For any non-U.S. Citizen Federal employee or contractor, OHS will periodically
         check active status in personnel and payroll systems.

     (3) For any non-U.S. Citizen visiting or on assignment at USDA, the host must notify
         OHS at FVALiaison@usda.gov when:

         (a) The individual’s visit or assignment with USDA has ended;

         (b) The Projected Departure Date has been extended; or

         (c) The open FNV ticket needs to be cancelled due to the cancellation of a visit or
             assignment.

     (4) Once an individual has an Actual Departure Date entered in the FNV App, future
         vetting actions will cease.

m. Reciprocity

     (1) OHS will transfer available historical FNV records into the FNV App to support
         subsequent tickets on the same individual (prepopulating personally identifiable
         information (PII) for efficiency, see DR 3515-002, Privacy Policy and Compliance
         for Personally Identifiable Information (PII) and DR 3440-003, Controlled
         Unclassified Information (CUI) Program) and reciprocity. Within FNV, reciprocity
         is the use of a prior, favorable FNV assessment that is less than 24 months old. If
         the individual is within 30 calendar days of the end of the 24 month period, they
         may onboard, but a new FNV ticket must be submitted with expedited service
         requested. The use of reciprocity allows the individual to onboard with no delay.




                                            11
         For example, if a non-U.S. Citizen departs 6 months after their favorable FNV
         assessment and returns 1 year later, their information would be collected in the
         FNV App for tracking purposes, but there would be no need to delay onboarding
         due to a pending assessment by OHS due to the existence of a favorable assessment
         already on record that is less than 24 months old.

     (2) If the individual stays onboard (Projected Departure Date) with USDA leading up
         to the 24-month vetting due date, OHS will initiate the follow-up screening and
         track the action in the FNV App.

n.   Interim Alternative Procedures for Research, Education, and Economics (REE)

     The Agricultural Research Service (ARS) administers a legacy application used across
     the REE Mission Area for tracking FNV requests. Until a technical solution to link the
     application with the FNV App, ARS will enter all vetting requests they receive into the
     FNV App, to ensure consolidated tracking and accurate reporting and statistics.

o.   FNV Exception (Waiver) Request

     (1) The OHS Director may grant an exception, in extraordinary circumstances, if a
         Mission Area, agency, or staff office is unable to complete the FNV process before
         a non-U.S. Citizen arrives at a USDA facility in the U.S. The waiver request must
         be in writing, justify the reason for the immediate need of the non-U.S. citizen’s
         subject matter expertise, and be signed by the Under Secretary or responsible
         Mission Area, agency, or staff office head. Information must be provided with the
         request to describe the purpose of the visit or assignment. The request must be
         submitted to OHS within 48 hours of the individual’s expected arrival at USDA.

     (2) OHS will review and provide a response within 5 business days unless an urgent
         reason and start date is indicated in the request. The CI Program will identify any
         CI-related risks and recommend mitigation strategies if the exception is approved.
         The OHS Director will make a risk-based decision and reply to the requesting
         Mission Area, agency, or staff office.

     (3) If an exception is granted to allow the non-U.S. citizen to onboard without the
         completed FNV assessment, the Mission Area, agency, or staff office must submit
         the FNV request to OHS as soon as possible, but no later than 48 hours after arrival.
         The request must indicate expedited service is needed.

p.   Privacy and Safeguarding of Information

     There are risks associated with the handling of the PII necessary for FNV record checks.
     To minimize these risks, the following strategies are in place:

     (1) The FNV App can only be accessed via a PIV card for eAuthentication;




                                            12
     (2) Access is restricted to individuals whose duties include processing FNV tickets or
         background investigations for work with, or on behalf of, USDA or who have a
         related need-to-know;

     (3) Access to the FNV App is limited to records within the FVA POCs own Mission
         Area, agency, or staff office;

     (4) Automated email notifications have been established within the FNV App to
         eliminate the need for hosts or supervisors to access the App directly to receive
         assessment results;

     (5) Administrator access is limited to OHS Director, or their designee, and technical
         support;

     (6) Any report downloaded from the FNV App is password-protected to prevent
         unauthorized access;

     (7) FNV App user accounts are individually approved by OHS;

     (8) All employees receive mandatory annual Information Security Awareness training
         from the Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) per DR 3545-001;

     (9) FVA POCs must have been found suitable, at a minimum, for a Public Trust
         position;

     (10) All data in the FNV App environment is hosted in a secure Federal Risk and
          Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP) Cloud Server;

     (11) Specific security roles have been defined and implemented within the FNV App to
          control access to information;

     (12) A system security certification was obtained for the FNV App in accordance with
          the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular No. A-130, Managing
          Information as a Strategic Resource; and

     (13) All FNV App data is encrypted.

q.   Auditing and Compliance

     The FVA POC list will be verified on an annual basis. The App has auditing
     capabilities that stamps who, when, and what changes are made to a given record, which
     can also be elevated to track and audit certain fields.

     OHS will proactively seek ways to monitor compliance against DR 4600-004. The
     information obtained will be crosschecked against the FNV App to identify missing
     FNV checks. Such sources of information may include:



                                            13
     (1) A monthly report identifying all fitness and suitability background investigation
         requests submitted from USDA to the Defensive CI and Security Agency (DCSA)
         on non-U.S. Citizens;

     (2) A report on non-U.S. citizens who have been issued a PIV card. This will not cover
         non-U.S. citizens who are issued a site or visitor badge; and

     (3) A report on non-U.S. citizens who have been granted IT user access from OCIO.

     OHS will alert the designated Mission Area, agency, or staff office FVA POC to submit
     an expedited FNV request when a non-U.S. citizen onboard has no record of receiving a
     FNV assessment in accordance with DR 4600-004.

r.   Reporting Concerns

     (1) Report potential insider threat concerns on non-U.S. Citizens on assignment or
         working at USDA to OHS at insider@usda.gov or OHS-Insider Threat Program.

     (2) Stay alert and watch for potential targeting or collection activity. Immediately
         report suspicious activities or anomalies such as:

         (a) Undue curiosity about, or requests for access to sensitive or proprietary
             information, when the individual does not have authorized access or a need-to-
             know;

         (b) Bringing cameras or recording devices, without approval, into areas storing
             sensitive, proprietary, or export-controlled material;

         (c) Any misuse of information systems or unauthorized transfer of USDA
             information;

         (d) Unauthorized removal or attempts to remove sensitive, export-controlled,
             proprietary, or other protected material from the facility;

         (e) Any attempts to encourage others to violate laws or disobey security policies
             and procedures;

         (f) Contact (phone, email, or social media) from a non-U.S. Citizen after their visit
             or assignment has been completed, requesting USDA information that is not
             available to the public or part of any cooperative or S&T arrangement;

         (g) Accessing the facility outside of normal business hours for no logical reason;
             or




                                            14
          (h) Any concerns about other individuals the non-U.S. Citizen invites or hosts into
              USDA facilities, including relatives.

      (3) Contact local law enforcement or the nearest Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
          field office immediately with any national security or terrorism concerns. The FBI
          will coordinate with USDA on reported issues. The appropriate field office can be
          located by visiting the FBI Field Offices web page.


6. INQUIRIES

  Please send all inquiries regarding this DG to FVALiaison@usda.gov.


                                           - END -




                                            15
                              APPENDIX A

                  ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


App       Application
ARS       Agricultural Research Service
CFR       Code of Federal Regulations
CI        Counterintelligence
COR       Contracting Officer’s Representative
CUI       Controlled Unclassified Information
CV        Continuous Vetting
DCSA      Defensive Counterintelligence and Security Agency
DG        Departmental Guidebook
DHS       Department of Homeland Security
DR        Departmental Regulation
E.O.      Executive Order
FBI       Federal Bureau of Investigation
FedRAMP   Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program
FN        Foreign National
FNV       Foreign National Vetting
FTRP      Foreign Government-Sponsored Talent Recruitment Program
FVA       Foreign Visits and Assignments
J-1       Exchange Visitor Visa
IT        Information Technology
LPR       Lawful Permanent Resident
OCIO      Office of the Chief Information Officer
OF        Optional Form
OHS       Office of Homeland Security
OMB       Office of Management and Budget
OPM       Office of Personnel Management
PII       Personally Identifiable Information
PIV       Personal Identity Verification
POC       Point of Contact
R&D       Research and Development
REE       Research, Education, and Economics
S&T       Science and Technology
SF        Standard Form
U.S.      United States
U.S.C.    United States Code
USDA      United States Department of Agriculture




                                   A-1
                                           APPENDIX B

                                           DEFINITIONS


Arrangement. Term used to describe any and all forms of legally binding documents, whether
governed by domestic, foreign or international law, and non-legally binding documents, signed
by representatives of the USDA. (Source: DR 1051-003, Citation of Science & Technology
(S&T) Agreements in USDA S&T Arrangements)

Counterintelligence (CI). Information gathered and activities conducted to identify, deceive,
exploit, disrupt, or protect against espionage, other intelligence activities, sabotage, or
assassinations conducted for or on behalf of foreign powers, organizations, or persons, or their
agents, or international terrorist organizations or activities. (Source: Executive Order (E.O.)
12333, United States Intelligence Activities, as amended)

Designated FVA POC. Individuals who have been assigned the responsibility and accountability
to carry out foreign visits and assignments management for their Mission Area, agency, or staff
office.

Foreign National (or Non-U.S. Citizen). A person without U.S. citizenship or nationality (may
include a stateless person). This term is synonymous with “noncitizen” and with “alien” as
defined in Section 101(a)(3) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code
(U.S.C.) § 1101(a)(3)). (Source: Department of Homeland Security (DHS), U.S. Citizenship
and Immigration Services, Glossary)

Foreign National Assignment (or Non-U.S. Citizen Assignment). A non-U.S. Citizen working at
a USDA facility in the U.S., whether onsite or remotely. If their duty assignment or arrangement
requires access to Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) or protected information, restricted
spaces, or the USDA IT architecture, or they are from a State Sponsor of Terrorism, FNV is
required prior to their arrival at USDA. This applies to Federal employees and any category of
non-Federal person working with USDA, such as an exchange visitor, consultant, contractor,
cooperator, affiliate, advisor, fellow, volunteer, student, intern, research collaborator, or visiting
scientist. This also includes university affiliated individuals that may have such access during
collaborations with USDA.

Foreign National Vetting (FNV). The screening of non-U.S. citizens to identify any risks from a
national security, CI, and anti-terrorism perspective prior to granting access to the Department’s
facilities, personnel, programs, information, and systems in accordance with criteria outlined in
DR 4600-004. The vetting process supports the Department’s mission, protects USDA assets,
and safeguards our national security. The vetting process includes queries and analysis of
information obtained across multiple intelligence community and law enforcement databases.

Foreign National Visit (or Non-U.S. Citizen Visit). A non-U.S. Citizen who is visiting a USDA
facility in the U.S., but not on assignment or arrangement to work with USDA. If a visit with a
non-U.S. Citizen will include access to CUI or protected information, restricted spaces, or the



                                                 B-1
USDA IT architecture, FNV is required. All non-U.S. Citizen visitors must be escorted at all
times by a USDA Federal employee, or as deemed appropriate by their facility security plan or
local operating procedures.

Host. A USDA Federal employee who is hosting a non-USDA employee or contractor who will
access a USDA facility, program, system, or information. Hosts are responsible for ensuring
adherence to all related security requirements.

Insider Threat. The threat that an insider will use their authorized access, wittingly or
unwittingly, to do harm to the security of the U.S. This threat can include damage to the U.S.
through espionage, terrorism, unauthorized disclosure of national security information, or
through the loss or degradation of Departmental resources or capabilities. (Adapted from E.O.
13587, Structural Reforms to Improve the Security Classified Networks and the Responsible
Sharing and Safeguarding of Classified Information).

J-1 Exchange Visitor Visa. A non-immigrant visa issued by the U.S. to research scholars,
professors, and exchange visitors participating in programs that promote cultural exchange
within the U.S.

Lawful Permanent Resident (LPR). As defined by the DHS, lawful permanent residents (LPR),
also known as “green card” holders, are non-U.S. citizens who are lawfully authorized to live
permanently within the U.S. LPRs may accept an offer of employment without special
restrictions, own property, receive financial assistance at public colleges and universities, and
join the Armed Forces. They also may apply to become U.S. citizens if they meet certain
eligibility requirements. FNV checks will be conducted on all LPRs regardless of the amount
time spent residing in the U.S.

LincPass. USDA branded its PIV card the “LincPass.” The unique spelling of LincPass is in
honor of President Abraham Lincoln, founder of the Department of Agriculture. The card links
your personal identity to your ability to access Federal buildings and computer systems. The
LincPass will be used for access by USDA employees and affiliates.

Screening. A risk analysis that includes making queries against multiple intelligence community
and law enforcement databases to identify any potential issues from a national security, CI, and
anti-terrorism perspective. This is also commonly referred to as a name trace.

State Sponsors of Terrorism. Countries that the Department of State has designated to be State
Sponsors of Terrorism because of their identified sponsorship of groups and or activities
supporting terrorism or terrorist activities.




                                               B-2
                                        APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


7 CFR § 2.95, Director, Office of Homeland Security

Counterintelligence Enhancement Act of 2002, Public Law 107-306, Title IX,
Counterintelligence Activities, November 27, 2002, codified at 50 United States Code (U.S.C.) §
3382, as amended

DHS, Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, Interagency Security Committee,
Facility Access Control, An Interagency Security Committee Best Practice, 2020 Edition

DHS, U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, Glossary website

Department of State, State Sponsors of Terrorism website

Executive Order (E.O.) 12333, United States Intelligence Activities, December 4, 1981, as
amended

E.O. 12977, Interagency Security Committee, October 19, 1995

E.O. 13556, Controlled Unclassified Information, November 4, 2010

E.O. 13587, Structural Reforms to Improve the Security of Classified Networks and the
Responsible Sharing and Safeguarding of Classified Information, October 7, 2011

FBI, FBI Field Offices web page

National Archives and Records Administration, General Records Schedule 5.6: Security
Management Records, March 2022

National Security Presidential Memorandum 33, United States Government-Supported Research
and Development National Security Policy, January 14, 2021

Office of the Director of National Intelligence, National Counterintelligence and Security
Center, Countering Foreign Intelligence Threats: Implementation and Best Practices Guide,
June 2017

Office of Management and Budget Circular No. A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic
Resource, July 2016

USDA, Agencies web page

USDA, DR 1051-003, Citation of Science & Technology (S&T) Agreements in USDA S&T
Arrangements, January 7, 2021

                                              C-1
USDA, DR 3080-001, Records Management, August 16, 2016

USDA, DR 3440-003, Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) Program, September 13, 2021

USDA, DR 3445-001, Media Protection, October 30, 2019

USDA, DR 3515-002, Privacy Policy and Compliance for Personally Identifiable Information
(PII), October 30, 2020

USDA, DR 3545-001, Information Security Awareness and Training Policy, October 22, 2013

USDA, DR 4600-003, USDA Defensive Counterintelligence and Insider Threat Programs, July
12, 2021

USDA, DR 4600-004, Foreign Visits and Assignments Vetting, May 27, 2021

USDA, Mission Areas, web page

USDA, OHS, OHS-Insider Threat Program SharePoint site

USDA, Staff Offices web page

U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM), OF 306, Declaration for Federal Employment,
October 2019

U.S. OPM, SF 85, Questionnaire for Non-Sensitive Positions, November 2021

U.S. OPM, SF 85P, Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions, January 2021 (available in the
Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing System)




                                             C-2
