                          U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                Number:
          DEPARTMENTAL MANUAL                                   DM 0100-001
                                                                DATE:
SUBJECT:                                                        January 4, 2018
Preparing Departmental Directives                               OPI:
                                                                Office of the Chief
                                                                Information Officer




Section                                                                                Page

1. Purpose                                                                                 1
2. Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                      1
3. Contents and Format Requirements                                                        2
4. Referencing Procedures                                                                  8
5. Directives Clearance Procedures                                                         9
6. Revision and Amendment Procedures                                                      14
7. Distribution and Classification Procedures                                             17
8. Forms and Templates                                                                    18
9. Inquiries                                                                              18

Appendix A – Definitions                                                                 A-1
Appendix B – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                  B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                  C-1
Appendix D – Sample Layout: Departmental Directives (DN, DR, DM)                         D-1
Appendix E – Sample Layout: Secretary’s Memorandum                                       E-1
Appendix F – Departmental Directives Classification System                               F-1



1. PURPOSE

   This Departmental Manual (DM) establishes the procedures for preparing, coordinating,
   submitting, and distributing temporary and permanent Departmental Directives as described
   in Departmental Regulation (DR) 0100-001, Departmental Directives System.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

   a.     This DM supersedes DM 0100-001, Procedures for Preparing Departmental Directives,
       dated December 20, 2006.

  b.   All Departmental directives must be prepared using the Department’s enterprise word
       processing solution.

  c.   Departmental directives that are not sensitive in nature or do not expose USDA to
       security risk will be posted to the USDA Directives system Web site and will be
       considered the authoritative official versions of the directives.


3. CONTENTS AND FORMAT REQUIREMENTS

  The following information is needed when preparing Departmental directives. Additional
  requirements and best practices information will be provided in a companion Departmental
  Directives Style Guide.

  a.   Section Information

       (1) The basic unit of text in a directive is the numbered section. A numbered section
           may consist of a single paragraph or several paragraphs and/or subparagraphs.
           Subparagraphs are used to separate complex issues within paragraphs or to list
           conditions, exceptions, or procedures.

       (2) If paragraphs are subdivided, there must be at least two subparagraphs for every
           subsection level.

       (3) Additional Sections/Subsections. Additional sections and subsections can be used,
           as appropriate, to present the substance of the directive. The optional
           sections/subsections should be arranged in order of workflow occurrence, relative
           importance, or other logical sequence of presentation.

  b.   Required Sections

       (1) Purpose. This is the first section in a directive. Briefly state the reason for the
           directive. References to relevant laws, Executive Orders, external directives, etc.,
           should be made in this section. If references are lengthy, it is recommended that the
           information be provided in an appendix to avoid interrupting the readability and
           flow of the directive. The Purpose section applies to DNs, DRs, DMs, DGs, and
           SMs.

       (2) Scope. Briefly state the mission area(s), agency(ies), staff office(s), and/or group(s)
           to which the directive applies. The Scope section applies to DNs, DRs, DMs, and
           DGs.

       (3) Special Instructions/Cancellations. This section describes important notes of
           interest that impact the use or execution of the directive (e.g., cancellation of

                                                2
         previous directives, directive implementation timeframes). The Special
         Instructions/Cancellations section applies to DNs, DRs, DMs, and DGs.

     (4) Policy. This section provides a brief summary of the principal policy promulgated
         in the directive. It may contain subsections to more clearly delineate the “who,”
         “what,” and “when” that describe and identify specific compliance requirements.
         The Policy section applies to DNs and DRs. If a Policy section is included in a DM
         or DG, use it only provide a sentence to reference or point to the overarching policy
         DR.

     (5) Procedures. This section identifies the processes for accomplishing the directive’s
         purpose by providing step-by-step or “how to” guidance. Information in this section
         is typically lengthy, detailed, and procedural in nature. It may contain subsections
         to more clearly describe the information being provided. The Procedures section
         applies to DMs, DGs, and occasionally DNs. If a Procedures section is included in
         a DR, use it to provide a sentence to reference or point to the companion procedural
         DM(s).

     (6) Roles and Responsibilities. This section identifies the responsible officials, offices,
         agencies, and functional specialists and describes their duties as it relates to the
         specific directive. The Roles and Responsibilities section applies to DNs, DRs, and
         DMs. If used in a DM, this section may not be used to establish new policy, and
         may only impose incremental roles and responsibilities pertinent to the processes or
         procedures delineated in the DM that were not identified in the DR. DGs may not
         establish roles and responsibilities beyond those found in the governing
         Departmental directive.

     (7) Authorities and References. This appendix (preferred) or section lists the pertinent
         laws, Executive orders, external directives, internal guidance, etc. that inform or
         provide support for the compliance requirements of a directive. If the list of
         Authorities and References are lengthy, it is recommended that the information be
         provided in an appendix to avoid interrupting the readability and flow of the
         directive. The Authorities and References section applies to DNs, DRs, and
         sometimes DMs and DGs.

c.   Optional Sections

     DRs, DMs, DNs, and DGs may include the following sections to enhance the clarity of
     the directive:

     (1) Background. This section provides a brief summary of the historical information or
         the circumstance that make the directive necessary.

     (2) Definitions. This appendix (preferred) or section provides meanings for words and
         phrases as they are to be interpreted in the context of the directive. Whenever
         possible, definitions should come from an authoritative, Federal source. If the

                                             3
         definitions are lengthy, it is recommended that the information be provided in an
         appendix to avoid interrupting the readability and flow of the directive. The
         definitions provided in Appendix B of DR 0100-001 and in Appendix A of this DM
         shall be applied consistently as the standard USDA definitions across all
         Departmental directives and need not be repeated in each one.

     (3) Acronyms and Abbreviations. This appendix (preferred) section identifies the
         acronyms and abbreviations used throughout the directive. If an abbreviations
         section is not utilized, the abbreviation must be explained immediately after the first
         use in the text of the directive. If the list of acronyms and abbreviations is lengthy,
         it is recommended that the information be provided in an appendix to avoid
         interrupting the readability and flow of the directive.

     (4) Compliance. This section delineates the measures that the OPI, as the policy
         owner, will proactively and regularly take to monitor, measure, audit, report, and
         enforce compliance with the provisions of the directive. These elements should
         also be included or summarized in the Roles and Responsibilities section for the
         responsible and accountable head, executive, or official with the OPI.

     (5) Policy Exceptions. This section provides agencies and staff offices with a
         mechanism to request and receive approval for a policy exception or waiver (with
         documented justification) which will provide an equivalent or greater level of
         compliance if significant cost, budgetary, system, staff, procedural, timeline, or
         other issues arise. Such a mechanism may help reduce or avoid adverse audit
         findings if compliance issues were to arise. Any granted exceptions or waivers
         should be documented and require annual review and documented re-approval. A
         reviewing official for exception requests should be designated by the OPI and
         reflected in the Roles and Responsibilities section of the directive. Provide a
         mechanism to consult with or to appeal the reviewing official’s decision to the
         OPI’s agency head if necessary. If the exception request relates to information
         technology (IT) or to cybersecurity, consultation with and review and approval by
         the USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO) and/or the USDA Chief Information
         Security Officer (CISO) may also be appropriate or required.

     (6) Inquiries. This section provides contact information for the OPI as an aid to the
         reader (preferably a central email and/or main telephone number) for end-user
         policy questions and inquiries. Ensure that the email account is regularly monitored
         and responded to timely. Do not include individual personnel names and associated
         telephone numbers or email addresses since they are likely to change often.

d.   Preferred Sequencing of Sections and Appendices

     (1) Masthead (use standard templates)

     (2) Table of Contents (except SMs)


                                             4
     (3) Purpose (required section)

     (4) Special Instructions/Cancellations (required section)

     (5) Background (optional section)

     (6) Scope (required section)

     (7) Policy (required section for DRs)

     (8) Procedures (required section for DMs)

     (9) Roles and Responsibilities (required section)

     (10) Compliance (optional section)

     (11) Policy Exceptions (optional section)

     (12) Inquiries (optional section)

     (13) Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations (optional)

     (14) Appendix B – Definitions (optional)

     (15) Appendix C – Authorities and References (required)

     (16) Other appendices as applicable

e.   Additional Components of a Directive

     (1) Masthead. Only use the standard masthead templates provided on the Departmental
         Directives or Forms Web sites to ensure Section 508 compliance.

     (2) Table of Contents.

         (a) Always include a table of contents, unless the directive is an SM, as an aid to
             the reader. The table of contents must begin on the same page as the masthead.

         (b) Start the table of contents after 3 blank lines below the masthead.

         (c) The left column should be titled with the underlined “Section”.

         (d) The right column should be titled with the underlined “Page”.

         (e) Two lines (after 1 blank line) below the word “Section” list the table of
             contents.

                                             5
         (f) Start the text of the directive after 3 blank lines below the table of contents.

     (3) Tables and Figures. Tables contain text and/or numerical data in column and row
         form. Figures are any illustration other than tables. Table captions are located
         above the table, figure captions are located below the graphic.

         (a) If used in a directive, tables and figures must include “Alt Text” to be Section
             508 compliant.

         (b) Both tables and figures must contain a title that clearly describes the content or
             what is being displayed.

         (c) Tables and figures are numbered independent of each other.

         (d) The format for a table caption is “Table #. Descriptive title.” (e.g., Table 1.
             Monthly hiring rate by education level.). The format for a figure caption is the
             same -- “Figure #. Descriptive title.” (e.g., Figure 1. Population growth in
             Washington DC.).

     (4) Forms. Forms affected by or associated with the directive should be identified by
         the complete title and number. It is strongly recommended that forms not be
         included as part of a directive but instead be referenced to in the text and
         hyperlinked. DM 3020, Departmental Forms Manual provides direction for the
         creation and posting of Departmental forms.

     (5) Reports. Similar to forms, reports affected by or associated with the directive
         should be identified by the complete title and number.

f.   Formatting and Style

     (1) Fonts. Other than in the masthead title, Times New Roman 12 is the required font
         type and size for all directives.

     (2) Margins. All of the margins for all pages in a directive must be set at one inch.

     (3) Page Numbering

         (a) The first page of a directive does not contain a page number; numbering begins
             on page 2. Pages are numbered consecutively, including pages that contain
             figures or tables.

         (b) For pages that come before the appendices, the page numbers should use
             Arabic numerals centered one-half inch from the bottom of the page.

         (c) For appendix page numbers, the page numbers should be centered one-half

                                             6
              inch from the bottom of the page. The appendix page numbers begin with the
              letter of the appendix, followed by a dash and the page number (e.g., A-1 for
              the first page of Appendix A; B-1 for the first page of Appendix B).

g.   Spacing and Indenting

     (1) Single space all text in a directive.

     (2) Double space (1 blank line) between paragraphs.

     (3) Triple space (2 blank lines) between numbered sections.

     (4) In cases where the items in a listing consist of one line each, they may be single
         spaced; double spacing however is preferred for improved readability and
         consistent style throughout a directive.

h.   Headings

     (1) Section headings must be in all capital letters (except when placed in the table of
         contents); they should not be underscored or end with a period. Text must not
         begin on the same line as the section heading.

     (2) Within each section, as a rule, the first and second level subsections within each
         section should be given a brief, descriptive heading. It is permissible to use
         headings at any subsection level, provided each subparagraph within that specific
         subsection bears a heading. Be consistent.

     (3) Capitalize the first letter of the first word and all major words in subsection
         headings. Underline the heading. Close with a period and begin text on the same
         line unless the heading stands alone.

i.   Section/Subsection Numbering

     (1) To properly align each successive subsection level, the tab should be set to align the
         subsection text 5 spaces from the beginning of the subsection number or letter
         above it. Sections and subsections should be numbered as follows:

     (2) Section. Use Arabic numerals followed by a period; i.e., 1., 2., 3., etc. The margin
         alignment settings are left indent 0” with a hanging indent of .25” (1/4”).

     (3) First Level Subsection. Use small letters of the alphabet followed by a period; i.e.,
         a., b., c., etc. The margin alignment settings are left indent of .25” (1/4”) with a
         hanging indent of .31” (5/16”).

     (4) Second Level Subsection. Use Arabic numerals in parentheses; i.e., (1), (2), (3),
         etc. The margin alignment settings are left indent of .56” (9/16”) with a hanging

                                                 7
         indent of .31” (5/16”).

     (5) Third Level Subsection. Use small letters of the alphabet in parentheses; i.e., (a),
         (b), (c), etc. The margin alignment settings are left indent of .88” (7/8”) with a
         hanging indent of .31” (5/16”).

     (6) Fourth Level Subsection. Use Arabic numerals underlined; i.e., 1, 2, 3, etc. The
         margin alignment settings are left indent of 1.19” (1-3/16”) with a hanging indent of
         .31” (5/16”).

     (7) Fifth Level Subsection. Use small letters of the alphabet underlined; i.e., a, b, c,
         etc. The margin alignment settings are left indent of 1.5” (1-1/2”) with a hanging
         indent of .31” (5/16”).

j.   Page Headers.

     Page headers are not to be used in Departmental directives other than for white space.
     No text, logos, or graphics shall appear in page headers.

k.   Page Footers.

     Page footers are only to be used for page numbers. No other text, logos, or graphics
     shall appear in page footers.

l.   Footnotes.

     Footnotes are not to be used in in the main body text in Departmental directives.

m. Ending a Directive

     To identify the last page of the main body of the directive before the creation of
     appendices, type "-END-" centered after 2 blank lines below the last line of text in the
     body of the directive. The “-END-” notation should not be inserted for appendix pages.


4. REFERENCING PROCEDURES

a.   To refer to one directive in another directive, use the directive series designator, number,
     and title the first time the directive is referenced (e.g., Manual). Thereafter, use only the
     series designator and number (e.g., DR 1010-001).

b.   To refer to text within a directive, use the following conventions:

     (1) A section:                                          Section 6

     (2) Several consecutive sections:                       Sections 5 through 9

                                              8
       (3) Several nonconsecutive sections:                  Sections 2, 6, and 9

       (4) A subsection:                                     Section 11c

       (5) Several consecutive subsections:                  Sections 3a through c

       (6) A subsection of a subsection:                     Section 2a(3)

       (7) Several nonconsecutive subsections:               Section 2c(1), (3), and (8)

       (8) A figure or table:                                Figure 2, Table 2

       (9) A figure within a DM chapter
       (e.g., Figure 1 within chapter 3):                    Figure 3-1

       (10) A figure within an appendix
       (e.g., Figure 5 within Appendix A):                   Figure A-5

       (11) An appendix:                                     Appendix A


5. DIRECTIVES CLEARANCE PROCEDURES

  a.   Agency/Staff Office Internal Clearance

       (1) The OPI or agency/staff office is responsible for establishing their own internal
           clearance process. The Departmental process may be used as an example, or the
           OPI may establish a different process.

       (2) The OPI drafts the directive and clears it through their organization’s internal
           clearance process. Comments received from offices within the organization and
           other stakeholders should be reviewed, adjudicated, and incorporated as appropriate
           into the draft directive.

       (3) After completing the internal clearance process, the OPI prepares the final draft
           directive package. The final draft of the directive must:

           (a) Be on the appropriate directive masthead form;

           (b) Be created using the Department’s enterprise word processing solution;

           (c) Comply with the formatting requirements identified in Sections 3 and 5 of this
               DM; and

           (d) Be accompanied by a copy of Form AD-116, Clearance and Approval for

                                                9
         Departmental Issuances and Form AD-3108, Note to Reviewers for Draft
         Departmental Directives containing the appropriate internal clearance
         signatures.

(4) The AD-116 should be prepared for formal review as follows:

(5) In “Type of Clearance”, select the type of clearance applicable to the draft directive.

(6) In “Classification Number and Title”, enter the directive’s number, if known, and
    the exact title of the directive.

(7) In “Originator”, indicate the originator of or point of contact for the directive, the
    originator’s room number, phone number, e-mail address, and the OPI’s mission
    area, agency or staff office abbreviation.

(8) In “Clearance Deadline/Distribution”, enter the required clearance date if the
    directive must be cleared as a rush review.

(9) In “Clearance Originating Organization”, enter the information for the internal
    reviewing and/or approving officials. The officials entered here are usually people
    at the Director/Administrator level and the next lowest level, or whatever the
    appropriate titles may be. Electronic signatures in the “Initials” column are
    preferred.

(10) In “Other Clearances”, list the following clearance officials in the Organization
     Abbreviations column:

    (a) USDA DDM

    (b) Optional Clearance offices

    (c) OBPA

    (d) OGC

    (e) ASA

    (f) USDA DDM

    (g) OES (Only if a directive needs to be signed by the Secretary)

(11) In “Signature Authority”, identify the title of the approver who will make the final
     decision to officially approve the directive for publishing.

(12) Once the package is prepared and internal signatures obtained, the OPI
     electronically transmits the draft directive and the AD-116 via email to the DDM

                                        10
         for processing. Hard copy (paper) documents will not be accepted for formal
         review except under extreme circumstances.

b.   Directives Clearance – Formal Review

     (1) The DDM will check all items on the Form AD-116 for appropriate clearances and
         will review the directive for compliance with Departmental formatting
         requirements, numbering, grammar, clarity, and overlap with existing guidance.
         The DDM will also check all items on the Form AD-3018 to determine if DR, DM,
         and DG revision submissions are eligible for the streamlined formal clearance
         process. Upon completion of the review, the DDM will return the directive package
         to the OPI if there are issues to be addressed or will transmit the draft directive
         package to the next formal clearance official.

     (2) The DDM is responsible for tracking and managing the draft directive through the
         formal review process and will keep the OPI informed as to the progress of the
         directive through the process.

     (3) At each step of the formal review process, if a clearance official concurs or non-
         concurs with comments, the official must document that decision on the AD-116 in
         the concur/non-concur columns and electronically transmit both the draft directive
         (with comments) and the updated AD-116 to the DDM. The DDM will return the
         package to the OPI to address the reviewer’s concerns. When addressing the
         returned comments, the OPI:

         (a) Determines which comments should be incorporated and revises the draft
             accordingly; and

         (b) Obtains a second clearance from affected clearance officials if the directive is
             significantly revised.

     (4) Once the outstanding issues are addressed, the DDM will return the draft directive
         into the formal review process.

     (5) When reviewing a draft directive, formal clearance officials should focus their
         comments on those matters that are within their functional area and do so within
         their prescribed timeframes (see the table below in Section 5b(6)). Reviewers
         should focus attention on the impact to the reviewer’s organization when providing
         comments to the originating office. Comments should be expressed using
         constructive feedback and provide suggestions for improvement.

         Reviewers should review in the light of achieving overall mission through joint
         cooperation and joint responsibility. In the case of technical manuals, non-technical
         reviewers should consider that material is intended for individuals with subject
         matter expertise and may not require that material be written in simpler terms.


                                            11
    Prior to informal or formal clearances, the OPI should meet with their Directives
    System Liaison Officer (DSLO) to manage, control and coordinate the informal and
    formal coordination of directives. This will greatly speed the formal process and
    decrease the chances of last minute non-concurrence or substantive changes.

(6) Formal Clearance timeframes for clearance official reviewers are as follows:

    (a) USDA DDM Initial Review – 3 business days

    (b) Optional Clearance offices – 3 business days

    (c) OBPA – 3 business days

    (d) OGC – 10 business days; 5 business days for DR/DM amendments

    (e) ASA – 10 business days

    (f) USDA DDM Final Review – 3 business days

    (g) OES (if to be signed by the Secretary) – 3 business days

    (h) Signature Authority – 10 business days

    (i) USDA DDM Publication – 5 business days

    (j) Formal Clearance Process – 1 calendar year – If a directive has not completed
        the formal clearance process and secured approval for publication within 1
        year, the underlying laws, regulations, and circumstances driving the need for
        the directive have likely changed in the interim. The directive will be
        automatically withdrawn from clearance and should be reviewed by the OPI,
        and if applicable, revised and resubmitted into the formal clearance process.

(7) The OPI and the USDA DDM have the discretion to determine the optional
    clearance officials. Officials, Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, and
    stakeholders that have a direct role or responsibility under or are significantly
    impacted by the proposed directive are strongly recommended to be clearance
    offices.

(8) For new DGs, since they do not establish any policy or impose roles and
    responsibilities beyond those found in the governing Departmental directive, the
    clearance offices under a streamlined formal clearance process will only include the
    USDA DDM, stakeholders and affected organizations at Optional Clearance, any
    additional clearance offices as determined by the DDM, and the Signature
    Authority.

(9) For existing DRs, DMs, and DGs which are eligible, as determined by the USDA

                                        12
         DDM, for the streamlined amendment clearance process for updates (see Section
         6a(1)), formal clearance offices include the USDA DDM and OGC, with additional
         clearance offices as determined by the DDM, and the Signature Authority.

     (10) Formal clearance timeframes for OPIs to adjudicate review comments and
          incorporate changes into a revised directive in order to timely resume formal
          clearance are as follows:

         (a) Within 5 business days for standard resolution of comments;

         (b) Within 20 business days for a mandatory clearance office nonconcurrence
             requiring remedy; and

         (c) Within 4 calendar months for a mandatory clearance office nonconcurrence
             requiring a rewrite.

     (11) If a clearance official needs more time to review a draft directive and cannot meet
          their time limit, they can request an extension for time to review the document. The
          request must be made through the DDM with an estimate of time needed to
          complete the review. The DDM will take the request to the OPI for determination.
          The OPI has the option to approve the extension or to assume concurrence of the
          reviewer and have the draft directive moved on to the next formal clearance official.
          Both the OPI and the clearance official will be notified via email if the extension is
          approved or if concurrence was assumed.

c.   Signature Authority Approval

     (1) For DRs, DMs, DGs, and DNs: Once all formal clearance officials have completed
         their reviews and signed off on the AD-116, the DDM returns the draft package to
         the OPI to finalize the package (i.e., incorporate final edits, remove any margin
         notes, comments, line numbering, or “Draft” watermarks; check the directive for
         Section 508 compliance; ensure formatting requirements are met) and prepare the
         directive for the Signature Authority’s approval. Once the package is finalized, the
         OPI returns the final package to the DDM to submit it for signature.

     (2) The DDM will submit the package to the Signature Authority. The Signature
         Authority signs, either in ink or electronically, in the designated space at the bottom
         of the AD 116, signifying approval of the directive as written. The directive itself
         should not be signed or initialed in any way. There must be a signature on the AD-
         116 before the directive can be published to the Directives Web page.

     (3) Once the final signature is obtained, the signed AD-116 and the final directive are
         returned electronically to the DDM. The date the Signature Authority signs the
         AD-116 will be considered to be the effective date of the directive, unless the DDM
         is directed otherwise by the Signature Authority.


                                             13
       (4) For SMs: Only the Secretary or Acting Secretary can sign an SM and provide
           approval by signing the original SM and/or the AD-116. The original copy of an
           SM must be physically signed in blue or black ink. The signature on the SM serves
           as the Signature Authority signature on the AD-116, but the Secretary/Acting
           Secretary has the option to sign both documents.

       (5) Once the Secretary/Acting Secretary’s signature is obtained, the following
           documents need to be returned via email to the DDM:

           (a) A clean scanned copy of the physically signed and dated SM with the assigned
               directive number (must be suitable for posting on the USDA Directives Web
               page);

           (b) A clean copy of the SM, in editable enterprise word processing format; and

           (c) The AD-116.

       (6) The date stamped on the original SM will be considered to be the effective date of
           the SM, unless the DDM is directed otherwise by the Secretary/Acting Secretary.

  d.   Publication.

       (1) Once a complete directive package has been returned to the DDM, the directive will
           be converted to PDF and HTML formats for posting on the Directives Web page.

       (2) The converted documents will be transmitted to the OCIO Webmaster for posting.
           Once posting is confirmed, the DDM will verify the quality of the posts. If the
           documents need to be adjusted in some way, the DDM will ensure the corrections
           are made.


6. REVISION AND AMENDMENT PROCEDURES

  The E-Government Act of 2002, Title 1, proposes that the Internet and other information
  technologies be used to improve the ability of the Government to achieve agency missions
  and to promote access to high quality government information and services across multiple
  channels. The USDA Departmental Directives Web page responds to these requirements by
  acting as an electronic repository and retrieval system for all Departmental directives. In
  many cases, this tool eliminates the need for offices to maintain hard copies of directives
  unless they are required on a regular basis to meet job or mission requirements.

  a.   DRs, DMs, and DGs

       (1) Amendments.

           a.   Amendments will be published for non-substantive changes and minor

                                             14
     substantive changes that do not add to or modify existing directive policy
     language or change agency responsibilities from the original directive.

b.   In lieu of the formal clearance process set forth in Section 5, amended
     directives will require that the OPI prepare an AD-116 marked with the term
     “Amendment”, and the amended pages. This package will be reviewed and
     approved by the OPI, the DDM and OGC, with additional clearance offices as
     determined by the DDM, and the Signature Authority. Reviews will be
     sequential, and will be conducted within the timeframes set out in Section
     5b(6) and (7).

c.   After the package is signed by all clearing offices on the AD-116, the DDM
     will return the draft package to the OPI to finalize the package (i.e., incorporate
     final edits, remove any margin notes, comments, line numbering, or “Draft”
     watermark; check the directive for Section 508 compliance; ensure formatting
     requirements are met) and will return the complete directive file containing the
     amended material electronically to the DDM. The DDM will submit the
     package to the Signature Authority. Once approval has been obtained,
     directives will be loaded on the Directives Web page to reflect the date
     modified. Amendments will be published on the Directives Web page to
     provide a ready reference to updates in the original directive.

d.   The following are illustrative examples of when an amendment versus a
     revision and reissuance of a DR, DM, or DG is appropriate. Note that these
     examples do not provide an exhaustive list. Questions about whether to use an
     amendment or a revision should be directed to the DDM through your
     organization’s DSLO.

     1   Use an amendment for an organizational name change or personnel title
         change resulting from a realignment.

     2   Use an amendment to add language to a DR or DM that clarifies, but does
         not change, existing policy.

     3   Use an amendment for updating website links or updating references to
         outside sources – e.g., for updating references to the Central Contractor
         Registry to be references to the System for Award Management.

     4   Use an amendment for updating references to the Code of Federal
         Regulations (CFR) or United States Code (U.S.C.) due to regulations or
         statutes being moved within those publications.

     5   Use an amendment for general updating that does not make significant
         substantive changes to the text and makes non-substantive changes to 25%
         or less of the text of the DR, DM or DG.


                                   15
              6    Use a revision or reissuance for general updating that makes significant
                   substantive changes to the text or that makes non-substantive changes to
                   more than 25% of the text of the DR, DM, or DG.

              7    Use an amendment for making minor changes to implement revisions of
                   the underlying statutory or regulatory authority. Use a revision and
                   reissuance for more than minor substantive language changes to
                   implement a revision of the underlying statutory or regulatory authority.

              8    Use a revision and reissuance for making substantive changes to the policy
                   set forth in the DR, DM, or DG.

              9    Use an amendment for making only minor or clarifying changes to roles
                   and responsibilities. Use a revision and reissuance for making more than
                   minor changes to roles and responsibilities. Use a revision and reissuance
                   when adding a role or responsibility for a component that does not have
                   any roles or responsibilities in the existing directive, even if the new role
                   or responsibility is minor.

     (2) Revisions.

         (a) Completely revise and reissue a DR or DM when major areas in the Policy,
             Procedures, and/or Roles and Responsibilities sections have modifications that
             add or substantially modify existing language or change workload from the
             original directive. For DGs, a revision and reissuance would entail a major or
             substantive revision in the process, procedures, instructions, standards, or other
             technical information.

         (b) A revision of an existing DR, DM. or DG carries the same classification and
             serial number, but a new date. In the "Special Instructions/Cancellations"
             section, state that the new DR, DM, or DG is a revision of and cancels
             (number), (old date). Explain the nature of the revision in this section or in the
             "Purpose" section. When there is a complete revision do not use asterisks to
             identify changes in the text.

         (c) A revised DR, DM, or DG will require the OPI to prepare a form AD-116
             marked with the term “Revised”, and will follow the procedures for clearance.

b.   DNs and SMs

     (1) DNs and SMs cannot be amended; they must be reissued if information in the
         original is in error or omitted. The reissued directive carries the same classification
         number as the original, along with the same serial number. The new directive
         cancels the original. In the "Special Instructions/Cancellations" section, state that
         the new DN or SM cancels the (number) (old date).


                                             16
       (2) A revised DN or SM will require the OPI to prepare a form AD-116 marked with
           the term “Revised”, and will follow the procedures for clearance set out in Section
           5.


7. DISTRIBUTION AND CLASSIFICATION PROCEDURES

  a.   Distribution System. The USDA Departmental Directives Web page is the official
       repository for Departmental directives. Departmental directives will be distributed
       electronically on the USDA Departmental Directives Web page. Departmental
       directives will be posted on the USDA Departmental Directives Web page within 5
       business days of their release.

  b.   Classification System. The Departmental Directives Classification System is a
       comprehensive list of USDA's administrative subjects. It is adjusted, expanded, or
       deleted as needed. It is used in issuing, filing, and referencing Departmental directives.
       Classification numbers are based on subject matter; they are not reserved for individual
       organizations. Any USDA agency with a need to write directives on a given subject
       may do so.

       All Departmental directives will be assigned a subject classification number in
       accordance with the subject classification codes which are contained in this directive.

  c.   Identifying Codes. All Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM) directives
       will be assigned a two-part identifying code. The first number consists of a
       classification code assigned to OHRM within the Departmental Directives System. The
       second number is a further refinement of the Departmental Directives System within
       Human Resources based on applicable chapter references from Title 5, Code of Federal
       Regulations.

       Under this system, directives will be numbered using two components; the first
       component will be the applicable Departmental administrative classification for Human
       Resources and the second will be the applicable CFR chapter reference. For example, if
       OHRM issued a new merit promotion plan as an issuance under Promotion and Internal
       Placement, its classification would be DM 4030-335, broken down as follows: “DM”
       (indicates it’s a manual) “4030” (“Employment” First component), and “335” (from 5
       CFR 335, Promotion and Internal Placement). DRs, DNs, and DGs will be numbered in
       the same manner, the only difference being the directive type, i.e., DR, DN, or DG.

  d.   Assigning Classification Numbers.

       (1) When More Than One Subject Is Involved. When a directive can be classified
           under more than one classification number, the OPI should recommend which
           subject captures the principal message of the directive. Otherwise, the DDM will
           assign Classification Numbers.


                                               17
       (2) Within a Directives Series. Serial numbers will be assigned consecutively within
           each series.

  e.   Changes to the Classification System. Recipients of Departmental issuances will be
       notified of any changes to the classification system and given an opportunity to request
       copies of any new information.

       The Department’s Classification system can be found in Appendix F.


8. FORMS AND TEMPLATES

  Use the following forms to prepare, clear, and issue Departmental directives. These forms
  are available electronically on the USDA Directives webpage

  a.   Form AD-116, Clearance and Approval for Departmental Issuances

  b.   Form AD-778, Secretary's Memorandum (first page)

  c.   Form AD-811, Departmental Regulation (first page)

  d.   Form AD-812, Departmental Manual (first page)

  e.   Form AD-813, Departmental Notice (first page)

  f.   Form AD-814, Departmental Guidebook (first page)

  g.   Form AD-3108, Note to Reviewers for Draft Departmental Directives


9. INQUIRIES

  All USDA agencies and staff offices shall direct questions and inquiries regarding this DM
  and the companion DR 0100-001 to the DDM via email at OCIO-PD@ocio.usda.gov.


                                            -END-




                                              18
                                       APPENDIX A

                                       DEFINITIONS


a.   Agency. Organizational units of the Department, other than staff offices as defined in
     paragraph u below, whose heads report to officials within the Office of the Secretary,
     Deputy Secretary, Under Secretaries, Assistant Secretaries, and Assistant to the
     Secretary.

b.   Agency Directives. Issuances that originate within Department agencies or staff offices
     as interpretations of internal or external directives, or enabling legislation.

c.   Amendment. An amendment is used for general updating that makes non-substantive or
     only minor substantive changes to 25 percent or less of the text of an existing DR, DM,
     or DG; e.g., for an organizational name change or personnel title change resulting from a
     realignment; to add language to the directive that clarifies, but does not change, existing
     policy or roles and responsibilities; for updating Web site links or updating references to
     external sources; or for updating references to the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) or
     United States Code (U.S.C).

d.   Camera Copy. The final approved version of a directive that is ready for reproduction.

e.   Classification. The arrangement of directives into categories and subcategories
     according to their subject matter. In the Departmental Directives System, categories are
     identified and their subdivisions logically related by a numbering system.

f.   Classification Code. A 4-digit number (7-digits for some specialized OHRM directives
     to align with overarching OPM guidance) indicating the basic subject matter of a
     specific directive; e.g., code 1041 indicates that the subject of a directive is committee
     management.

g.   Classification Number. The number that uniquely identifies each Departmental
     directive. It consists of a series designator, a classification code, and a 3-digit serial
     number; e.g., DR 1041-001 would be the first Departmental Regulation on committee
     management.

h.   Codification. The issuance of a directive, appropriately numbered, in permanent form,
     or the conversion of a temporary directive to permanent issuance.

i.   External Directives. Federal regulations, Executive Orders, or other issuances that
     originate outside USDA but may apply to USDA operations.

j.   Format. The design of directive pages for positioning constant information such as
     directive number, subject, OPI, date, page number, margins, etc.


                                             A-1
k.   Head. Agency Administrator or office director, or the person acting as head.

l.   Mandatory Clearance Office. A clearance office that directives must be cleared through
     prior to issuance.

m. Mission Area. A group of agencies with related functions that report to the same Under
   or Assistant Secretary. Research, Education, and Economics (REE) is an example of a
   mission area.

n.   Office of Primary Interest (OPI). The office responsible for the origination and content
     of a directive related to a particular function or program.

o.   Office of the Secretary. This term includes the immediate office of the Secretary, the
     Deputy Secretary, the Under and Assistant Secretaries.

p.   Rescission. The cancellation of a directive.

q.   Revision. A revision or reissuance is used for general updating in which more than
     minor substantive changes are made or more than 25 percent of the text of a DR, DM, or
     DG is changed; for language changes necessitated by the revision of underlying
     statutory or regulatory authority; for making substantive changes to the policy set forth
     in the directive; or for making changes to agency and staff office and other stakeholder
     responsibilities set forth in the directive.

r.   Secretary. The Secretary of Agriculture.

s.   Series Designator. A 2-letter alphabetical abbreviation indicating the Series of a
     particular Departmental directive (e.g., DR, DM, DN, DG, SM).

t.   Signature Authority. The office/person that approves the directive in accordance with
     delegated authorities and assigned functions.

u.   Staff Office. Departmental administrative offices whose heads report to officials within
     the Office of the Secretary.

u.   Stakeholder. An official, mission area, agency, staff office, or component with a defined
     role and responsibility or vested interest in a Departmental directive.




                                            A-2
                            APPENDIX B

                ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AD       Agriculture Department (for Departmental forms use only)
ASA      Assistant Secretary for Administration
ASCR     Assistant Secretary of Civil Rights
CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
CIO      Chief Information Officer
CISO     Chief Information Security Officer
DDM      Departmental Directives Manager
DG       Departmental Guidebook
DM       Departmental Manual
DN       Departmental Notice
DR       Departmental Regulation
DSLO     Directives System Liaison Officer
HTML     HyperText Markup Language
IT       Information Technology
OBPA     Office of Budget Program and Analysis
OC       Office of Communications
OCIO     Office of the Chief Information Officer
OES      Office of the Executive Secretariat
OGC      Office of the General Counsel
OHRM     Office of Human Resources Management
OPI      Office of Primary Interest
PDF      Portable Document Format
SM       Secretary’s Memorandum
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                                  B-1
                                        APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


The E-Government Act of 2002, 44 U.S.C. 3501

GSA, GSA Governmentwide Section 508 Accessibility Program Web site

Labor Management Relations, 5 U.S.C. 71

Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. § 794 (d), as amended

USDA, Departmental Directives Web Page

USDA, Template for Departmental Regulation

USDA, Template for Departmental Manual

USDA, Template for Departmental Notice

USDA, Template for Secretary’s Memorandum

USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System

USDA, DR 4030-001, Section 508, September 8, 2014

USDA, DR 4300-004, Civil Rights Impact Analysis, October 17, 2016

USDA, Departmental Forms Web Page

USDA, AD-116, Clearance and Approval for Departmental Issuances

USDA, AD-778, Secretary’s Memorandum

USDA, AD-811, Departmental Regulation

USDA, AD-812, Departmental Manual

USDA, AD-813, Departmental Notice

USDA, AD-814, Departmental Guidebook

USDA, AD-3108, Note to Reviewers for Draft Departmental Directives

USDA, Directives Contacts Web Page

                                              C-1
                   APPENDIX D

SAMPLE LAYOUT: DEPARTMENTAL DIRECTIVE (DN, DR, DM)




                       D-1
             APPENDIX E

SAMPLE LAYOUT: SECRETARY’S MEMORANDUM




                E-1
                                      APPENDIX F

             DEPARTMENTAL DIRECTIVES CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM


0100 DEPARTMENTAL DIRECTIVES SYSTEM

  0100 Procedures for Preparing Departmental Directives
  0110 Directive Systems Management and Operation
  0120 Classification
  0130 Distribution Codes
  0140 Indexing


1000-1999 GENERAL MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION

1000 ORGANIZATION, AUTHORITIES, AND FUNCTIONS

  1010 Organization
     1011 Principles of Organization (General)
     1012 Organization Planning
     1013 Manpower Planning

  1020 Statements of Missions and Functions

  1030 Delegations of Authority

  1040 Committees and Boards
     1041 Committee Management
     1042 Statutory Advisory Committees
     1043 Nonstatutory Committees
     1044 Other Committees and Boards

  1050 Intradepartment Relations
     1051 Relations with Field Activities

1100 MANAGEMENT IMPROVEMENT

  1110 Management Policies and Procedures

  1120 Management Systems Development
     1121 Project Management

  1130 Management Studies and Analyses
     1131 Workload Analysis and Measurement
     1132 Productivity Analysis



                                            F-1
  1140 Management Improvement Programs


1200 PROGRAM PLANNING AND EVALUATION

  1210 Program Goals and Objectives

  1220 Program Planning

  1230 Program Review and Evaluation

  1240 Program Impact Analysis

  1250 Program Decision Systems

  1260 Legislative Programs and Reports

1300 EXTERNAL RELATIONS

  1310 Executive Branch Relations
     1311 White House and Executive Office Relations
     1312 Interdepartmental Relations
     1313 Temporary Agencies, Commissions, Task Forces, etc.
     1314 Formal Agreements and Memoranda of Understanding

  1320 Legislative Branch Relations
     1321 Senate Relations
     1322 House of Representatives Relations
     1323 Congressional Hearings and Testimony
     1324 GAO/GPO/Other Legislative Branch Relations
     1325 Reports to Congress

  1330 Judicial Branch Relations

  1340 State and Local Agency Relations

  1350 International Relations

  1360 Public and Special Interest Groups and Organizations

  1370 Industrial and Commercial Organizations

  1380 Professional Societies and Associations

  1390 Educational Institutions (including Libraries, Museums, etc.)




                                            F-2
1400 PUBLIC AFFAIRS

  1410 Publishing

  1420 Composition and Printing
     1421 Copy and Duplication
     1422 Photocomposition

  1430 Publication Distribution

  1440 News Releases, Speeches and Current Information

  1450 Radio and Television

  1460 Media and Public Liaison

  1470 Graphic and Exhibit Design

  1480 Photography

  1490 Video and Film

  1495 New Media
     1496 Digital Strategy
     1497 Communications/Information Products and Services

1500 LEGAL AFFAIRS AND PROCEEDINGS

  1510 Coordination and Clearance Services
     1511 Legislative Review
     1512 Regulatory and Program Review
     1513 Legal Advice and Opinions

  1520 Legal Proceedings
     1521 Departmental and Administrative Proceedings
     1522 Judicial Proceedings

  1530 Employee Involvement in Legal Proceedings

1600 FACILITIES AND SPACE MANAGEMENT

  1610 Space Planning, Classification, and SLUC

  1620 Space Acquisition and Assignment

  1630 Space Utilization



                                             F-3
  1640 Alterations and Maintenance

  1650 Building Safety/Security

  1660 Parking Services

  1670 Utility Services

  1680 Conference Rooms/Auditoriums/Vendor Services

1700 INVESTIGATIONS AND AUDITS

  1710 Investigations

  1720 Audits

1800 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND CONTINGENCY PLANNING

  1810 Emergency Procedures and Planning (Crisis Management)

  1820 Civil Defense Program

  1830 Nature and Other Disasters


2000-2999 BUDGET AND FINANCE

2000 BUDGET DEVELOPMENT, PRESENTATION, AND EXECUTION

  2010 Budget Planning

  2020 Budget Development

  2030 Budget Presentation

  2040 Budget Execution

  2050 Budget Reporting

2100 FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT/ACCOUNTING

  2110 Accounting Systems

  2120 Cash Management




                                         F-4
  2130 Debt Management

  2140 Liabilities

  2150 Revenues

  2160 Cost Distribution

  2170 Cost Determination (A-76)

  2180 Property

2200 FISCAL MANAGEMENT

  2210 Appropriations, Receipts, and Fund Accounts

  2220 Collections

  2230 Obligations

  2240 Disbursements

  2250 Imprest Funds

  2260 Withdrawals, Restorations, and Transfers of Appropriation Balances

  2270 Account Table Officers

  2280 Fiscal and Accounting Codes

2300 TRAVEL AND TRANSPORTATION

  2310 Temporary Duty Travel-Domestic

  2320 Temporary Duty Travel-Foreign

  2330 Relocation

  2340 Sickness or Death while in Travel Status

  2350 Transportation of Things

2400 FEDERAL ASSISTANCE

  2410 Educational Institutions




                                            F-5
  2420 State and Local Governments

  2430 Institutions of Higher Education, Hospitals, and Other Non-Profit Organizations

  2440 Loans

  2450 Grants

2500 CLAIMS

  2510 Claims against the U.S.

  2520 Debt Claims

  2530 Dual Compensation Debts

  2540 Damage/Loss of Government Property

  2550 Damage/Loss of Shipments

  2560 Irregularities/Discrepancies

  2570 Waivers

2600 PAY AND ALLOWANCES

  2610 Internal Control

  2620 Principles and Standards

  2630 Special Allowances to Civilian Employees


3000-3999 INFORMATION RESOURCES MANAGEMENT

3000 RECORDS MANAGEMENT

  3010 Directives Management

  3020 Forms Management

  3030 Reports Management
     3031 Public Paperwork Burden Control

  3040 Files Management




                                            F-6
  3050 Mail Management
     3051 Automated Mailing Lists
     3052 Messenger Services

  3060 Correspondence Management

  3070 Micrographics Management

  3080 Records Disposition

  3090 Vital Records

3100 MANAGEMENT OF INFORMATION RESOURCES

  3110 Planning
     3111 Long Range Planning
     3112 Capacity Planning

  3120 Standards

  3130 Technical Approval

  3140 Security

  3145 Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA)

  3150 Internet Domain Name

  3160 Software Licensing

  3170 End User Work Station Configurations

  3180 Information Technology Standards

  3185 Enterprise Architecture

3200 ADP MANAGEMENT

  3210 Design and Development

  3220 Resource Acquisition

  3230 Resource Utilization

  3240 Operations




                                          F-7
3300 TELECOMMUNICATIONS MANAGEMENT

  3310 Voice Telecommunications

  3320 Data Telecommunications

  3330 Radio Communications

  3340 Employee Locator Services

3400 INFORMATION MANAGEMENT

  3410 Information Collection

  3420 Information Dissemination

  3430 Information Sharing

  3440 Classified and Sensitive Information

  3450 FOIA, Privacy, and Computer Matching

  3460 Digital Signage

  3465 Geospatial Data

3500 CYBERSECURITY

  3505 USDA Computer Incident Response Procedures

  3510 USDA Information Technology (IT) Restricted Space

  3515 Privacy Requirements

  3520 Configuration Management

  3525 USDA Internet and E-mail Security

  3530 USDA Security Protection

  3535 C2 Controlled Access Protection-General Information

  3540 Risk Management Program

  3545 Personnel Security




                                              F-8
  3550 Information Technology Systems

  3560 Capital Planning and Investment Control (CPIC) for Security

  3565 Cybersecurity Plans

  3570 IT Contingency and Disaster Planning

  3575 Security Controls

  3580 Mobile Computing

  3595 USDA Cyber Security Manual Series 3500 Glossary

3600 INFORMATION AND TECHNOLOGY TRANSFORMATION

  3600 USDA Information and Technology Transformation

  3610 USDA eAuthentication Service

  3620 USDA eLearning Services, Courseware and Content

  3630 USDA Enterprise Shared Services

  3640 Identity, Credential, and Access Management (ICAM)

  3650 Cloud Computing

3800 COMMON IDENTIFICATION STANDARDS

3900 SERVICE CENTER TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION INFORMATION

4000 HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGEMENT

  4010 Strategic Human Capital Management and Human Resources Delegations
     001 Delegations of Authority
     010 Strategic Human Capital Management
     171 OHRM Directives System

  4020 General Personnel Provisions, Personnel Records, and Actions
     211 Veteran Preference
     212 Competitive Service & Competitive Status
     213 Excepted Service
     250 Oversight & Evaluation
     251 Employee Organizations
     293 Personnel Records



                                           F-9
   294 Freedom of Information
   297 Privacy

4030 Employment
   300 Employment
   307 Veteran Readjustment Act
   308 Volunteer Service
   310 Employment of Relatives
   311 Workforce Planning
   315 Career & Career Conditional Employment
   316 Temporary & Term Employment
   317 SES Employment
   319 Senior level & Scientific & Professional positions
   330 Recruitment, Selection & Placement
   332 Recruitment & Selection through Competitive Exams
   333 Recruitment & Selection for Temp & Term Appointments Outside Registers
   334 Temp Assignments between & Outside Federal Agencies
   335 Promotion & Internal Placement
   337 Examining System
   338 Qualifications Requirements
   339 Medical Qualification Determinations
   340 Other than Full Time Career Employment
   351 Reduction in Force
   352 Employment Rights
   353 Restoration of Duty
   359 Removal from the SES and Placement Rights
   362 Presidential Management Intern Program

4040 Employee Performance and Development
   410 Training
   412 Executive Management & Supervisory Development
   430 Performance Management
   432 Performance Based Actions
   451 Awards

4050 Position Classification, Pay and Allowances
   511 Classification under the General Schedule
   530 Pay Rates & Systems
   531 Pay under the General Schedule
   532 Prevailing Rate Systems
   534 Pay Under Other Systems
   536 Grade & Pay Retention
   537 Repayment of Student Loans
   550 Pay Administration
   551 Pay Administration under FLSA
   553 Reemployment of Military and Civilian Retirees



                                       F-10
     572 Travel & Transport Expenses – Appointees & Interviews
     575 Recruitment & Relocation Bonuses
     576 Voluntary Separation Incentive Payments
     581 Processing Garnishment Order & Child Support
     591 Allowances and Differentials
     592 Overseas Allowances and Differentials
     594 Hostile Fire Pay
     595 Physicians’ Comparability Allowances

  4060 Attendance and Leave
     610 Hours of Duty
     630 Absence & Leave

  4070 Personnel Relations
     711 Labor Relations
     720 Affirmative Employment Programs
     731 Suitability
     734 Political Activities
     735 Employee Responsibilities & Conduct
     736 Personnel Investigations
     751 Discipline
     752 Adverse Actions
     771 Agency Administrative Grievance System
     792 Federal Employee Health & Counseling Programs

  4080 Employee Benefits
     811 Employee Work Life Programs
     830 CSRS Retirement
     840 FERS Retirement
     870 Federal Employees Group Life Programs
     875 Professional Liability Insurance
     880 Federal Employee Long Term Care Programs
     890 Federal Employee Health Benefit Program
     1600 Thrift Savings Plan

  4090 Senior Executive Service and Other special positions
     900 Intergovernmental Personnel Act Programs
     910 Demonstration Projects

4100 RESERVED

4200 RESERVED

4300 EQUAL OPPORTUNITY

  4310 Affirmative Action



                                           F-11
  4320 Complaint Investigations

  4330 Compliance

  4340 Civil Rights Impact Statements

  4350 Equal Opportunity in Housing

  4360 Outreach-Public Notification

  4370 Data Collection and Evaluation

4400 SAFETY AND HEALTH

  4410 Program Management

  4420 Education/Training

  4430 Employee Services

  4440 Supervision

  4450 Evaluation

4600 PERSONNEL SECURITY

  4610 Security Clearance

  4620 Identification Cards, Passes, and Badges

4700 ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION

  4710 Alternative Dispute Resolution


5000-5999 PROPERTY AND RESOURCE MANAGEMENT

5000 PROCUREMENT MANAGEMENT

  5010 USDA Procurement Reporting System

  5020 Debarred, Suspended, and Ineligible Bidders

  5030 Sureties




                                           F-12
  5040 ADP

  5050 Labor Standards

  5060 Departmental Blanket Purchase Arrangements

  5070 Consulting Services

  5080 Disputes

  5090 Socioeconomic Procurement

5100 REAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT

  5110 Acquisitions
     5111 Purchase, Donations, Exchanges, Transfers
     5112 Leasing

  5120 Utilization

  5130 Disposition

  5140 Historical Significance/Preservation

  5150 Relocation Assistance

  5160 Use of Official Agency Symbols

5200 PERSONAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT

5300 SUPPLY MANAGEMENT

5400 FLEET MANAGEMENT

5500 ENERGY MANAGEMENT

5600 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

5700 PATENTS, COPYRIGHTS, AND TRADEMARKS


6000-8999 RESERVED


9000-9999 PROGRAM AREAS




                                              F-13
9000 FOOD AND CONSUMER PROGRAMS

9100 MARKETING AND TRANSPORTATION PROGRAMS

9200 INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS PROGRAMS

9300 COMMODITY PROGRAMS

9400 RURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS

9500 NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROGRAMS

9600 SCIENTIFIC AND EDUCATION PROGRAMS

9700 SOCIOECONOMIC PROGRAMS

  9710 Preference Programs

  9720 Minority Bank Deposit Programs

9800 ECONOMIC AND STATISTICS PROGRAMS




                                        F-14
