                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                NUMBER:
          DEPARTMENTAL MANUAL                                   DM 1074-001
 SUBJECT: Procedures for Responding to Allegations of           DATE:
 Compromised Scientific Integrity                               May 2, 2024
                                                                EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of the Chief Scientist                             May 2, 2029



Section                                                                                  Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                1
2.   Scope                                                                                  2
3.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                     2
4.   Background                                                                             3
5.   Policy                                                                                 4
6.   Procedures                                                                             5
7.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                            29
8.   Inquiries                                                                             33

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                   A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                  B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                   C-1


1. PURPOSE

     a.   This Departmental Manual (DM) sets forth the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)
          processes and procedures for reporting, investigating, and resolving allegations of
          compromised scientific integrity, including research misconduct, which are made
          against USDA employees.

     b.   The Department has a separate rule, Title 2 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)
          Part 422 (2 CFR Part 422), Research Institutions Conducting USDA-Funded Extramural
          Research; Research Misconduct, that sets forth procedures for research institutions that
          receive allegations of research misconduct involving USDA-funded extramural research.
2. SCOPE

  a.   This DM applies to:

       (1) All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices.

       (2) All USDA employees who are responsible for receiving and responding to
           allegations of compromised scientific integrity.

       (3) All current USDA employees alleged to have compromised scientific integrity in
           their capacities as USDA employees.

  b.   The procedures in this DM apply exclusively to allegations of compromised scientific
       integrity, as defined in Appendix B(bb)(1), made against current USDA employees. The
       conduct listed in Section 2b(1) through 2b(2) does not fall within the scope of this DM.
       Such conduct may be prohibited and investigated under other applicable statutes,
       regulations, policies, or any combination of these authorities. Excluded categories
       include:

       (1) Alleged compromise of scientific integrity committed by an individual who is not a
           USDA employee. Such allegations should be referred to the appropriate institution,
           oversight office, journal editor, or other point of contact.

           Research institutions that receive allegations of research misconduct involving
           USDA-funded extramural research should refer to Title 2 CFR Part 422, Research
           Institutions Conducting USDA-Funded Extramural Research; Research
           Misconduct.

       (2) Ethical improprieties and regulatory non-compliance that occur in research and
           other settings but do not pertain to compromised scientific integrity as described in
           Appendix B(bb)(1). Examples of such improprieties include, but are not limited to:
           misallocation of funds, sexual harassment, discrimination, and breaches of human
           subject protections or animal welfare requirements.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This DM supersedes DM 1074-001, Procedures for Responding to Allegations of
       Compromised Scientific Integrity, dated November 18, 2016.

  b.   This DM must be used in conjunction with Departmental Regulation (DR) 1074-001
       Scientific Integrity, dated XX/XX/2024.

  c.   Relative to the previous version of DM 1074-001, this updated DM continues to:




                                              2
       (1) Implement more robust and well-defined procedures for responding to allegations
           of compromised scientific integrity;

       (2) Harmonize the procedures for responding to alleged violations of the USDA
           Scientific Integrity policy with those used for responding to allegations of research
           misconduct made against USDA employees; and

       (3) Further clarify the roles of the USDA Chief Scientist, Departmental Scientific
           Integrity Officer (DSIO), and Agency Scientific Integrity Officers (ASIOs) in
           overseeing Departmental and USDA agency responses to allegations of
           compromised scientific integrity.

  d.   This DM should not be interpreted to conflict with the rights of an employee under the
       law, including:

       (1) The Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute (5 United States Code
           (U.S.C.) §§ 7101-7135);

       (2) Applicable collective bargaining agreements;

       (3) Those provisions of Employees statute (5 U.S.C. §§ 7101- 7901) relating to
           disciplinary action of employees;

       (4) The Whistleblower Protection Act of 1989 (WPA) Public Law (P.L.) 101-12; and

       (5) The Whistleblower Protection Enhancement Act of 2012 (WPEA) P.L. 112-199.

  e.   Additionally, this DM should not be interpreted to conflict with any rights accorded a
       union representative under the Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute
       when communicating as a union representative. Further, it is recognized that the
       implementation of this DM may be subject to collective bargaining, the results of which
       may modify the policy or procedures stated or implied herein.


4. BACKGROUND

  a.   On December 6, 2000, the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy
       (OSTP) published the Federal Policy on Research Misconduct (65 Federal Register
       (FR) 76260). The purpose of this Federal Government-wide policy was to enhance
       consistency in the responses to allegations of research misconduct that pertain to
       research conducted or supported by the Federal Government. The policy established:

       (1) A Federal-wide definition of research misconduct;

       (2) Criteria required for making a finding of research misconduct;




                                               3
       (3) A multi-phase process for responding to allegations of research misconduct; and

       (4) Guidelines for safeguarding the interests of informants (hereafter referred to as
           complainants) and the subjects of allegations. The policy directed Federal
           Departments and Agencies that conduct or support research to implement the policy
           and, correspondingly, to develop procedures for responding to allegations of
           research misconduct.

  b.   On March 9, 2009, a Presidential memorandum on Scientific Integrity was issued to the
       Heads of Federal Departments and Agencies. This memorandum emphasized that the
       public must be able to trust the science and scientific process used to inform public
       policy decisions. Further, the Presidential memorandum indicated that Federal
       Departments and Agencies should have appropriate procedures in place to ensure the
       integrity of the scientific process and to identify and address instances in which
       scientific integrity is alleged to have been compromised. As a follow-up to the
       Presidential memorandum, OSTP issued a memorandum Scientific Integrity, dated
       December 17, 2010, directing Federal Departments and Agencies to develop and
       implement scientific integrity policies.

  c.   This DM is issued in response to, and is consistent with, the Federal Policy on Research
       Misconduct, the 2009 Presidential Memorandum on Scientific Integrity, the 2010 OSTP
       Memorandum on “Scientific Integrity,”. Whereas DR 1074-001 establishes USDA’s
       scientific integrity policy, this DM establishes procedures for reporting, investigating,
       and resolving allegations of compromised scientific integrity, including research
       misconduct, involving USDA employees.


5. POLICY

  USDA is committed to promoting a culture of scientific integrity. To that end, and pursuant
  to the Federal Policy on Research Misconduct, the 2009 Presidential Memorandum on
  Scientific Integrity, the 2010 OSTP Memorandum on Scientific Integrity, and DR 1074-001,
  USDA employees are prohibited from compromising scientific integrity, including
  committing research misconduct. Accordingly, the policy of the Department is to:

  a.   Assess, investigate, and/or resolve, as appropriate, allegations of compromised scientific
       integrity that are reasonable and made in good faith;

  b.   Respond to allegations of compromised scientific integrity in a timely, objective,
       thorough, and competent manner;

  c.   Uphold the safeguards afforded to individuals during the course of USDA proceedings
       to respond to allegations of compromised scientific integrity;

  d.   Protect from prohibited personnel practices (as defined in Prohibited Personnel
       Practices, 5 U.S.C. § 2302(b)) those USDA employees who uncover and report



                                               4
       allegations of compromised scientific integrity in good faith, as well as those USDA
       employees alleged to have compromised scientific integrity in the absence of a finding
       that scientific integrity was compromised; and

  e.   Comply with the requirements of the WPA, and its expanded protections enacted by the
       act, To Reauthorize the Office of Special Counsel and for Other Purposes, P.L. 103-424,
       and the WPEA, as well as with all Department- and agency-specific WPA regulations,
       rules, and policies, as applicable.


6. PROCEDURES

  The procedures described in this section address the reporting, assessing, investigating, and
  resolving of allegations of compromised scientific integrity made against current USDA
  employees. The purpose of these procedures is to determine whether and to what extent
  scientific integrity has been compromised, who is responsible, and what corrective actions, if
  any, are appropriate to restore any compromise of scientific integrity.

  Corrective actions, as defined in this DM, do not include adverse personnel actions or
  disciplinary actions. Procedures for implementing adverse personnel or disciplinary actions
  are not covered by this DM. Such actions may be proposed and implemented as allowed by,
  and in accordance with, other USDA policies and procedures separate from this DM based
  on final findings that scientific integrity has been compromised (i.e., those findings
  adjudicated by an agency or staff office and, if appealed, upheld by the USDA Chief
  Scientist).

  a.   General Provisions.

       (1) Procedural Exceptions. Particular circumstances in individual cases may dictate
           variation from the procedures in this DM when deemed in the best interests of
           USDA. (Examples of such circumstances may include, but are not limited to: joint
           jurisdiction over an allegation between two or more USDA agencies; joint
           jurisdiction over an allegation between USDA and a non-USDA institution; a
           USDA agency or staff office bearing primary responsibility for responding to an
           allegation, but being unable to do so because of a conflict of interest (see Appendix
           B(f)) or other compelling circumstances.). Any significant change from these
           procedures must be approved by the DSIO, must be documented in the case record,
           and must ensure fair treatment of the complainant and the respondent. Reasonable
           extensions of the timeframes set forth in this DM are not considered to be
           significant changes.

       (2) Referenced Terms. For purposes of this DM, the following terms are to be
           construed as specified:

           (a) All references to “day” or “days” in this DM mean calendar days, unless
               otherwise noted;



                                              5
    (b) Receipt of a submission by any USDA administrative, oversight, legal, or
        deciding office or official (including but not limited to ASIOs or the DSIO)
        will mean actual receipt; and

    (c) All references in this DM to reports (e.g., “Inquiry Report” and “Investigation
        Report”) and memoranda issued in the course of responding to allegations refer
        solely to the report or memorandum itself, not to evidentiary exhibits or other
        documents that may be referenced in the reports or memoranda.

(3) Confidentiality.

    (a) Except as described below, all individuals involved in a proceeding to review
        allegations of compromised scientific integrity (including, but not limited to,
        complainants, respondents, other witnesses, individuals appointed to conduct
        the inquiry and investigation, consultants, legal counsel, and administrative
        support personnel) should preserve the confidentiality of information reviewed
        during the proceeding to the extent possible consistent with a fair and thorough
        investigation and as allowed by law.

         This provision must not be construed as limiting complainants’ abilities to
         avail themselves of other appropriate processes for a review and resolution of
         their allegations.

         1   During the course of a USDA-conducted proceeding to review and resolve
             an allegation of compromised scientific integrity, USDA leadership and
             offices with a need-to-know may be provided with case-related
             information in the event of the following exigencies:

             a    Public health or safety is at risk, including an immediate need to
                  protect human research subjects or animals;

             b    The resources or interests of USDA funding sources are threatened;

             c    Scientific activities should be suspended;

             d    There is reasonable indication of possible violations of civil or
                  criminal law;

             e    Federal action is required to protect the interests of those involved in
                  the proceeding to respond to the allegation of compromised scientific
                  integrity;

             f    There is a reasonable indication that the allegation of compromised
                  scientific integrity or the proceeding to respond to the allegation
                  might be made public prematurely; or



                                       6
              g   There are other reasonable indications that the research community or
                  public should be immediately informed of the allegations of
                  compromised scientific integrity, or combinations of these exigencies.

    (b) Records maintained in connection with and during the course of proceedings to
        respond to allegations of compromised scientific integrity will be handled in
        accordance with the requirements of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C.
        § 552 and the Privacy Act (5 U.S.C. §552a), as applicable. Accordingly, any
        disclosures described in this DM must be done in accordance with these Acts.

(4) Responsible Agency or Staff Office. Allegations of compromised scientific
    integrity should be reported to, and, as appropriate, assessed, investigated,
    adjudicated, and resolved, by the agency or staff office that employed the
    respondent(s) at the time the alleged compromise of scientific integrity occurred.
    (See Section 6b).

    In rare circumstances, if agency or staff office leadership determines that the agency
    or staff office cannot respond to an allegation in a fair, objective, competent, and
    thorough manner, an alternate agency or staff office may be designated to respond
    to the allegation.

    (a) The decision to designate an alternate agency or staff office to respond to an
        allegation must be made in consultation with the:

         1    Leadership of the agency or staff office that employed the respondent(s) at
              the time the alleged compromise of scientific integrity occurred;

         2    Leadership of the agency or staff office proposed to serve as the alternate
              responding entity;

         3    DSIO;

         4    Office of the General Counsel (OGC); and

         5    Under Secretary of the appropriate USDA Mission Area if the entity that
              employed the respondent was an agency, or the Deputy Secretary if the
              entity that employed the respondent was a staff office.

    (b) The determination that an alternate agency or staff office should be designated
        to respond to an allegation must be documented in writing. The documentation
        should indicate the:

         1    Name of the agency or staff office that employed the respondent at the
              time the alleged compromise of scientific integrity occurred;




                                        7
        2    Name of the designated alternate agency or staff office;

        3    Basis for the determination; and

        4    Procedural phases (i.e., initial assessment, inquiry, investigation, and/or
             adjudication) that the alternate agency or staff office will be responsible
             for conducting.

    (c) As appropriate, the alternate agency or staff office may be assigned
        responsibility for conducting one or more of the procedural phases described in
        Sections 6c through f. For agencies, the designated alternate agency should
        typically be one that is within the same USDA Mission Area as the agency that
        employed the respondent(s) at the time the alleged compromise of scientific
        integrity occurred.

(5) Complainants.

    (a) USDA employees are encouraged to report suspicions that scientific integrity
        has been compromised if, after a careful assessment of the facts that are readily
        available to them in the course of their normal duties, they honestly and
        reasonably believe there is evidence that scientific integrity has been
        compromised.

    (b) It is the policy of the Department to be diligent in protecting the positions and
        reputations of USDA employees who make allegations of compromised
        scientific integrity in good faith.

    (c) USDA employees, former USDA employees, and applicants for USDA
        employment who make allegations of compromised scientific integrity
        consistent with the WPA and the WPEA may seek redress for retaliation as
        provided under these Acts. Those individuals who believe they have been
        improperly retaliated against may contact the USDA Office of Inspector
        General (OIG), the USDA Whistleblower Protection Ombudsman, the U.S.
        Office of Special Counsel, or a combination of these points of contact.

    (d) Complainants, who are current USDA employees, are required to cooperate in
        good faith with any inquiry or investigation conducted pursuant to this DM.

    (e) Non-anonymous complainants who submit good faith and reasonable
        allegations of compromised scientific integrity should be notified of any
        deficiencies in their allegations that would preclude the allegations from being
        referred for an inquiry (see Section 6d), and notified as to whether their
        allegations were deemed to have sufficient substance to warrant referral for
        investigation (see Section 6e).




                                        8
    (f) The roles, responsibilities, and notification requirements for complainants
        specified in this DM will be deemed not applicable to anonymous
        complainants.

(6) Respondents.

    (a) Respondents must be given timely, written notification of all substantive
        allegations of compromised scientific integrity directed against them. The
        notification should include a sufficient description of the allegation so as to
        allow the respondent to be able to respond to the allegation.

    (b) Under most circumstances, the mere filing of an allegation of compromised
        scientific integrity should not bring a respondent’s research or scientific
        activities to a halt or be the basis for other disciplinary or adverse action absent
        other compelling reasons.

    (c) Respondents must be given reasonable access to evidence (including witness
        statements) supporting substantive allegations and any proposed findings so as
        to be able to respond to said allegations and findings. Reasonable access may
        include, but is not limited to, providing a respondent with a copy of
        sequestered documentary evidence or an opportunity for supervised review of
        sequestered evidence.

    (d) Respondents must be given an opportunity to respond to substantive
        allegations, the supporting evidence, and any proposed findings and corrective
        actions.

    (e) Respondents, who are current USDA employees, are required to cooperate in
        good faith with any inquiry or investigation conducted pursuant to this DM.
        Regardless of a respondent’s cooperation, inquiries and investigations will
        proceed, and recommendations and determinations will be made based on the
        available evidence.

    (f) Respondents are prohibited from retaliating against complainants who make
        good faith and reasonable allegations of compromised scientific integrity, even
        if such allegations are ultimately not substantiated.

    (g) Respondents against whom a finding of compromised scientific integrity is
        made under the procedures in this DM must be afforded an opportunity to
        appeal that finding and any proposed corrective actions to restore scientific
        integrity. (See Section 6g).

    (h) Respondents who are found not to have compromised scientific integrity
        should be offered reasonable assistance in restoring their reputations to the
        extent that agency or staff office leadership deems appropriate, and within the
        scope of the agency or staff office leadership’s authority. For example, agency



                                        9
         or staff office leadership might expunge references to the allegation from the
         respondent’s personnel file.

(7) USDA Employment Status. If an allegation of compromised scientific integrity is
    raised with regard to the research or other scientific activities of a former USDA
    employee, the procedural framework described in this DM may be used to
    determine whether there was a compromise of scientific integrity with respect to
    scientific information resulting from USDA research or scientific activities. The
    procedures in the DM may also be used to determine whether any appropriate
    corrective actions are warranted to restore the integrity of the scientific information
    (e.g., research results).

(8) Non-USDA Funded Research or Scientific Activities. For allegations of
    compromised scientific integrity made against a USDA employee and that involve
    research or a scientific activity funded by a non-USDA Federal agency, the ASIO,
    in consultation with the DSIO, will coordinate with the funding agency to
    determine:

    (a) How to respond to the allegation; and

    (b) Whether the procedures in this DM need to be modified to enable a
        coordinated response to the allegation and/or to enable compliance with the
        terms and conditions of the grant, agreement, memorandum of understanding,
        funding arrangement, etcetera.

(9) Sequestration of Evidence. Reasonable and practical steps should be taken to
    obtain custody of physical materials that might reasonably serve as evidence in
    determining the merits of the allegation of compromised scientific integrity.
    Collected evidence should be sequestered and inventoried. In most cases,
    sequestration of evidence should occur prior to or immediately after respondents are
    notified of any substantive allegations of compromised scientific integrity made
    against them.

(10) Admissions. If at any point during a proceeding to review and resolve allegations
     of compromised scientific integrity the respondent admits to wrongdoing, such
     admission by itself is not necessarily grounds for termination of the proceedings.

    (a) Any admission must be placed in writing and signed by the respondent.

    (b) If the admission by itself does not meet all the definitional elements and
        evidentiary standards for establishing that scientific integrity has been
        compromised, additional evidence will need to be collected through continued
        proceedings to establish a finding of compromised scientific integrity.




                                        10
         (c) If the respondent admits to some but not all of the allegations, the remaining
             allegations must be proven by a preponderance of evidence to establish a
             finding of compromised scientific integrity for the remaining allegations.

     (11) Record Retention. All records related to proceedings to review and resolve
          allegations of compromised scientific integrity must be retained and managed by
          the appropriate USDA agency or staff office in accordance with applicable USDA
          records management policies and schedules.

b.   Reporting of Allegations.

     (1) Reporting by USDA Employees. If a USDA employee has a good faith and
         reasonable allegation of compromised scientific integrity, the employee is
         encouraged to notify the appropriate ASIO of the allegation. In most cases, the
         allegation should be submitted to the ASIO of the agency or staff office that
         employed the respondent at the time the alleged compromise of scientific integrity
         occurred. If the allegation is received by an agency contact other than the ASIO,
         the agency contact should refer the employee and the allegation to the appropriate
         ASIO. If a USDA employee believes that an ASIO has a conflict of interest with
         regard to the allegation or wishes to shield their identity from the ASIO, the
         employee may notify the DSIO of the allegation by email at
         researchintegrity@usda.gov.

         (a) Contact information for submitting allegations of compromised scientific
             integrity may be found on the USDA Office of the Chief Scientist website.

         (b) The DSIO serves as the Scientific Integrity Officer for the Office of the
             Secretary. If a Departmental staff office does not appoint an individual to
             serve as the ASIO for that office, the DSIO will fulfill the ASIO
             responsibilities for that office as these responsibilities apply to the receipt and
             handling of allegations of compromised scientific integrity.

     (2) Reporting by a Member of the Public. Members of the public who have good faith
         and reasonable allegations of compromised scientific integrity are encouraged to
         submit their allegations. Such allegations may be submitted to the appropriate
         ASIO, DSIO (researchintegrity@usda.gov), or OIG or any combination of the three.

     (3) Pre-Allegation Consultation. Individuals who have a scientific integrity concern are
         encouraged, but are not required, to first consult with the appropriate ASIO or
         DSIO before deciding whether to submit a formal allegation of compromised
         scientific integrity. A pre-allegation consultation does not constitute submission of
         a formal allegation. If a consultation is sought, the ASIO or DSIO should:

         (a) Convey to the individual the scope of this DM (Section 2) and what constitutes
             a compromise of scientific integrity as described in Appendix B(bb)(1), and
             any deficiencies identified in the potential allegation;



                                             11
    (b) Assess and discuss whether the matter can be readily resolved or corrected in
        the absence of a formal allegation being submitted;

    (c) Explain the procedures for making a formal allegation, the process of
        investigating and adjudicating allegations of compromised scientific integrity,
        and the individual’s role, responsibilities, and safeguards under this DM; and

    (d) Refer the individual to an applicable USDA website where this DM is posted,
        or provide the individual with electronic or hard copies of this DM.

(4) Formal Allegations. If a complainant decides to submit a formal allegation of
    compromised scientific integrity:

    (a) The allegation should describe in detail the nature of the alleged compromise
        of scientific integrity.

    (b) To facilitate the assessment of the allegations, the individual submitting the
        allegation should provide specific details about the allegation, to the extent
        known, including:

         1   A description of the scientific activity in question, including, as
             applicable, protocol titles, funding sources, and locations where the
             activity was approved and conducted;

         2   The names of the person or people involved in the scientific activity in
             question;

         3   The names of the person or people believed to have compromised
             scientific integrity (i.e., name(s) of the potential respondent(s));

         4   Bibliographic information for publications, presentations, reports, funding
             requests, etc., where the scientific activity in question was reported;

         5   Relevant dates and chronologies;

         6   The current storage location of data from, and records of, the scientific
             activity in question;

         7   Any evidence that suggests the alleged compromise of scientific integrity
             was committed intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly; and

         8   The basis for the individual’s allegation(s), including the significance of
             the alleged compromise, the individual’s relationship to the respondent(s)
             and the scientific activity in question, the individual’s access to any
             underlying evidence, and the potential role of other witnesses.



                                       12
         (c) The allegation should be accompanied by all relevant evidence that is within
             the individual’s authorized possession and related to the allegation.

         (d) A lack of specific details or substantive information may impact
             determinations as to whether an inquiry or investigation must be initiated.

     (5) Anonymous Allegations. Allegations of compromised scientific integrity may be
         submitted anonymously and acted upon by the ASIO. However, the inherent
         inability to follow up with an anonymous complainant after submission of an
         allegation, and the inherent inability to assess the credibility of an anonymous
         complainant, may impact determinations as to whether an inquiry and/or
         investigation should be initiated, as well as the outcome of said proceedings.

c.   Initial Review and Assessment of Formal Allegations. The ASIO will review all formal
     allegations of compromised scientific integrity, and consult, as appropriate, with
     colleagues (e.g., Employee/Labor Relations personnel, DSIO, Ethics Officer, Quality of
     Information Officer, Peer Review Officer, Research Integrity Officer, or other relevant
     expert) to determine how to proceed.

     (1) As determined by the ASIO, an inquiry must be initiated for any formal allegation
         that on its face (as alleged) includes all of the following:

         (a) Falls within the scope of this DM as set forth in Section 2;

         (b) Pertains to a compromise of scientific integrity as described in Appendix
             B(bb)(1);

         (c) Is sufficiently credible and specific so that potential evidence of compromised
             scientific integrity may be identified; and

         (d) Is not clearly frivolous (i.e., has no basis in fact or reason).

     (2) The ASIO’s determination as to whether an inquiry must be initiated should
         normally be completed within 10 days of receipt of all information necessary for the
         ASIO to make the determination. The complainant must be notified in writing of
         the outcome of the ASIO’s determination, and the basis for the determination.

         (a) If the ASIO determines that the allegation does not meet the definition of a
             compromise of scientific integrity set forth in Appendix B(bb)(1) and a more
             appropriate entity (e.g., OIG; Office of Ethics; Institutional Animal Care and
             Use Committee (IACUC); Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC);
             Institutional Review Board (IRB)) or process exists for responding to the
             allegation, the allegation should be referred accordingly, and the complainant
             notified of the referral.




                                             13
    (b) If a determination is made that the allegation is not sufficiently credible or
        specific enough to warrant an inquiry, the complainant should be offered the
        opportunity to supplement the allegation with additional credible or specific
        information.

    (c) If a determination is made that the allegation meets the criteria for initiating an
        inquiry, a scientific integrity case will be opened. Within 10 days of the
        determination, the ASIO will provide the DSIO with a copy of the allegation
        and the ASIO’s written determination that an inquiry must be initiated.

(3) If the ASIO’s initial assessment of an allegation results in a determination that the
    criteria for convening an inquiry were not met, the ASIO must notify the
    complainant of the opportunity that exists under Section 6c(3) to request
    reconsideration of the ASIO’s determination. Complainants may request
    reconsideration of an ASIO’s initial assessment determination within 30 days of the
    date upon which the ASIO’s written notification of the determination was sent to
    the complainant. The request for reconsideration must be submitted to both the
    ASIO and DSIO. The request submission must include: a copy of the allegation
    and any other accompanying documentation that was initially provided to the
    ASIO; a copy of the ASIO’s written notification received by the complainant
    regarding the outcome of the initial assessment; a specific point-by-point rebuttal of
    the basis cited in the ASIO’s notification for not convening an inquiry; and the
    specific rationale for the complainant’s contention that the allegation should be
    referred for an inquiry under Section 6d of this DM. Both the ASIO and DSIO
    must each be provided with a complete submission.

    (a) The DSIO will review timely and complete submissions and consult with the
        ASIO. As warranted, the DSIO may also consult with agency or staff office
        leadership or others as appropriate. Based on the review, the DSIO may either
        concur with the outcome of the ASIO’s initial assessment or request that an
        inquiry be convened based on a determination that the allegation meets the
        criteria delineated in Section 6c(1) for opening an inquiry.

    (b) The DSIO will notify the complainant, ASIO, and agency or staff office
        leadership of the DSIO’s decision.

    (c) Decisions on requests for reconsideration of an ASIO’s initial assessment
        determination should typically be rendered within 30 days of the DSIO’s
        receipt of a complainant’s request for reconsideration.

(4) In the absence of a formal allegation of compromised scientific integrity, an ASIO
    may determine that an inquiry should be initiated based on credible and specific
    information that a compromise of scientific integrity may have occurred. Such a
    determination may be made, provided that there is a reasonable basis to conclude
    that the alleged compromise of scientific integrity falls within the scope of this DM.




                                       14
d.   Inquiry. The purpose of an inquiry is to conduct a preliminary review of readily
     available evidence to determine whether an allegation has sufficient substance to warrant
     an investigation.

     (1) Notification. Respondents, if identified prior to or during the inquiry phase, must
         be provided with written notification of the inquiry. The notification should:
         indicate the purpose of the inquiry; include a specific description of the
         allegation(s) to be reviewed during the inquiry; and provide agency or staff office
         contact information for an individual (e.g., ASIO, Employee Relations
         representative, etc.) who can address procedural questions that the respondent may
         have. The notification should either reference an applicable USDA website where
         this DM is posted or include an electronic or hard copy attachment of this DM. If
         or when additional allegations are subsequently added to the scope of the inquiry,
         the respondent must be provided with written notice of the additional allegations.

     (2) Standard. An allegation is deemed to have “sufficient substance” to warrant an
         investigation if the inquiry determines that the allegation and any readily available
         evidence reviewed would together raise a reasonable suspicion that scientific
         integrity has been compromised.

     (3) Timeframe. The inquiry should be completed within 60 days of the date the ASIO
         determined that an inquiry was warranted. If the timeframe for completing an
         inquiry takes greater than 60 days, the reason for the extended timeframe should be
         documented in the Inquiry Report. The complainant, respondent, and DSIO should
         be notified of any extensions of the timeframe for completing the inquiry.

     (4) Inquiry Participants. The ASIO or other agency or staff office-designated
         individual(s) should conduct the inquiry in coordination with an Employee
         Relations (Human Resources) specialist. The individuals conducting the inquiry
         should have no conflicts of interest with respect to the issue in question, the
         respondent, the complainant, or other key witnesses. Subject matter experts may be
         consulted to aid in the review of the evidence.

     (5) Review of Evidence. The inquiry must involve a thorough review of the following:
         the allegations referred for an inquiry; evidence, if any, submitted by the
         complainant and respondent; and other readily available evidence. An inquiry does
         not require a full review of all of the evidence related to the allegation or exhaustive
         interviews and analyses.

     (6) Inquiry Report.

         (a) The inquiry should culminate in the issuance of a succinct report indicating:

              1    The name and position of the respondents (if identified);

              2    A summary of the allegations reviewed during the inquiry;



                                             15
        3    The basis for why each allegation falls within the scope of this DM and
             constitutes an alleged compromise of scientific integrity;

        4    A recommendation to open or not open an investigation based on whether
             the allegation was determined to have sufficient substance;

        5    A description of the evidence reviewed; and

        6    A written analysis of how the evidence reviewed supports the
             recommendation.

    (b) A copy of the Inquiry Report must be provided to the ASIO (if the ASIO did
        not participate in the inquiry); the DSIO; and agency or staff office leadership.
        The Inquiry Report may also be provided to Employee Relations (Human
        Resources), as well as other internal USDA entities with a need to know.

(7) Inquiry Determination.

    (a) If an inquiry determines that an allegation has sufficient substance, an
        investigation must be convened in accordance with Section 6e.

        1    The complainant must be notified in writing that the allegation was
             referred for investigation.

        2    The respondent must be:

             a    Notified in writing that the allegation was referred for investigation;

             b    Provided with a copy of the Inquiry Report; and

             c    Provided an opportunity to submit comments on the Inquiry Report.
                  The comments will be considered during the investigation phase if
                  received prior to completion of the investigation.

    (b) If an inquiry results in a determination that the allegation does not have
        sufficient substance to warrant an investigation, agency or staff office
        leadership may nonetheless require that an investigation be convened in
        accordance with Section 6e. Such a decision by agency or staff office
        leadership is within their full discretion as long as that decision is not
        inconsistent with any other part of this DM. The justification for convening an
        investigation in spite of a contrary recommendation by the inquiry must be
        documented in writing and retained according to records management policies
        and schedules. A copy of the justification must be provided to the ASIO and
        DSIO.




                                       16
         1   The complainant must be notified in writing that the allegation was
             referred for investigation.

         2   The respondent must be:

             a    Notified in writing that the allegation was referred for investigation;

             b    Provided with a copy of the Inquiry Report;

             c    Provided with a copy of the agency or staff office justification for
                  referral of the allegation for investigation; and

             d    Provided with an opportunity to submit comments on both the Inquiry
                  Report and the agency or staff office justification for referring the
                  allegation for investigation. The comments will be considered during
                  the investigation phase if received prior to completion of the
                  investigation.

    (c) If an inquiry results in a determination that the allegation does not have
        sufficient substance to warrant an investigation and agency or staff office
        leadership does not issue a decision to the contrary, the ASIO or other
        designated individual must notify the complainant in writing that the allegation
        was determined to lack sufficient substance to warrant referral for an
        investigation. The notification should also indicate that, in accordance with
        Section 6d(8) of this DM, the complainant is afforded the opportunity to
        request reconsideration of an inquiry determination to not proceed with an
        investigation.

(8) Inquiry Determination Reconsideration. If an inquiry results in a determination that
    the allegation does not have sufficient substance to warrant an investigation and
    agency or staff office leadership does not issue a decision to the contrary, a
    complainant may request reconsideration of the inquiry determination within 30
    days of the date upon which the notification of the determination was sent to the
    complainant. The request for reconsideration must be submitted to both the ASIO
    and DSIO. The request submission must include the following: a copy of the
    notification received by the complainant regarding the outcome of the inquiry; the
    specific rationale for the complainant’s contention that the allegation should be
    referred for a formal investigation under Section 6e of this DM; and any evidence in
    the complainant’s authorized possession that supports the complainant’s request for
    reconsideration. Both the ASIO and DSIO must each be provided with a complete
    submission.

    (a) If the complainant does not submit a written request for reconsideration of the
        inquiry determination within 30 days of the date upon which the notification of
        said determination was sent to the complainant, the ASIO or other appropriate
        agency or staff office employee will:



                                       17
    1    Notify the complainant and DSIO in writing that the case will be closed.

    2    Notify the respondent that an inquiry determined the allegation did not
         have sufficient substance to warrant an investigation and that the case will
         be closed.

(b) If the complainant submits an incomplete request for reconsideration of the
    inquiry determination within 30 days of the notification of said determination
    being sent:

    1    The DSIO will notify the complainant and the ASIO that the request
         submission was incomplete and that the case will be closed.

    2    The ASIO or other appropriate agency or staff office employee will notify
         the respondent that an inquiry determined the allegation did not have
         sufficient substance to warrant an investigation and that the case will be
         closed.

(c) If the complainant submits a complete, written request for reconsideration of
    the inquiry determination within 30 days of the notification of said
    determination being sent, the DSIO will review the request, any supporting
    documents accompanying the request, the Inquiry Report, and any additional
    documentation provided by the agency or staff office. Based on the review, the
    DSIO may either concur with the agency’s/staff office’s inquiry determination
    or convene a Departmental Scientific Integrity Review Panel (DSIRP) to
    review the matter and make a determination as to whether an agency or staff
    office-initiated investigation is warranted.

    1    If the DSIO does not find the complainant’s request to be compelling (e.g.,
         based on a lack of credible supporting evidence, the complainant’s
         misinterpretation of provisions in DR 1074-001 or this DM, etc.) and
         concurs with the basis for the agency’s/staff office’s inquiry
         determination, the DSIO may deny the complainant’s request for
         reconsideration.

         a    The DSIO will notify the complainant, ASIO, agency or staff office
              leadership, and the USDA Chief Scientist of the DSIO’s decision, the
              basis for said decision, and that the case will be closed.

         b    The ASIO or other appropriate agency or staff office employee will
              notify the respondent that an inquiry determined the allegation did not
              have sufficient substance to warrant an investigation and that the case
              will be closed.




                                  18
2   If the DSIO finds the complainant’s request to be compelling, has
    concerns with the basis for the original inquiry determination, or believes
    that a de novo review is warranted, the DSIO will convene a DSIRP in
    accordance with Section 6h. The DSIRP will review the complainant’s
    submission, the Inquiry Report, and any additional documentation
    provided by the agency or staff office. Following its review, the DSIRP
    will issue a determination, based on the standard set forth in Section 6d(2),
    as to whether an agency or staff office must convene an investigation into
    the complainant’s allegation.

    a   If the DSIRP determines an investigation is not warranted, the case
        will be closed.

         (1) The DSIO will provide the ASIO, agency or staff office
             leadership, and the USDA Chief Scientist with a copy of the
             DSIRP’s written decision and notification that the case will be
             closed.

         (2) The DSIO will notify the complainant of the DSIRP’s
             determination and that the case will be closed.

         (3) The ASIO or other appropriate agency or staff office employee
             will notify the respondent that an inquiry determined the
             allegation did not have sufficient substance to warrant an
             investigation and the case will be closed.

    b   If the DSIRP determines an investigation is warranted, the agency or
        staff office must conduct an investigation in accordance with Section
        6e.

         (1) The DSIO will provide the ASIO, agency or staff office
             leadership, and the USDA Chief Scientist with a copy of the
             DSIRP’s written decision and notification that an investigation
             must be convened.

         (2) The DSIO will notify the complainant of the DSIRP’s
             determination and that the allegation will be referred for an
             investigation.

         (3) The ASIO or other appropriate agency or staff office employee
             will:

             (a) Notify the respondent in writing that the allegation has been
                 referred for investigation;




                             19
                            (b) Provide the respondent with a copy of the Inquiry Report and
                                the DSIRP’s written decision; and

                            (c) Provide the respondent with an opportunity to submit
                                comments on both the Inquiry Report and the DSIRP’s
                                written decision. The comments will be considered during
                                the investigation phase if received prior to completion of the
                                investigation.

         (d) Decisions on requests for reconsideration should typically be rendered within
             60 days of the DSIO’s receipt of the complainant’s request for reconsideration.

e.   Investigation. The purpose of an investigation is to formally develop the factual record
     and examine that record leading to a recommendation to either: dismiss the case; make
     a finding that scientific integrity has been compromised; or take corrective or other
     administrative actions to restore scientific integrity and remedy any findings.

     (1) Notification. Respondents, if identified prior to or during the investigation phase,
         must be provided with written notification of the investigation. The notification
         should: indicate the purpose of the investigation; include a specific description of
         the allegation(s) to be reviewed during the investigation; and provide agency or
         staff office contact information for an individual (e.g., ASIO, Employee Relations
         representative, etc.) who can address procedural questions that the respondent may
         have. The notification should either reference an applicable USDA website where
         this DM is posted or include an electronic or hard copy attachment of this DM. If
         and when additional allegations are subsequently added to the scope of the
         investigation, the respondent must be provided with written notice of the additional
         allegations.

     (2) Evidentiary Standard. For the purposes of this DM, accepted practices of the
         relevant research/scientific community include, but are not limited to, those
         delineated in the USDA Code of Scientific Ethics incorporated in DR 1074-001.

         (a) To establish a finding that scientific integrity has been compromised:

              1    There must be a loss or breach of scientific integrity (see Appendix
                   B(bb)(1)) in the conducting or reporting of scientific activities, and/or the
                   use or application of the results of scientific activities; and

              2    There must be a failure to comply with the policies set forth in DR 1074-
                   001 or a significant departure from accepted practices of the relevant
                   research, scientific, or statistical community; and

              3    The allegation must be proven by a preponderance of evidence.

         (b) Research misconduct is a subset of compromised scientific integrity.



                                             20
         1    To establish a finding of research misconduct:

              a    The alleged behavior must fall within the definition of research
                   misconduct (i.e., fabrication, falsification, or plagiarism in proposing,
                   performing, or reviewing research, or in reporting research results);
                   and

              b    There must be a significant departure from accepted practices of the
                   relevant research community; and

              c    The misconduct must be committed intentionally, knowingly, or
                   recklessly; and

              d    The allegation must be proven by a preponderance of evidence.

         2    Research misconduct does not include honest error or differences of
              opinion.

(3) Timeframe. The investigation should be completed within 120 days of the date that
    the agency or staff office leadership is notified of an inquiry or DSIRP
    determination that an allegation has sufficient substance to warrant an investigation.
    If the timeframe for completing an investigation takes more than 120 days, the
    reason for the extended timeframe should be documented in the Investigation
    Report. The respondent and DSIO should be notified of any extensions of the
    timeframe for completing the investigation.

(4) Investigation Panel. An investigation panel, composed of a credentialed USDA
    personnel misconduct investigator (i.e., an individual credentialed by the USDA
    Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM)) and two or more agency or
    staff office employees who have experience conducting or overseeing scientific
    activities, will conduct the investigation. The participants should coordinate efforts
    on all aspects of the investigation to the extent practicable. The ASIO may not be
    assigned to be a member of an investigation panel, but may provide administrative
    support to the panel (see Section 6e(4)(c)).

    (a) The investigation panel will be responsible for: identifying the evidence that
        needs to be gathered to fulfill the purpose of the investigation; gathering
        documentary evidence and obtaining witness statements and oral testimony;
        ensuring that witnesses, including respondents and complainants, are accorded
        any rights due under laws, regulations, policies, or bargaining agreements that
        are applicable to their roles as witnesses in a USDA administrative
        investigation; cataloging and securing evidence; reviewing relevant evidence;
        and collaborating on the formulation of the investigation recommendations and
        the drafting of the Investigation Report.




                                        21
    (b) Subject matter experts may be consulted to aid in the review of the evidence
        and provide opinions to the investigation panel. However, only the
        investigation panel members may make any recommended findings in the
        Investigation Report.

    (c) The ASIO may provide administrative and management support to the
        investigation panel; however, the ASIO must not substantively participate in
        the panel’s deliberations as to whether scientific integrity has been
        compromised and what corrective actions, if any, should be recommended to
        restore scientific integrity.

    (d) The individuals involved in conducting the investigation should have no
        conflicts of interest with respect to the issue in question, the respondent, the
        complainant, or other key witnesses.

(5) Review of Evidence.

    (a) The investigation must involve a thorough review of all allegations referred for
        investigation; the Inquiry Report; relevant evidentiary exhibits from the
        inquiry; the respondent’s response, if submitted, to the Inquiry Report; relevant
        testimonial evidence offered during the course of the inquiry and investigation;
        and all other collected evidence relevant to the allegations.

    (b) If practicable, oral testimony or written statements must be obtained from the
        complainant, the respondent, and other witnesses who, as deemed by the
        investigation panel, are likely to be able to provide relevant documentary
        and/or testimonial evidence.

        1    The complainant or respondent may suggest that oral testimony or written
             statements be obtained from other specific witnesses; however, the final
             decision to obtain testimonial evidence from any particular witness
             belongs solely to the investigation panel.

        2    If oral testimony is obtained, a written summary of the testimony should
             be prepared, and the witness provided with an opportunity to review and
             sign the written summary. Oral testimony also may be recorded provided
             that the parties participating in the interview agree in advance to have the
             testimony recorded.

    (c) After fully reviewing and analyzing all of the relevant evidence and testimony
        that are reasonably available, the investigation panel must collectively
        formulate recommendations for each allegation about whether and to what
        extent scientific integrity has been compromised, who is responsible, and what
        corrective actions are appropriate, based on the evidentiary standard set forth in
        Section 6e(2). The recommendations should be reached by consensus
        whenever possible. If consensus cannot be reached on one or more of the



                                       22
         recommendations, a majority vote will determine the final recommendation.
         For any recommendation that is not reached by consensus, the Investigation
         Report must indicate the number of investigation panel members in favor of
         (majority) and the number opposed to (minority) the final recommendation.
         The final report may include a synopsis of the minority viewpoint.

(6) Investigation Report.

    (a) Within the allotted timeframe for completing the investigation, a report should
        be drafted that provides the following information:

         1   The name and position of all respondents;

         2   A summary of the allegations reviewed during the investigation;

         3   The basis for why each allegation falls within the scope of this DM and
             constitutes an alleged compromise of scientific integrity (see Section 2 and
             Appendix B(bb)(1));

         4   A recommendation for each allegation as to whether scientific integrity
             was compromised;

         5   A description of the evidence reviewed;

         6   An index providing a brief descriptive title and the source of the
             evidentiary exhibits referenced in the report to support findings,
             conclusions, and recommendations;

         7   A written analysis of how the preponderance of the evidence supports a
             recommended finding that scientific integrity has been compromised or
             that there was not a preponderance of the evidence to support a finding;

         8   A response to any contrary evidence including, but not limited to, the
             respondent’s affirmative defenses; and

         9   If applicable, any recommended corrective actions to restore scientific
             integrity and/or other administrative actions.

    (b) The respondent should be provided with a copy of the Investigation Report,
        and should concurrently be offered a copy of, or supervised access to, the
        evidence cited in the report. The respondent should be afforded at least 15
        days from receipt of the report to submit comments. The respondent’s
        comments, if submitted within the aforementioned timeframe, should
        accompany the Investigation Report transmitted to the adjudicating official
        along with the Investigation Panel’s response to the respondent’s comments, if
        the Investigation Panel’s response is submitted.



                                      23
f.   Adjudication. Adjudication is the stage when the outcome of the investigation is
     reviewed (including the final Investigation Report and the respondent’s response, if one
     was submitted, to the draft Investigation Report), and a determination is made as to
     whether scientific integrity was compromised, and if so, the extent that scientific
     integrity was compromised, who compromised scientific integrity, and the appropriate
     corrective actions (see Appendix B(g)) to implement to restore scientific integrity.

     (1) Adjudicating Official.

         (a) Unless indicated otherwise (in agency or staff office policies or other written
             documentation), scientific integrity cases will be adjudicated by the Head of
             the agency or staff office that employed the respondent at the time the alleged
             compromise of scientific integrity occurred.

         (b) The adjudicating official must not have been involved in conducting the
             inquiry or investigation, and must not have a conflict of interest with respect to
             the issue in question, the respondent, or the complainant.

              1    If the designated agency or staff office adjudicating official conducted the
                   inquiry or investigation, or has a conflict of interest, another individual
                   within the agency or staff office must be designated as the adjudicating
                   official for the case.

              2    In rare circumstances, if agency or staff office leadership determines that a
                   case cannot be fairly and objectively adjudicated within the responsible
                   agency or staff office, an individual from another agency or staff office
                   may be selected to adjudicate the case. (See Section 6a(4)(a)).

         (c) An individual is not disqualified to serve as the adjudicating official for
             appointing individuals to conduct an inquiry or investigation, or making a
             determination that an investigation must be conducted despite an inquiry
             determination that an investigation was not warranted (in accordance with
             Section 6d(7)(b)).

     (2) Timeframe. The adjudication, including issuance of a Decision Memorandum,
         should be completed within 30 days of the adjudicating official’s receipt of the
         Investigation Report. If an extension of the timeframe is required, the adjudicating
         official must document the reason for the extension in the Decision Memorandum.

     (3) Review of Evidence. The adjudicating official must review the Investigation
         Report; the respondent’s comments on the Investigation Report (if submitted); and
         the evidence cited in the Investigation Report to support any investigation findings,
         conclusions, and recommendations.




                                            24
         (a) The adjudicating official may request additional information, clarification, or
             analysis from the personnel who conducted the investigation, and consult with
             the ASIO, DSIO, OGC, or any other person or office with relevant knowledge
             or expertise.

     (4) Decision Memorandum. The adjudicating official must issue a written decision
         indicating whether scientific integrity was compromised, and if so, a decision as to
         the extent that scientific integrity was compromised, who compromised scientific
         integrity, and the appropriate corrective actions to restore scientific integrity.

         (a) The decision must be consistent with the definition of compromised scientific
             integrity and the evidentiary standard set forth in Section 6e(2).

         (b) The decision may concur with all, some, or none of the recommended findings
             and corrective actions in the Investigation Report. Any decision contrary to the
             recommendations of the investigation must be noted, and the specific reasons
             for that decision must be indicated in the Decision Memorandum.

     (5) Notifications of the Outcome.

         (a) The ASIO or other agency or staff office-designated official must provide the
             respondent and the DSIO with a copy of the adjudication Decision
             Memorandum and the final Investigation Report.

              1    If the adjudication resulted in a determination that the respondent
                   compromised scientific integrity, the respondent must also be notified of
                   the opportunity to appeal the determination and any corrective actions to
                   be taken to restore scientific integrity.

              2    Any corrective action(s) should be explicitly described and, if a
                   recommended action involves correction and/or retraction of a published
                   article, the language should be provided by the department to the
                   respondent for the request to correct/retract the literature.

         (b) The ASIO or other agency or staff office-designated official should notify the
             respondent’s supervisor of the outcome of the adjudication.

g.   Appeal. The purpose of the appeal process described herein is to provide a respondent,
     who has been found to have compromised scientific integrity, with the opportunity to
     appeal the finding and any corrective actions to be taken to restore scientific integrity.
     The appeal process described in this paragraph is separate from the USDA
     administrative grievance system. Procedures for implementing disciplinary or adverse
     personnel actions are not covered by this DM; therefore, any such actions, whether
     proposed or taken, cannot be appealed under the procedures of this DM.

     (1) No in-person hearings are provided for under Section 6g of this DM.



                                             25
(2) An appeal of a finding of compromised scientific integrity on the basis of non-
    compliance with the procedures set forth in this DM will not be grounds for
    reversing the finding unless the magnitude and consequence of such non-
    compliance is determined by the USDA Chief Scientist to have materially affected
    the outcome of the case.

(3) To preserve the opportunity for an appeal, the respondent must submit a written
    request for an appeal to the ASIO and DSIO within 30 days of the date upon which
    the notification informing the respondent of the finding was sent. The appeal
    submission must include the following: a copy of the adjudication Decision
    Memorandum; a statement of the findings and corrective actions being appealed; a
    statement of the grounds for the appeal; and any additional evidence that supports
    the grounds for the appeal. Both the ASIO and DSIO must each be provided with a
    complete appeal submission.

    (a) If the respondent does not submit an appeal within the 30-day timeframe
        afforded for submission, the ASIO will notify the respondent and DSIO that
        the case will be closed with the findings and corrective actions standing.

    (b) If the respondent submits an incomplete appeal submission within the 30-day
        timeframe afforded for submission, the DSIO will notify the respondent and
        the ASIO that the request was incomplete and that the case will be closed with
        the findings and corrective actions standing.

    (c) If the respondent submits a complete and timely appeal, the DSIO will convene
        a DSIRP, in accordance with Section 6h, to review the submission and make a
        recommendation to the USDA Chief Scientist on the appeal request.

         1   The DSIRP will review the respondent’s appeal submission; the
             Investigation Report; the adjudication Decision Memorandum; and the
             agency’s or staff office’s response (if one is submitted), to the
             respondent’s appeal submission. The DSIRP may request additional
             information or clarifications from the individuals who conducted the
             investigation, the adjudicating official, and other individuals as necessary.
             The DSIRP may also consult with OGC and other offices, as needed, for
             advice.

         2   Upon completion of its review, the DSIRP will issue a memorandum to
             the USDA Chief Scientist, recommending whether the original finding (or
             findings) and any corrective actions for restoring scientific integrity
             should be upheld, reversed, or modified. The memorandum must include
             a justification for the DSIRP’s recommendation.

             a    The memorandum should be issued within 60 days of the DSIRP’s
                  convening its first meeting.



                                       26
                  b    A copy of the DSIRP’s memorandum must be transmitted to the
                       USDA Chief Scientist, and the appropriate agency or staff office
                       Head and ASIO.

              3   The USDA Chief Scientist will review the respondent’s appeal submission
                  and the DSIRP’s memorandum. Based on this review, and any additional
                  consultations as needed, the USDA Chief Scientist will issue a decision on
                  the respondent’s appeal request. The Chief Scientist’s decision should be
                  issued within 30 days of receipt of the DSIRP’s memorandum. The Chief
                  Scientist’s decision constitutes the Department’s final decision with regard
                  to the appeal.

                  a    The Chief Scientist’s written appeal decision must include a
                       justification for upholding, reversing, or modifying the findings
                       and/or corrective actions appealed.

                  b    The DSIO will forward a copy of the Chief Scientist’s appeal
                       decision to the respondent, and the appropriate agency or staff office
                       Head and ASIO. The ASIO or other agency or staff office-designated
                       official should notify the respondent’s supervisor of the outcome of
                       the appeal.

h.   Departmental Scientific Integrity Review Panels (DSIRP).

     (1) A DSIRP will be convened for the purposes of reviewing the complainants’
         requests for reconsideration of agency or staff office inquiry determinations in
         accordance with Section 6d(8)(c) and for reviewing respondents’ appeals of
         findings in accordance with Section 6g(3)(c). At the discretion of the USDA Chief
         Scientist, a DSIRP may be convened to provide scientific integrity-related
         recommendations for other purposes.

     (2) A DSIRP will be composed of at least three ASIOs who are from agencies or staff
         offices other than the one involved in responding to the allegation. The DSIRP
         members must not have conflicts of interest with respect to the matter being
         reviewed.

     (3) The DSIO serves as a non-voting member of a DSIRP and the ex-officio chair. In
         the event that the DSIO is unable to perform these duties due to a conflict of
         interest, extended absence, or other reasons, the USDA Chief Scientist may
         designate another individual to serve as an interim/alternate DSIO for the purposes
         of fulfilling the DSIO’s role and responsibilities with regard to Section 6h.

     (4) With respect to DSIRPs, the DSIO is responsible for the following:

         (a) Identifying and appointing ASIOs to serve on the DSIRP;



                                           27
    (b) Establishing the charge for the DSIRP in accordance with the applicable
        provisions of this DM;

    (c) Providing administrative management of, and support to, the DSIRP, including
        but not limited to:

         1   Setting the specific date, time, and place for DSIRP meetings;

         2   Ensuring that relevant information is distributed to DSIRP members in a
             timely manner;

         3   Providing policy and procedural advice with regard to this DM and DR
             1074-001;

         4   Ensuring that DSIRP responsibilities are satisfied within the required
             timelines or documenting the reason for the extension of any timelines;

         5   Arranging for technical advisors and necessary resources to be available
             for the DSIRP;

         6   Assisting with obtaining documentary and testimonial evidence, if and as
             needed;

         7   Drafting DSIRP findings and recommendations; and

         8   Retaining records of DSIRP proceedings in accordance with the relevant
             records control schedule.

(5) As deemed necessary by the DSIRP members, the DSIRP may engage in fact-
    finding, including obtaining and reviewing additional documentary and testimonial
    evidence, to fulfill its charge and to inform its recommendations.

(6) As deemed necessary by the DSIRP members, the DSIRP may seek technical
    advice regarding human resource policies, ethics, legal issues, the science in
    question, or other areas where the DSIRP determines that such advice would be
    beneficial to the fulfillment of its charge.

(7) The DSIRP will attempt to reach its findings and recommendations by consensus.
    If consensus cannot be reached on one or more of the recommendations, a majority
    vote will determine the DSIRP’s final recommendation. All recommendations that
    are not reached by consensus must indicate the number of DSIRP members in favor
    of (majority) and the number opposed to (minority) the final recommendation. At
    the ex-officio Chair’s discretion, the final report may include a synopsis of the
    minority viewpoint.




                                      28
7. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   As the USDA Chief Scientist, the Under Secretary for USDA’s Research, Education and
       Economics (REE) Mission Area will oversee all aspects of this DM and have oversight
       authority for USDA proceedings to review and resolve allegations of compromised
       scientific integrity. Specific responsibilities, which may be delegated as appropriate,
       include:

       (1) Providing leadership for the Department on scientific integrity;

       (2) Ensuring Departmental compliance with this DM for responding to allegations of
           compromised scientific integrity, including recognition of, and taking of prompt
           action to address and prevent, compromised scientific integrity;

       (3) Seeking consultation with the USDA Science Council in regard to implementation
           of this DM;

       (4) Updating this DM and any accompanying guidance, as appropriate; and

       (5) Designating the duties of the DSIO to a senior career staff person with scientific or
           scholarly credentials or both.

  b.   The DSIO will:

       (1) Serve as the primary Department-level contact for questions regarding the policies
           of this DM.

       (2) Develop training and conduct outreach activities to facilitate USDA employee
           awareness and understanding of the policies and procedures specified in this DM.

           (a) Coordinate reporting of training compliance and training module availability;
               and

           (b) Report results to OSTP as required by the Framework.

       (3) Serve as the Scientific Integrity Officer for the Office of the Secretary.

       (4) Serve as the USDA Scientific Integrity Official.

           (a) Serve as the USDA representative on the NSTC Subcommittee on Scientific
               Integrity.

           (b) Keep ASIOs and USDA scientific integrity community aware of scientific
               integrity developments across the government.




                                               29
(5) Serve as a neutral point of contact (ombudsman) for receiving allegations of
    compromised scientific integrity that are made against USDA employees through
    the OIG hotline, directly from the public, or from other sources.

(6) Refer allegations of compromised scientific integrity, if received by the DSIO, to
    the appropriate ASIO within 5 days of receipt, unless the ASIO is the individual
    alleged to have compromised scientific integrity or has an identified conflict of
    interest.

(7) Provide oversight of Departmental and agency responses to allegations of
    compromised scientific integrity referred for an inquiry or investigation, including:

    (a) Review ASIO-submitted reports of allegations and their disposition; and

    (b) Maintain a status report of responses to allegations as a means of monitoring
        the progress toward resolution.

(8) Serve as the USDA Research Integrity Officer (USDA RIO) as described in 2 CFR
    422.

(9) Coordinate with OGC, OIG, the Office of Ethics (OE), OHRM, the Office of
    Communications (OC), the Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO), and
    other offices, as necessary, to ensure that scientific integrity-related policies are
    aligned and guidance is appropriate and consistent.

(10) Report any potentially criminal behavior to OIG that is uncovered during the course
     of responding to an allegation of compromised scientific integrity, and coordinate
     with the appropriate USDA entity to ensure that all records, documents, or other
     materials related to the allegation are provided to OIG.

(11) Keep the Chief Scientist and the Science Council informed on the status of the
     implementation of this DM and any compliance concerns, as warranted.

    (a) Lead formation and serve as chair of the Scientific Integrity Committee under
        the Science Council; and

    (b) Periodically report to the Science Council on the activities of the Scientific
        Integrity Committee.

(12) Maintain a publicly accessible website with the following or a link to the following:

    (a) This DM;

    (b) Procedures for reporting and responding to allegations of compromised
        scientific integrity;




                                        30
         (c) Contact information for the DSIO and ASIOs; and

         (d) A summary of closed scientific integrity cases involving formal allegations
             referred for an inquiry or investigation. The summary will include a
             description of the nature and disposition of the allegations.

c.   Assistant Secretaries and Under Secretaries will:

     (1) Ensure that their agencies and staff offices comply with this DM; and

     (2) Ensure that applicable USDA Mission Area, agency, and staff office policies and
         guidance are consistent with this DM.

d.   USDA Agencies will:

     (1) Implement this DM as it pertains to their agency;

     (2) Develop, as necessary, any agency-specific policies and guidance to supplement the
         policies and procedures specified in this DM;

     (3) Coordinate, as necessary, with the appropriate Employee Relations and Labor
         Management staff, the DSIO, and others, as needed, to ensure that agency policies
         and guidance are consistent with this DM;

     (4) Ensure that agency employees, who are covered by the scope of this DM, are aware
         of the policies in the DM and the procedures for reporting allegations of
         compromised scientific integrity;

     (5) Provide agency employees, who are covered by the scope of this DM, with any
         necessary guidance and training to understand and fulfill their responsibilities under
         this DM and any related agency-specific guidance on scientific integrity;

     (6) Monitor and report non-compliance with this DM to the DSIO;

     (7) Ensure that the DSIO is notified of all allegations of compromised scientific
         integrity referred for an inquiry or investigation, and that the DSIO receives
         periodic reports on the status of the responses to said allegations;

     (8) Ensure that inquiry and investigation reports, decision memoranda, and other
         substantive documents generated in the course of responding to allegations of
         compromised scientific integrity are provided to the DSIO, if requested; and

     (9) Appoint an agency employee to serve as the ASIO. The individual appointed to
         serve as ASIO must be a career appointee (i.e., non-political appointee), and should
         have previous experience conducting scientific activities, and sufficient institutional
         authority, stature, and credentials to be able to fulfill the required responsibilities.



                                             31
e.   USDA Staff Offices:

     (1) Will apply the responsibilities delineated for agencies in Section 7d(1) through (8)
         to their staff offices and employees, as applicable, and fulfill these responsibilities.

     (2) May, but are not required to, appoint an office employee to serve as the Scientific
         Integrity Officer.

         (a) If an individual is appointed to serve as a Scientific Integrity Officer, the
             individual must be a career appointee (i.e., non-political appointee), and should
             have previous experience conducting scientific activities and sufficient
             institutional authority, stature, and credentials to be able to fulfill the required
             responsibilities. For the purposes of this DM, individuals appointed to serve as
             Scientific Integrity Officers for Departmental staff offices are considered to be
             ASIOs.

         (b) If a Departmental staff office does not appoint an individual, the DSIO will
             fulfill the ASIO responsibilities for that office as these responsibilities apply to
             the receipt and handling of allegations of compromised scientific integrity.

f.   ASIOs will:

     (1) Receive and process allegations of compromised scientific integrity;

     (2) Conduct an initial assessment of allegations and submitted materials received from
         the DSIO, OIG, or other sources, following established procedures, to determine
         whether the allegations pertain to compromised scientific integrity and the
         appropriate handling of said allegations;

     (3) Notify the DSIO of all allegations of compromised scientific integrity referred for
         an inquiry or investigation, including notifying the DSIO within 10 days of an
         ASIO’s initial assessment determination that an allegation should be referred for an
         inquiry;

     (4) Coordinate with the DSIO and appropriate employee or labor relations personnel on
         responses to allegations of compromised scientific integrity referred for an inquiry
         or investigation so as to facilitate the integrity of, and consistency in, the process
         used across the Department for responding to said allegations;

     (5) Provide oversight of proceedings to address allegations of compromised scientific
         integrity;

     (6) Provide records (e.g., inquiry and investigation reports, evidentiary exhibits, and
         decision memoranda) when requested and status reports to the DSIO of the
         disposition of allegations;



                                              32
       (7) Immediately notify OIG and the DSIO if behavior that is or may be criminal in
           nature is discovered at any point during the agency or staff office response to
           allegations of compromised scientific integrity; and

       (8) Serve as, and fulfill the responsibilities of, the Agency Research Integrity Officer
           (ARIO) as described in 2 CFR 422, unless an agency specifically designates another
           individual to serve as the ARIO for handling allegations of research misconduct
           involving USDA-funded extramural research.

  g.   Managers and Supervisors will:

       (1) Report to the ASIO any knowledge of compromised scientific integrity;

       (2) Implement and comply with this DM as it pertains to their area of management or
           supervision;

       (3) Ensure that their employees who are responsible for implementing this DM are
           informed about and receive training on this DM; and

       (4) Consult, as appropriate depending upon the nature of the allegation, with the ASIO,
           Human Resources officer, ethics officer, DSIO, OIG, OGC, and the Office of Civil
           Rights.

  h.   Employees:

       (1) Are encouraged to report any knowledge of compromised scientific integrity to the
           ASIO or DSIO;

       (2) Must comply with this DM; and

       (3) Must cooperate in good faith with USDA proceedings to review and resolve
           allegations of compromised scientific integrity.


8. INQUIRIES

  Questions about this DR should be directed to the Office of the Chief Scientist and the
  Departmental Scientific Integrity Officer at researchintegrity@usda.gov. Additional contact
  information can be found on the OCS Scientific Integrity and Research Misconduct website.


                                           -END-




                                             33
                                  APPENDIX A

                     ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ARIO     Agency Research Integrity Officer
ASIO     Agency Scientific Integrity Officer
CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
DM       Departmental Manual
DR       Departmental Regulation
DSIO     Departmental Scientific Integrity Officer
DSIRP    Departmental Scientific Integrity Review Panel
E.O.     Executive Order
FR       Federal Register
IACUC    Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
IBC      Institutional Biosafety Committee
IRB      Institutional Review Board
NSTC     National Science and Technology Council
OC       Office of Communications
OCIO     Office of the Chief Information Officer
OCS      Office of the Chief Scientist
OE       Office of Ethics
OGC      Office of the General Counsel
OIG      Office of the Inspector General
OSTP     Office of Science and Technology Policy (Executive Office of the President)
P.L.     Public Law
REE      Research, Education and Economics
RIO      Research Integrity Officer
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture
WPA      Whistleblower Protection Act of 1989
WPEA     Whistleblower Protection Enhancement Act of 2012




                                      A-1
                                       APPENDIX B

                                       DEFINITIONS


a. Adjudication. The stage in response to an allegation of compromised scientific integrity
   when the outcome of the investigation is reviewed and a determination is made as to
   whether scientific integrity was compromised and what corrective actions are warranted.

b. Agency. An organizational unit of the Department, other than a staff office, whose head
   reports to an Under Secretary.

c. Agency Scientific Integrity Officer (ASIO). The individual appointed by a USDA
   agency or staff office who is responsible for overseeing agency or staff office
   responsibilities and activities related to scientific integrity, including receiving and
   overseeing agency or staff office responses to allegations of compromised scientific
   integrity. For allegations of research misconduct involving USDA-funded extramural
   research, ASIOs will also serve as, and fulfill the responsibilities of, the ARIO, as
   described in 2 CFR Part 422, unless an agency specifically designates another individual
   to serve as the ARIO.

d. Allegation. A disclosure of a suspected compromise of scientific integrity through any
   means of communication. The disclosure may be by written or oral statement, or by
   other means of communication to a USDA official.

e. Appeal. The stage in the response to an allegation of compromised scientific integrity
   when a respondent (i.e., the individual against whom the allegation has been made), who
   has been found to have compromised scientific integrity, may appeal the finding and/or
   corrective actions to restore scientific integrity.

f. Conflict of Interest. For the purposes of this DM, a conflict of interest may exist when an
   individual has a close familial, personal, or professional relationship with the respondent
   or complainant, or a direct relationship with the scientific activities referenced in an
   allegation of compromised scientific integrity, such that the relationship creates a strong
   potential for biasing the individual’s decision-making.

g. Corrective Action. A corrective action is an administrative action that is recommended
   and implemented for the purpose of ensuring and/or restoring scientific integrity based on
   finding(s) that scientific integrity was compromised. For the purposes of this DM,
   corrective actions do not include adverse personnel actions or disciplinary actions.
   Procedures for implementing adverse personnel actions or disciplinary actions are not
   covered by this DM. Such actions may be proposed and implemented as allowed by and
   in accordance with other USDA policies and procedures separate from this DM, based on
   final findings that scientific integrity was compromised (i.e., those findings adjudicated
   by an agency or staff office and, if appealed, upheld by the USDA Chief Scientist).




                                           B-1
    (1) The following is a non-exhaustive list of corrective actions, some or all of which
        may be recommended and implemented, based on findings that scientific integrity
        was compromised. The implementation of certain of these actions may require
        further proceedings as specified in other USDA rules, regulations, or policies.

       (a) Government-wide debarment;

       (b) Removal from a particular research project, or suspension or termination of an
           active research award;

       (c) Correction or retraction of published scientific products;

       (d) Correction or retraction of USDA media releases pertaining to scientific
           products;

       (e) Release of inappropriately suppressed scientific products;

       (f) Monitoring or supervision of future USDA scientific activities, use of scientific
           information, or dissemination of scientific information;

       (g) Required validation of data and/or sources (references and contributors); and/or

       (h) Training and/or mentoring.

h. Decision-makers. Employees who may: (1) develop policies or make determinations
   about policy or management; (2) make determinations about expenditures of USDA
   funds; (3) implement or manage activities that involve, or rely on, scientific activities; or
   (4) supervise employees who engage in or report on scientific activities.

i. Extramural Research. Research or scientific activities conducted by any research
   institution other than the Federal agency to which the funds supporting the activities were
   appropriated. Research institutions conducting extramural research may include Federal
   research facilities.

j. Fabrication. Making up data or results and recording or reporting them.

k. Falsification. Manipulating research materials, equipment, or processes, or changing or
   omitting data or results such that the research is not accurately represented in the research
   record.

l. Inappropriate Influence. The attempt to shape or influence scientific activities or
   findings, communication about, or the production/use of a scientific product against the
   judgment of a non-partisan and apolitical scientific or statistical agency. More
   specifically, it includes, but is not limited to:




                                            B-2
   (1) The suppression of an agency’s responsibility to offer its best judgment on how to
       most accurately and reliably study or measure a given phenomenon;

   (2) The decision to prevent an agency from using state-of-the-art science;

   (3) The insistence on the preclearance of a scientific product, which is based on state-of-
       the-art science, for purposes other than providing advance notification or an
       opportunity to review for technical merit; and/or

   (4) The suppression, alteration, or delay of the release of a scientific product for any
       reason other than technical merit or providing advance notification, as determined
       through standard agency procedures.

m. Informant (also known as Complainant). The individual who submits a formal allegation
   of compromised scientific integrity. Witnesses who provide information in support of a
   complainant’s initial allegation are not considered complainants. However, an individual
   who submits a substantively different formal allegation of compromised scientific
   integrity may be considered an additional complainant. Individuals who only submit an
   allegation anonymously are considered to be non-complainant sources, and all roles and
   responsibilities otherwise adhering to complainants under this DM will be deemed not
   applicable to the anonymous conveyor of the allegation. In instances where a
   governmental or institutional oversight body (e.g., Institutional Review Board (IRB))
   rather than an individual identifies possible compromised scientific integrity, the
   governmental or institutional oversight body does not constitute a complainant.

n. Inquiry. The stage in the response to an allegation of compromised scientific integrity
   when an assessment is made to determine whether the allegation has substance and
   whether an investigation is warranted.

o. Intramural Research. Research or scientific activities conducted by a Federal agency to
   which funds were appropriated for the purpose of conducting the activities.

p. Investigation. The stage in the response to an allegation of compromised scientific
   integrity when the factual record is formally developed and examined, leading to a
   recommendation to dismiss the allegation, make a finding that scientific integrity was
   compromised, and/or implement corrective actions to restore scientific integrity.

q. Office of the Secretary. The immediate office of the Secretary, the Deputy Secretary, and
   the Under and Assistant Secretaries.

r. Plagiarism. The appropriation of another person’s ideas, processes, results, or words
   without giving appropriate credit. The proposing and conducting of research often
   involves collaboration and may result in the joint development of products
   (e.g., concepts, methods, descriptive language, results, etc.). The ownership of such
   jointly developed products is often unclear, and a collaborative history may support a
   presumption of implied consent for individual collaborators to independently use jointly



                                           B-3
   developed products. For these reasons, disputes among collaborators pertaining to
   subsequent independent use of products resulting from prior joint efforts may be
   determined to involve authorship or credit disputes rather than plagiarism.

s. Political Interference. To engage in “inappropriate influence” in an attempt to gain
   partisan or regional advantage. More specifically, it includes, but is not limited to:

    (1) The politically motivated suppression of an agency’s responsibility to offer its best
        judgment on how to most accurately and reliably measure a given phenomenon;

    (2) The politically motivated decision to prevent an agency from using state-of-the-art
        science;

    (3) The politically motivated insistence on the pre-clearance of a major scientific
        product that is based on state-of-the-art science; and/or

    (4) The politically motivated suppression, alteration, or delay of the release of a
        scientific product for any reason other than technical merit or providing advance
        notification, as determined through standard agency or staff office procedures.

t. Preponderance of the Evidence. Proof by information that, compared with that opposing
   it, leads to the conclusion that a particular matter or asserted fact is probably truer than
   not. NOTE: A “preponderance of the evidence” is a lower burden of proof than “by
   clear and convincing evidence” or “beyond a reasonable doubt.”

u. Recklessly. Compromising scientific integrity “recklessly” is characterized by a
   conscious or willful disregard for ensuring scientific integrity that a reasonable individual
   would take in like circumstances.

v. Research. Research means a systematic investigation, including research development,
   testing, and evaluation, designed to develop or contribute to generalizable knowledge.
   Research includes all basic, applied, and demonstration research in all fields of science,
   technology, engineering, and mathematics. This includes, but is not limited to, research
   in economics, education, linguistics, medicine, nutrition, psychology, natural sciences,
   social sciences, statistics, and research involving human subjects, animals, and in vitro
   and in silico techniques. Activities which meet this definition constitute research
   (scientific activity) for purposes of this policy, whether or not they are conducted or
   supported under a program which is considered “research” for other purposes. For
   example, some demonstration and service programs may include research/scientific
   activities.

w. Research Misconduct. Fabrication, falsification, or plagiarism in proposing, performing,
   or reviewing research, or in reporting research results. Research misconduct does not
   include honest error or differences of opinion.




                                            B-4
x. Research Record. The record of data or results that embody the facts resulting from
   scientific inquiry, and includes, but is not limited to, research proposals, laboratory
   records, progress reports, abstracts, theses, oral presentations, internal reports, and journal
   articles. Research records may exist in physical, electronic, or other forms.

y. Respondent. The individual(s) alleged to have compromised scientific integrity and
   whose actions are the subject of an inquiry or investigation under this DM.

z. Scientific Activities. Activities, such as data collection, inventorying, monitoring,
   statistical analysis, surveying, observations, experimentation, study, research, analysis,
   integration, economic analysis, forecasting, predictive analytics, modeling, scientific
   assessment, and technology development, which involve the application of well-accepted
   scientific methodologies in a systematic manner. Activities which meet this definition
   constitute scientific activity for purposes of this policy, whether or not they are conducted
   or supported under a program which is considered “research” for other purposes. For
   example, some demonstration and service programs may include scientific activities.

aa. Scientific Assessment. Evaluation of a body of scientific, economic, or technical
    knowledge, which typically synthesizes multiple factual inputs, data, models,
    assumptions, and/or applies best professional judgment to bridge uncertainties in the
    available information. Scientific assessments include, but are not limited to, state-of-
    science reports; technology assessments; weight-of-evidence analyses; meta-analyses;
    health, safety, or ecological risk assessments; toxicological characterizations of
    substances; integrated assessment models; hazard determinations; and exposure
    assessments.

bb. Scientific Integrity. The adherence to professional practices, ethical behavior, and the
    principles of honesty and objectivity when conducting, managing, using the results of,
    and communicating about science and scientific activities.

   (1) For the purposes of this regulation:

        (a) Scientific Integrity is also the condition resulting from such adherence.

        (b) This condition ensures objectivity, clarity, and reproducibility, while providing
            insulation from, fabrication, falsification, plagiarism, bias, inappropriate
            influence, political interference, censorship, as well as inadequate procedural
            and information security.

   (2) Compromise of Scientific Integrity. The loss or breach of scientific integrity in the
       conducting or reporting of scientific activities, and/or the use or application of the
       results of scientific activities. Compromised scientific integrity includes, but is not
       limited to:

        (a) Using scientific products that are not representative of the current state of
            scientific knowledge and research (for example because of a lack of appropriate



                                             B-5
             peer review, poor methodology, or flawed analyses) to inform decision making
             and policy formulation;

        (b) Misrepresenting the underlying assumptions, uncertainties, or probabilities of
            scientific products, both USDA products and externally produced products;

        (c) Inappropriately influencing, or politically interfering with, funding, design,
            proposal, conduct, review, management, evaluation, or reporting of scientific
            activities and/or resulting scientific products (see Appendix B(1)and (s));

        (d) Inappropriately influencing, or politically interfering with, the release of
            scientific products (see Appendix BB(l) and (s));

        (e) Inappropriately suppressing or censoring the objective communication of
            findings (data and results) resulting from scientific activities;

        (f) Inappropriately altering or misrepresenting scientific products in public
            communications; or

        (g) Inappropriately restricting resources or capacity that would limit and reduce
            scientific activities or the availability of scientific products outside of normal
            budgetary or priority-setting processes or without scientific justification.

   (3) Compromised scientific integrity also includes research misconduct (see Appendix
       B(w)).

   (4) For the purposes of this DM, compromised scientific integrity does not include
       ethical improprieties and regulatory non-compliance that do not constitute a loss or
       breach of scientific integrity as described in Appendix B(bb)(1). Examples of such
       improprieties include but are not limited to: misallocation of funds, sexual
       harassment, discrimination, and breaches of human subject protections or animal
       welfare requirements. Breaches of human subject protections or animal welfare
       requirements should be reported, respectively, to the appropriate Institutional
       Review Board (IRB) or Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC).

cc. Scientific Product. The results of scientific activities, including the analysis, synthesis,
    compilation, tool, or translation of scientific, statistical, economic, and technological,
    information and data into formats for the use of USDA or the Nation. Official policy,
    budget, or management documents are not considered scientific products. For the
    purposes of this DM, a regulatory impact analysis is also not considered to be a scientific
    product; however, the use and representation of scientific information in a regulatory
    impact analysis is covered by this DM.

dd. Staff Office. A Departmental administrative office whose head reports to an official
    within the Office of the Secretary.




                                            B-6
ee. Statistical Agency. A Federal statistical agency is a unit of the Federal Government
    whose principal function is the compilation and analysis of data and the dissemination of
    information for statistical purposes.

ff. USDA Departmental Scientific Integrity Officer (DSIO). The individual designated by
    the USDA Chief Scientist who is responsible for implementing this DR under the
    direction of the Chief Scientist and the USDA Science Council, and who is responsible
    for providing oversight of, and consultation on, Departmental and agency responses to
    allegations of compromised scientific integrity. For allegations of research misconduct
    involving USDA-funded extramural research, the DSIO will also serve as, and fulfill the
    responsibilities of, the USDA RIO, as described in 2 CFR part 422.

gg. USDA Science Council. A group representing USDA Mission Areas and offices, chaired
    by the USDA Chief Scientist, to facilitate cross-Department coordination and
    collaboration among all USDA agencies.

hh. Witness. Any person who provides testimonial and/or documentary evidence as part of
    the proceedings covered by this DM, including but not limited to, the complainant and
    respondent. Individuals who conduct, oversee, or administratively support proceedings
    to review and resolve allegations of compromised scientific integrity do not constitute
    “witnesses,” unless specifically acting in the capacity of a witness as defined above.




                                           B-7
                                     APPENDIX C

                         AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


2 CFR Part 422, Research Institutions Conducting USDA-Funded Extramural Research;
Research Misconduct
5 CFR Part 735, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct
7 CFR § 2.21(a)(11), Office of the Secretary, USDA, Delegations of Authority to the Under
Secretary for Research, Education, and Economics Related to Scientific Integrity
7 CFR § 2.69, Office of the Secretary, USDA, Establishment of the Office of the Chief
Scientist
65 FR 76260-76264, Federal Policy on Research Misconduct, December 6, 2000
5 U.S.C. § 301, Departmental Regulations
5 U.S.C. § 552, Freedom of Information Act
5 U.S.C. §552a, Privacy Act
5 U.S.C. § 2302(b), Prohibited Personnel Practices
5 U.S.C. §§ 7101-7135, Labor-Management Relations
5 U.S.C. §§ 7101- 7901, Employees
OSTP, Scientific Integrity, December 17, 2010
To Reauthorize the Office of Special Counsel and for Other Purposes, P.L. 103-424,
October 29, 1994
USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System, January 4, 2018
USDA, DR 1074-001, Scientific Integrity, May 2, 2024
USDA, DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007
Whistleblower Protection Act (WPA) of 1989, Public Law 101-12, April 10, 1989
Whistleblower Protection Enhancement Act (WPEA) of 2012, Public Law 112-199,
November 27, 2012




                                        C-1
