                          U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                              NUMBER:
     DEPARTMENTAL MANUAL                                      DM 1260-001
                                                              DATE:
SUBJECT: Legislative Reports and Proposals                    May 27, 2021
                                                              EXPIRATION DATE:
OPI: Office of Budget and Program Analysis
                                                              May 27, 2026



Section                                                                                 Page

1. Purpose                                                                                 1
2. Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                      2
3. Scope                                                                                   2
4. Background                                                                              2
5. Policy                                                                                  2
6. What is a Legislative Report?                                                           3
7. Who Requests Legislative Reports?                                                       3
8. Legislative Report Clearance and Procedures Steps                                       3
9. Exemptions                                                                              5
10. Roles and Responsibilities                                                             6
11. Legislative Proposals                                                                  8
12. Inquiries                                                                              9

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                  A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                 B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                  C-1
Appendix D – Sample Enrolled Bill Letter                                                 D-1
Appendix E – Sample Legislative Proposal                                                 E-1



1. PURPOSE

   This United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Departmental Manual (DM) provides
   instructions on the preparation, review and clearance of the various types of legislative
   reports in support of Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular No. A-19,
   Legislative Coordination and Clearance, on legislative coordination and clearance. All
   individuals who prepare, review, or clear legislative reports must follow these instructions.
2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  This manual replaces the previous manual, DM 1260-001, Legislative Reports and
  Proposals, dated April 12, 2002.


3. SCOPE

  This DM applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices.


4. BACKGROUND

  OMB performs legislative coordination and clearance functions to:

  a.   Assist the President in developing a position on legislation;

  b.   Make known the Administration’s position on legislation;

  c.   Assure appropriate consideration of the views of all affected Federal agencies and
       departments; and

  d.   Assist the President with respect to action on enrolled bills.

  USDA’s Office of Budget and Program Analysis-Legislative and Regulatory Affairs Staff
  (OBPA-LRAS) is responsible for this function in coordination with the Office of
  Congressional Relations (OCR).


5. POLICY

  a.   USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will use this manual for detailed
       instructions on the preparation, review, and clearance of the various types of legislative
       reports under OMB’s purview.

  b.   Moreover, this manual supports OMB’s legislative coordination and clearance oversight
       role of the Executive Branch in the most efficient, effective, and timely manner, and to
       ensure that USDA speaks with “one voice.”

  c.   While process should not impede results, release of USDA legislative reports outside of
       official review channels is not permitted. Accordingly, any questions on the status of
       legislative reports should be referred to OBPA-USDA-LEG@usda.gov.

  d.   Finally, this DM ensures that roles and responsibilities within USDA are clear.




                                                2
6. WHAT IS A LEGISLATIVE REPORT?

  A legislative report is any written expression of official USDA position, including edits, on a
  bill or draft legislation, another Federal agency’s position on a bill, report to Congress,
  legislative proposal, or testimony, and executive orders. Legislative reports serve to initiate
  discussions about legislation and certain proposed administrative actions and also aid the
  administration in developing a unified position.


7. WHO REQUESTS LEGISLATIVE REPORTS?

  a.   OMB.

       OMB requests USDA’s views on a wide range of legislative and executive office
       documents such as bills, other Federal agencies’ views on bills, agency reports to
       Congress, executive orders, and testimony. These documents address issues that affect,
       or have the potential to affect, USDA or USDA programs. OMB submits these requests,
       or Legislative Referral Memorandums (LRM), to OBPA-USDA-LEG@usda.gov.

  b.   Congress.

       Members of Congress and committees request USDA’s views on draft legislation or on
       an introduced bill. These requests are often “snail” mailed, emailed, or both. As these
       direct Congressional requests often involve correspondence, the Office of the Executive
       Secretariat (OES) coordinates these requests for USDA while OMB serves in a
       clearinghouse role.

  c.   USDA.

       USDA Mission Areas, agencies, or staff offices may sometimes request a voluntary
       report. Determining the necessity for a voluntary report is the responsibility of each
       Mission Area, agency, or staff office working with OCR and OBPA-LRAS.


8. LEGISLATIVE REPORTS CLEARANCE AND PROCEDURES STEPS

  a.   LRMs (except testimony; see Note 1)

       OBPA-LRAS coordinates LRM requests. Accordingly, the following sequential steps
       are required:

       (1) OBPA-LRAS reviews the request, assigns the lead Mission Area, agency, or staff
           office, and identifies any other Mission Area, agency, staff office, or USDA entity
           that may have a substantive interest in the request. The request is entered into a




                                               3
         tracking database and emailed to the Mission Areas, agency, and staff offices with
         instructions for commenting and due date.

     (2) The Mission Area, agency, or staff office drafts the response, and emails the
         response back to OBPA-LRAS.

     (3) Office of the General Counsel (OGC). OBPA-LRAS emails the draft Mission
         Area, agency, or staff office response to OGC’s General Law and Research
         Division for legal sufficiency review and clearance.

     (4) Departmental Reviewers. OBPA-LRAS emails the response to the following
         reviewers concurrently:

         (a) OBPA-Program Analysis Staff – to ensure consistency with program, policy,
             and budgetary objectives;

         (b) OCR;

         (c) Mission Area; and

         (d) OES (only if a formal views letter is required; see Note 2).

     (5) Office of the Secretary (OSEC). OBPA-LRAS submits the response to OSEC for
         final policy-level approval prior to submission to OMB. See Section 9 on
         Exemptions.

     (6) OMB. OBPA-LRAS submits the cleared USDA response to the OMB lead LRM
         desk officer. A copy of the response is provided to OCR and the Mission Area
         chief of staff.

     Note 1 – Testimony. LRMs on Congressional testimony, follow-up questions and
     answers (Q and A’s) to hearings, and Statements of Administration Policy (SAP) are
     coordinated by OCR.

     Note 2 – Formal Views Letters. Formal views letters to OMB are less frequent than
     emailed response comments due to OMB deadlines and other efficiency considerations;
     however, some LRMs will require a signed USDA views letter. Typically, the necessity
     for a formal views letter will be clear such as for a major Farm Bill reauthorization,
     enrolled bill, or other legislation where USDA is the lead or primary Federal
     stakeholder. In such instances, OBPA-LRAS can provide Mission Areas, agencies, and
     staff offices with sample views letters and guidance. When clearing LRMs requiring a
     formal views letter, OES must be added per Section 8a(4), Departmental Reviewers.

b.   Congressional requests.




                                            4
       Congressional committees and staff offices often request USDA views on pending bills
       or draft legislation. These requests are mailed, emailed, or both, often to the Secretary
       of Agriculture. Accordingly, such correspondence is coordinated by OCR. OMB
       approval is required before any signed USDA response letter can be transmitted back to
       Congress. The steps are as follows:

       (1) OCR receives request; facilitates the drafting and clearance process;

       (2) Agency – Drafts the views letter;

       (3) Departmental Clearance to include:

           (a) OGC;

           (b) OBPA; and

           (c) OCR.

       (4) OSEC approves the draft letter for submittal to OMB;

       (5) OMB approves the proposed USDA letter;

       (6) OES obtains the Secretary’s signature on the letter; and

       (7) Congress – OCR transmits the signed views letter to Congress.


9. EXEMPTIONS

  The following categories of responses are exempt from OSEC clearance should the
  legislative referral be unrelated to the programs administered by USDA, or have no direct
  impact or has a limited impact on agriculture or rural communities:

  a.   No comment;

  b.   No objection;

  c.   Defer to another Department;

  d.   No impact;

  e.   Support for the release of routine documents providing only programmatic information
       and do not contain policy recommendations or guidance;

  f.   Minor comment, correction, or edit; and




                                               5
g.   No additional comments in cases where USDA has previously reviewed the document,
     provided comments, and those comments are addressed in the revised document being
     circulated by OMB.


10. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

a.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Heads will:

     (1) Prepare a draft Legislative Report response (these can include “no comment,”
         “concur,” and “no objection” responses);

     (2) Identify any other Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices with interest in the
         Legislative Report;

     (3) Mark-up other Federal agency reports as needed;

     (4) Avoid contacting OMB and Congress directly without approval;

     (5) Inform OCR of all direct requests for reports received directly from Congress;

     (6) Request an extension from the OBPA lead analyst if additional time is needed to
         prepare response; and

     (7) Consult with OGC when preparing a draft Legislative Report when provisions in a
         report involve pending litigation that USDA is involved or interested in.

b.   The Director, OBPA, will:

     (1) Assign lead Mission Area, agency, or staff office and due date on LRMs and
         coordinate and clear USDA response;

     (2) Ensure that all other potentially impacted USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff
         offices, and views are accounted for;

     (3) Assist and guide Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices with drafting responses
         as needed (including views letters);

     (4) Ensure that all Legislative Reports are consistent with program, policy, and
         budgetary objectives;

     (5) Ensure proper submission requirements, including timeliness, formatting;

     (6) Send bills of interest to other USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices as
         needed and copies OCR on all final dispositions to OMB;




                                             6
     (7) Track and maintain complete records for all LRMs, including final disposition;

     (8) Coordinate annual OMB expiring law requests;

     (9) Identify Legislative Proposals; and

     (10) Transmit signed formal views letters to OMB when one is required.

c.   OSEC will:

     (1) Review and provide final policy-level approval for LRM responses prior to
         submittal to OMB; and

     (2) Review and provide final approval for draft Congressional Request letters prior to
         submittal to OMB.

d.   The General Counsel will review legislative reports for legal sufficiency including:

     (1) The interpretation of relevant statutes and Congressional intent;

     (2) The effect of provisions of existing law, pending litigation that USDA is involved
         or interested in, or pending rulemakings, if relevant;

     (3) The legal implications of enactment or of recommended changes;

     (4) Whether the legislation as drafted reflects the policy intention of USDA expressed
         in the report; and

     (5) Whether the report is responsive, in proper format, and cleared by appropriate
         Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices, and consistent with USDA policy.

e.   The Director, OCR, will:

     (1) Monitor all direct requests for reports received from Congress;

     (2) Coordinate USDA responses to incoming Congressional request correspondence;

     (3) Facilitate the drafting and clearance process for Congressional requests;

     (4) Work with the Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, and OBPA-LRAS to
         determine the necessity for a voluntary report;

     (5) Coordinate LRMs on Congressional testimony, follow-up Q and A’s to hearings,
         and SAPs;




                                               7
       (6) Provide policy-level review and clearance for draft LRM and Congressional request
           responses;

       (7) Obtain the Secretary’s signature through OES on Congressional request response
           letters;

       (8) Transmit signed views letters to Congress; and

       (9) Maintain copies of all final dispositions sent to OMB.

  f.   The Executive Secretary to the Department or the Director, OES, will:

       Provide reviews and clearance for formal views letters.

  g.   USDA Policy Official Review.

       All Legislative Reports must have some form of policy-level review and approval.
       These can include:

       (1) OCR;

       (2) Mission Area(s); and

       (3) OSEC.


11. LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS

  Each year USDA prepares and submits a budget in accordance with the President’s Federal
  budget release in February. These annual budget submissions often include descriptions of
  proposed legislation in support of the budget. Accordingly, the responsible USDA Mission
  Area, agency, or staff office is responsible for preparing and submitting any follow-on
  legislative proposal described in the budget within the agency’s program area. OBPA, in
  consultation with the OCR, will alert Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices of the need to
  prepare such proposals. USDA organizations may also develop legislative proposals
  separately from the annual budget process. Like for Congressional Requests in Section 8b,
  OBPA will clear the legislative proposal through the Department. After Departmental
  approval, all legislative proposals are subject to review and approval by OMB. Only upon
  OMB approval can a legislative proposal be transmitted to Congress. Typically, upon the
  need for a legislative proposal:

  a.   OGC will assist Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices in drafting legislation for
       USDA. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should consult with OGC and the
       Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights (OASCR) in drafting legislative
       proposals.




                                               8
   b.   Contents of a Legislative Proposal (see example package in Appendix E):

        (1) A transmittal letter to the Speaker of the House;

        (2) A transmittal letter to the President of the Senate;

        (3) The proposed legislation; and

        (4) Section-by-section analysis.


12. INQUIRIES

   Direct all inquiries to the Legislative and Regulatory Affairs Staff Division in the Office of
   Budget and Program Analysis OBPA-USDA-LEG@usda.gov.


                                              -END-




                                                 9
                                 APPENDIX A

                   ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


CFR       Code of Federal Regulations
DM        Departmental Manual
DR        Departmental Regulation
LRAS      Legislative and Regulatory Affairs Staff
LRM       Legislative Referral Memorandum
OASCR     Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
OBPA      Office of Budget and Program Analysis
OCR       Office of Congressional Relations
OES       Office of the Executive Secretariat
OGC       Office of the General Counsel
OMB       Office of Management and Budget
OSEC      Office of the Secretary
Q & A’s   Questions and Answers
SAP       Statements of Administration Policy
USDA      United States Department of Agriculture




                                      A-1
                                           APPENDIX B

                                          DEFINITIONS


Agency. Organizational units of the Department, other than staff offices as defined below,
whose heads report to officials within the Office of the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Under
Secretaries, Assistant Secretaries, and Assistant to the Secretary. (Source: USDA, Departmental
Regulation (DR) 0100-001, Departmental Directives System)

Enrolled Bill. A bill or resolution that has passed both houses of Congress and is awaiting
presidential action. (Source: OMB, Circular No. A-19, Legislative Coordination and
Clearance)

Expiring Law. A list of laws or provisions that will expire in the coming year with an
explanation of the consequences the expiration may have, and possibly a statement regarding
whether the relevant agency supports a reauthorization. (Source: OMB, Circular No. A-19)

Legislative Proposal. A legislative proposal requests Congress to enact a change in law and
explains the rationale for such change. It consists of two identical letters, one addressed to the
President of the Senate and the other to the Speaker of the House. The letters must enclose draft
legislation. (Source: OMB, Circular No. A-19)

Legislative Report. Any written expression of official USDA position, including edits, on a bill
or draft legislation, another agency’s position on a bill, report to Congress, legislative proposal,
or testimony, and executive orders. (Source: OMB, Circular No. A-19)

Mission Area. A group of agencies with related functions that report to the same Under or
Assistant Secretary. Research, Education, and Economics (REE) is an example of a Mission
Area. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-001)

Staff Office. Departmental administrative offices whose heads report to officials within the
Office of the Secretary. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-001)




                                                B-1
                                      APPENDIX C

                          AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


7 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) § 3100, Cultural and Environmental Quality
This CFR part discuss the requirements for environmental assessments and impact statements
prepared by an agency regarding legislative proposals

40 CFR, Chapter V, Subchapter A, National Environmental Policy Act Implementing
Regulations, §§ 1500-1508
These CFR parts discuss the requirements for environmental assessments and impact
statements prepared by a Federal agency regarding legislative proposals.

Executive Order 12988, Civil Justice Reform, February 5, 1996
This executive order specifies requirements for agencies in developing legislative proposals
in order to minimize litigation.

Executive Order 13132, Federalism, August 4, 1999
This executive order requires that agencies draft its regulations, legislative comments or
proposed legislation consistent with the principles of Federalism.

OMB, Circular No. A-11, Preparation, Submission, and Execution of the Budget, December
23, 2020
This circular provides instructions for the preparation of annual estimates, including
requirements for those estimates for which additional authorizing legislation is required for
the budget year.

OMB, Circular No. A-19, Legislative Coordination and Clearance, September 20, 1979
This circular outlines procedures for the coordination and clearance by OMB of Federal
agency recommendations on proposed, pending and enrolled legislation. It also includes
instructions on the timing and preparation of Federal agency legislative programs and
legislative proposals.

USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System, January 4, 2018

USDA, DR 1512-001, Regulatory Decisionmaking Requirements, March 14,1997
This Departmental Regulation has requirements pertaining to the preparation of Regulatory
Impact Analyses for legislative proposals expected to have a major impact in terms of
Federal or non-Federal costs or burdens.

USDA, DR 4300-004, Civil Rights and Impact Analysis, October 17, 2016
This Departmental Regulation has requirements pertaining to the preparation of a Civil
Rights Impact Analysis that may be required for legislative proposals under this directive.




                                            C-1
                                          APPENDIX D

                             SAMPLE ENROLLED BILL LETTER


The Honorable Russell Vought
Acting Director
Office of Management and Budget Washington, D.C. 20503
Dear Acting Director Vought:

This letter is in response to your request of June 4, 2019, for the views of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA) on the enrolled bill, S. 1379, titled "Pandemic and All-Hazards
Preparedness and Advancing Innovation Act of 2019."

USDA supports passage of the enrolled bill.

The bill reauthorizes and expands upon programs created under the Public Health Service Act
and the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. Notably, for USDA, the bill would raise the
profile and importance of plant and animal diseases, including zoonotic diseases, by adding them
as a priority under the National Health Security Strategy. Other sections of the bill, such as
Section 205, would also strengthen our capabilities by including agriculture in planning,
response, and research activities. Additionally, Section 402 includes USDA as a member of the
Public Health Emergency Medical Countermeasures Enterprise, allowing for our direct
engagement in identifying national health security needs; and Section 607 includes USDA's
research on novel and improved integrated management technologies for mosquito abatement.

The bill would also allow the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to continue to
operate the Presidential Advisory Council on Combating Antibiotic-Resistant Bacteria, which
provides advice, information, and recommendations regarding programs and policies intended to
support and evaluate the implementation of U.S. Government activities related to combating
antibiotic-resistant bacteria.

Thank you for the opportunity to provide USDA's comments.

                                                 Sincerely,


                                                 Stephen Censky
                                                 Deputy Secretary




                                               D-1
                                          APPENDIX E

                             SAMPLE LEGISLATIVE PROPOSAL


The Honorable Paul D. Ryan, Speaker
U.S. House of Representatives
The Capitol
Washington, D.C. 20515

Dear Mr. Speaker:

I am transmitting, for the consideration of the Congress, this enclosed draft legislation, “To
authorize the Secretary of Agriculture to collect fees for service for programs related to the
licensing of products under the Virus-Serum-Toxin Act, the costs of compliance inspections and
licensing and registration services provided under the Animal Welfare Act, and for the regulation
of biotechnology-derived products.”

The Department of Agriculture (USDA) recommends that the draft legislation be introduced and
enacted.

The fiscal year 2017 budget includes these three user fee proposals for programs within the
purview of the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) of USDA, as outlined
below.

Veterinary Biologics User Fees

Under the authority of the Virus-Serum-Toxin Act, APHIS regulates veterinary biologics
(vaccines, bacterins, antisera, diagnostic kits, and other products of biological origin) to ensure
that those products produced in or imported into the United States are not “worthless,
contaminated, dangerous, or harmful.” APHIS’ licensing activities allow manufacturers to
market their products. APHIS reviews license applications for production facilities and
biological products, and operates a compliance and inspection program to ensure that its
regulations are met. Under this proposal, APHIS would amend its current authority to allow the
collection of a user fee that would supplement Agency appropriations to enhance the services it
provides. This fee would enable APHIS to continually adjust its resources to match the
workload generated by industry, which has steadily increased production and product
development. Industry would directly benefit through the reduction in time required to receive a
license, which would allow industry to recover the cost of product development faster. In
addition, the fee would better position APHIS to approve biologics during an animal health
emergency.

Animal Welfare User Fees

APHIS carries out activities designed to ensure the humane care and treatment of animals
covered under the Animal Welfare Act (AWA). These activities include licensing and inspection



                                                E-1
of certain establishments that handle animals intended for biomedical research, sold as pets,
transported in commerce, or used for exhibition purposes. Regulated entities already pay
minimal fees for licenses, but these fees do not cover the full costs of the activity or the cost of
the inspection. This proposal would establish a new user fee that would offset a portion of the
appropriation for the enforcement of the AWA.

Biotechnology Regulatory User Fees

Under the authority of the Plant Protection Act, APHIS regulates the introduction – meaning the
importation, interstate movement, and field-testing – of organisms derived through
biotechnology that may pose a plant pest risk. As part of this process, APHIS may issue
authorizations allowing specific activities and testing under appropriate confinement conditions
that protect plant health. APHIS operates a compliance and inspection program to ensure
developers meet these conditions during field trials, importation and interstate movement.
APHIS also evaluates petitions the Agency receives to deregulate products the agency has
determined do not pose a plant health risk. This proposal would establish a new user fee that
would supplement appropriations for the regulation of biotechnology derived products. The user
fee would finance activities related to the compliance management and inspection of those
products under Agency purview, as well as to supplement resources for the petition review
process.

The effect of these three proposed user fees on the deficit would be:

                              Fiscal Year (dollars in millions)
 Net Deficit        2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Total
 Impact
                    -20    -27     -27    -28     -29     -30    -31     -32     -33    -34     -291

The Statutory Pay-As-You-Go Act of 2010 (PAYGO) provides that revenue and direct spending
legislation cannot, in the aggregate, increase the on-budget deficit. If such legislation increases
the on-budget deficit and that increase is not offset by the end of the Congressional session, a
sequestration must be ordered. This proposal would reduce direct spending and is therefore in
compliance with the Statutory PAYGO Act.

The Office of Management and Budget advises that there is no objection to the presentation of
this proposed legislation and that its enactment would be in accord with the Administration’s
program.

An identical letter has been sent to the President of the Senate.

Sincerely,




Thomas J. Vilsack


                                                 E-2
Secretary

Enclosure




            E-3
                                               A BILL

To authorize the Secretary of Agriculture to collect fees for service for programs related to the
licensing of products under the Virus-Serum-Toxin Act, the costs of compliance inspections and
licensing and registration services provided under the Animal Welfare Act, and for the regulation
of biotechnology-derived products.


Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in
Congress assembled,


 TITLE I – USER FEE FOR LICENSING AND INSPECTION OF PRODUCTS UNDER THE
                                   VIRUS-SERUM-TOXIN ACT


SEC. 101.-USER FEE TO COVER THE COSTS OF LICENSING AND INSPECTION
SERVICES PROVIDED UNDER THE VIRUS-SERUM-TOXIN ACT
The Virus-Serum-Toxin Act, (21 U.S.C. 151 et seq.) is amended by adding a new section 160
that reads as follows:
“Sec. 160.-VIRUSES, SERUMS, TOXINS, and ANALOGOUS PRODUCTS.—
        “(a) IMPOSITION AND COLLECTION OF FEES.—The Secretary shall prescribe,
adjust, and collect fees to cover the costs incurred by the Secretary for activities related to-
               “(1) the review, issuance, and maintenance of licenses under this chapter for
establishments that prepare viruses, serums, toxins, or analogous products for use in the
treatment of domestic animals for sale, barter, exchange, or shipment; and
               “(2) inspections conducted pursuant to chapter 5 of this title.
       “(b) EXCEPTIONS.—The Secretary shall exempt any department, agency, or
instrumentality of the United States from any fee prescribed under subsection (a).
        “(c) ACCOUNT.—
               “(1) ESTABLISHMENT.-There is established a Veterinary Biologics User Fee
Account in the Treasury of the United States.
               “(2) DEPOSITS.-The Secretary shall deposit into the account-
                         “(A) fees authorized to be collected under subsection (a); and



                                                 E-4
                       “(B) any associated late payment penalties, interest, and handling and
processing charges collected pursuant to section 3717 of title 31, United States Code.
        “(d) AVAILABILITY AND USE OF FUNDS.-The fees and other amounts deposited in
the Veterinary Biologics User Fee Account established under subsection (c) shall be available
upon collection, to remain available until expended.”


    TITLE II – USER FEE FOR COMPLIANCE INSPECTIONS AND LICENSING AND
     REGISTRATION SERVICES PROVIDED UNDER THE ANIMAL WELFARE ACT


SEC. 201.-FUNDS FOR ADMINISTRATION OF ANIMAL WELFARE ACT
   (a) User Fees Authorized.--Section 23 of the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. 2153) is amended
to read as follows:
“SEC. 23. FEES AND AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.—
       “(a) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.— Except for the costs of activities
supported by fees prescribed under subsection (b), there are authorized to be appropriated such
sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.
        “(b) FEES.—
               “(1) IMPOSITION AND COLLECTION OF FEES.—
                       “(A) IN GENERAL.-Except as provided in paragraph (3), the Secretary
               shall prescribe, adjust, and collect fees to cover the costs incurred by the Secretary
               for activities related to the review of applications for licenses or registrations
               under this Act, the review and maintenance of licenses or registrations issued
               under this Act, and inspections conducted pursuant to section 16.
                       “(B) EQUITABLE ASSESSMENT.-Such fees shall be adjusted on an
               equitable basis taking into consideration the type and nature of the operations to
               be licensed and registered.
               “(2) PURPOSE.-The purpose of the fees authorized in this subsection shall be to
cover the costs of inspections, licensing and registration services provided under this Act.
               “(3) EXCEPTIONS.—The Secretary shall exempt any department, agency, or
instrumentality of the United States from any fee prescribed under this section.
               “(4) COLLECTION OF FEES.—



                                                 E-5
                      “(A) ACCOUNT.-There is established an Animal Welfare User Fee
Account in the Treasury of the United States.
                      “(B) DEPOSITS.-Fees imposed under paragraph (1), as well as late
payment penalties, interest, and handling and processing charges collected pursuant to section
3717 of title 31, United States Code, shall be collected by the Secretary and deposited in the
account established in paragraph 4(A).
               “(5) AVAILABILITY AND USE OF FUNDS.-The fees and other amounts
deposited in the Animal Welfare User Fee Account established under paragraph 4(A) shall only
be available to the extent and in the amount provided in advance in appropriation Acts, to remain
available until expended.”
  (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 6 of the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. 2136) is
amended by inserting “and upon payment of such fee established pursuant to 2153 of this title” at
the end of the sentence.


        TITLE III – USER FEE FOR BIOTECHNOLOGY REGULATORY SERVICES


SEC. 301.-USER FEE TO COVER THE COSTS OF PROVIDING SERVICES IN
CONNECTION WITH THE REGULATION OF ORGANISMS AND PRODUCTS
DERIVED THROUGH BIOTECHNOLOGY


The Food, Agriculture, Conservation, and Trade Act of 1990, Pub. L.101-624, 104 STAT. 3359
et seq. (1990) is amended by inserting a new section after section 2509 that reads as follows:


“SEC. 2509a.-Organisms and Products Derived Through Biotechnology.—
       “(a) ESTABLISHMENT.—
               (1) The Secretary shall prescribe, adjust, and collect fees to cover costs incurred
                   by the Secretary for compliance management and inspection of and reviews
                   related to the regulation of organisms and products derived through
                   biotechnology.
       “(b) COLLECTION OF FEES.—




                                                E-6
                       “(1) ACCOUNT.-There is established a Biotechnology User Fee Account
in the Treasury of the United States.
               “(2) DEPOSITS.-The Secretary shall deposit into the account-
                       “(A) fees authorized to be collected under subsection (a); and
                       “(B) any associated late payment penalties, interest, and handling and
processing charges collected pursuant to section 3717 of title 31, United States Code.
        “(c) AVAILABILITY AND USE OF FUNDS.-The fees and other amounts deposited in
the Biotechnology User Fee Account established under subsection (a) shall be available upon
collection, to remain available until expended.”




                                               E-7
                                  Section-by-Section Analysis


Section 101: This section would allow the Secretary of Agriculture to collect user fees from
certain establishments (other than Federal entities) that prepare viruses, serums, toxins, or
analogous products for use in the treatment of domestic animals for sale, barter, exchange, or
shipment. Money collected would be used to cover a portion of the cost of licensing and
inspection services provided under the Virus-Serum-Toxin Act. Fees collected would be
deposited in a Veterinary Biologics User Fee Account in the U.S. Treasury, and would remain
available until expended.

Section 201: This section would allow the Secretary of Agriculture to collect user fees from
persons (other than Federal entities) regulated by the Secretary under the Animal Welfare Act.
Money collected would be used to cover the cost of compliance inspections and licensing and
registration services provided under the Animal Welfare Act. Fees would be deposited in an
Animal Welfare User Fee Account in the U.S. Treasury, and would be authorized to be
appropriated, to remain available until expended. This legislation also would authorize
appropriations for all other program activities related to carrying out the Animal Welfare Act.

Section 301: This section would allow the Secretary of Agriculture to collect user fees from
persons that develop or produce organisms and products derived through biotechnology that are
regulated by the Secretary. Money collected would be used to supplement current appropriations
to cover the costs of providing services in connection with the regulation of organisms and
products derived through biotechnology. Fees collected would be deposited in a Biotechnology
User Fee Account in the U.S. Treasury, and would remain available until expended.




                                               E-8
