                             U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                   WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


                                                               NUMBER:
           DEPARTMENTAL MANUAL                                 DM 2236-001
                                                               DATE:
     SUBJECT: Shared Cost Programs                             April 16, 2021
                                                               EXPIRATION DATE:
     OPI: Office of the Chief Financial Officer
                                                               April 16, 2024



Section                                                                                   Page

1.    Purpose                                                                                1
2.    Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                     1
3.    Scope                                                                                  2
4.    Background                                                                             2
5.    Roles and Responsibilities                                                             2
6.    Procedures                                                                             3
7.    Inquiries                                                                              4

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                    A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                   B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                    C-1



1. PURPOSE

      This Departmental Manual (DM) establishes the United States Department of Agriculture
      (USDA) financial procedures regarding Shared Cost Programs (SCP).


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

      a.   This manual supersedes DM 2236-001, Shared Cost Programs, dated March 14, 2014.

      b.   Policies and procedures described herein apply to administration of SCP under authority
           of 7 United States Code (U.S.C.) § 2263, Transfer of funds. They do not apply to
           Working Capital Fund (WCF) or Central Cost Distribution Programs.

      c.   For purposes of budget execution and financial transaction management, SCPs will be
           administered using sales orders.
3. SCOPE

  This procedural manual applies to the following individuals and organizations:

  a.   The Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO);

  b.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices; and

  c.   Organizations managing SCP activities.


4. BACKGROUND

  Shared cost agreements may be entered into under the authority of 7 U.S.C. § 2263. This
  language authorizes the Department of Agriculture to establish programs, financed by
  reimbursement from Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices of the Department, of general
  benefit to the Department, its Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, its stakeholders, and
  other organizations with which the Department works to promote its various missions.


5. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Chief Financial Officer (CFO), or his/her designee, will:

       (1) Certify and validate the accuracy of SCP allowances to SCP program managers and
           Mission Area, agency, and staff office cost shares for each SCP activity;

       (2) Coordinate and provide technical support to SCP program managers in budget
           formulation, budget execution, and management of SCP finances; and

       (3) Ensure billing for every activity performed is completed in a timely and accurate
           fashion.

  b.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Offices Customers will:

       (1) Create and approve purchase orders in the Financial Management Modernization
           Initiative (FMMI) system upon the posting of “Initial Estimates” to the Greenbook
           (FUND) Web application, and within 7 days of the distribution of agreements to
           customer Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices; and

       (2) Enter the purchase order number, line item number, Government Treasury Account
           Symbol, and the amount funded in the Greenbook (FUND) Web application.

  c.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office SCP Program Managers and Program Owners
       will:



                                              2
       (1) Administer programs and activities consistent with delegations of authority and
           other authorities granted to those programs and activities;

       (2) Submit resource estimates to the CFO (or his/her designee) in a manner, fashion,
           and schedule to be established by the CFO (or his/her designee);

       (3) Create sales orders in FMMI to establish funding at a level in accordance with the
           SCP resource allowances and cost recovery method approved by the Secretary in
           accordance with DR 2236-001;

       (4) Liquidate obligations on existing purchase orders no later than 18 months after the
           close of the fiscal year; and

       (5) Provide periodic status of funds reports in a manner and according to a schedule set
           forth by the OCFO. The status must include the current year and any prior years
           that have not been fully closed, and for which there remain outstanding unliquidated
           obligations.


6. PROCEDURES

  a.   Shared cost agreements may be executed within USDA between different
       appropriations. When one office provides a beneficial service to another office, the
       office receiving the service will reimburse the providing office for the cost of that
       service.

       (1) USDA will use the Department of the Treasury, Bureau of the Fiscal Service (FS),
           Form 7600A, General Terms & Conditions (GT&C), Interagency Agreement
           (IAA), for shared cost agreements. The FS Form 7600A will be used to establish
           sales orders and purchase orders for the service provider and purchaser respectively.

       (2) Regular billings will be processed based upon amounts expended during the month.
           The bills will be calculated using FMMI’s settlement process.

  b.   Continuing Resolutions – Absence of Appropriations Enacted on October 1

       (1) In the event appropriations for the fiscal year are not enacted by October 1 and
           temporary spending measures have been enacted in their place (e.g., a continuing
           spending resolution), customer agencies will be required to fund purchase orders as
           follows:

           (a) The number of days of funding provided in the continuing spending resolution
               shall be divided by the number of days in the fiscal year to establish a funding
               share factor for the SCP.




                                               3
           (b) This factor must be multiplied by the Mission Area, agency, or staff office cost
               share computed for the fiscal year using OCFO updated cost recovery metrics
               to arrive at the amount to be funded by the Mission Area, agency, or staff
               office under the continuing spending resolution. Continuing resolution
               Mission Area, agency, or staff office shares will be provided by OCFO when
               requesting customer Mission Areas, agencies, or staff offices to fund
               continuing resolution purchase orders and supersede Mission Area, agency, or
               staff office calculations for continuing resolution purchase order amounts.
               SCPs may appeal continuing resolution spending levels to the Secretary.

           (c) Spending share factors must be adjusted by the OCFO in the event terms of
               continuing resolutions are amended, new continuing spending resolutions are
               enacted, or when SCP continuing resolution levels are appealed and a higher
               spending level is approved by the Secretary.

       (2) At such time that a permanent funding measure is enacted for the fiscal year, the
           customer Mission Area, agency, or staff office must adjust or fund the purchase
           order to fund the activity for the full fiscal year share allocated to it.

  c.   For any SCP that uses, all or in part, full-time equivalents (FTE) as the basis for
       allocating costs among customer Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices, the source
       data for full-time equivalents shall be the most recent enacted year’s data available and
       published by the Office of Budget and Program Analysis in the Department’s Budget
       Summary and Annual Performance Plan at the time of the budget formulation, less SCP
       direct FTEs.

  d.   The OCFO will be responsible for ensuring that settlement rules are checked and
       validated in all sales orders so that they match the approved cost recovery methods and
       allocations.


7. INQUIRIES

  Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should direct questions and inquiries regarding this
  DR to the OCFO at USDABudget@usda.gov.


                                            -END-




                                               4
                              APPENDIX A

                 ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


CFO      Chief Financial Officer
DM       Departmental Manual
DR       Departmental Regulation
FMMI     Financial Management Modernization Initiative
FS       Fiscal Service (Department of the Treasury Component)
FTE      Full Time Equivalent
IAA      Interagency Agreement
OCFO     Office of the Chief Financial Officer
SCP      Shared Cost Program
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture
WBS      Work Breakdown Structure
WCF      Working Capital Fund




                                   A-1
                                       APPENDIX B

                                      DEFINITIONS


Financial Management Modernization Initiative (FMMI). FMMI is the corporate financial
and accounting system for USDA.

Purchase Orders. Request or instruction from a purchasing organization or agency to a
vendor (external supplier) or plant to deliver a certain quantity of material or perform certain
services at a certain point in time. This document represents a legal obligation of funds after
either a contract has been signed or a service provider has agreed to provide goods or
services.

Sales and Distribution. Modular functionality in FMMI that supports customer business,
such as the Order Fulfillment business process, reimbursable agreements, interagency orders,
receivable processing, revenue management, etc.

Sales Orders. A Financial Management Modernization Initiative (FMMI) document in the
Sales and Distribution module that represents a customer order (also known as a
“reimbursable order”). This document creates spending authority (allotment) in FMMI.

Settlement Rules. Rules governing the process of settling costs posted on projects' Work
Breakdown Structure (WBS) elements to other WBS elements, cost centers, or General
Ledger accounts.

Shared Cost Programs (SCP). SCPs are programs authorized under 7 U.S.C. § 2263 and are
performed on behalf of the Department and/or its agencies, costs for which are recovered
from USDA agencies via reimbursement mechanisms. They do not include Central Cost
Distribution Programs or Working Capital Fund activities (WCF).

Work Breakdown Structure (WBS). A cost object representing a project that support directs
charge and cost allocation for financial, procurement, and reimbursable processes. There is a
one-to-one relationship with a funded program.




                                            B-1
                                      APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


7 U.S.C. § 2263, Transfer of funds

Department of the Treasury, Bureau of the Fiscal Service, FS Form 7600A, General Terms &
Conditions (GT&C), May 2019

Department of the Treasury, Greenbook (FUND) Web application

USDA, DR 2236-001, Shared Cost Programs, April 16, 2021




                                            C-1
