                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                   WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


                                                                       Number:
           DEPARTMENTAL MANUAL                                         3020-001
SUBJECT:                                          DATE:
Departmental Forms Manual                         September 16, 1991
                                                  OPI: Information Management Division
                                                  Office of Information Resources
                                                  Management

1     PURPOSE

       This manual prescribes policies, responsibilities, standards,
       procedures and instructions for ordering and stocking forms used
       Departmentwide.
    This manual also incorporates the forms catalog
       and makes it part of the Departmental Directives System.


2     AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES

      a    Federal Information Resources Management Regulation (FIRMR).


     b    Standard and Optional Forms Facsimile Handbook.
The General
          Services Administration issues a Standard and Optional Forms
          Facsimile Handbook. It is a loose-leaf publication,
          periodically updated by GSA that includes facsimiles of
          current editions of all Standard and Optional Forms. The
          handbook can be ordered from the Superintendent of Documents,
          U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402.

3    SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/
CANCELLATION

       a    Form AD-640, Department Forms Catalog is rescinded.
    DR 3020-1
            and DR 3020-1 Amendment 1, Departmental Forms Management
            Program are rescinded.

      b    This manual has a new listing of forms that have been entered
           into the Departmental Information Locator System as new,
           revised or obsolete.

      c    This manual contains operating instructions for the
           Consolidated Forms and Publications Distribution Center.

      d    The initial distribution for this manual will be to holders
of
           the 3000 series of Departmental Directives.           Additional
copies
              can be ordered from the Consolidated Forms and Publications
              Distribution Center.

4      POLICY

       a      Each USDA agency and staff office must use the most cost
              effective method of stocking, reproducing and ordering forms.

       b      Agencies must use existing forms, Standard, Optional, and AD
              forms whenever they are prescribed or when their use will
meet
              agency needs. Agencies should not create new agency forms
              unless there is a compelling reason to do so, and approval is
              received from the DFMO.

       c      Each form used Departmentwide must be approved by the DFMO
and
              supported by a directive prescribing its use.

5      ABBREVIATIONS

       AD       -   Agriculture Department (for forms use only)
       CFPD     -   Consolidated Forms and Publications
                    Distribution Center
       DFMO     -   Departmental Forms Management Officer
       DILS     -   Departmental Information Locator System
       FMO      -   Forms Management Officer
       OF       -   Optional Form
       OPA      -   Office of Public Affairs
       PPMD     -   Personal Property Management Division, Office
                    of Operations
       SF       -   Standard Form
       USDA     -   United States Department of Agriculture

6      DEFINITIONS

       a    Accountable Form.
    A negotiable document, usually bearing a
            preprinted control number, that is used by the Government to
            purchase public services or products or other items that are
            used for security, control, or identification purposes.

       b    ADP Form.
    A form designed to collect or transmit data through
            Automated Data Processing systems. Included are:

              (1)   Paper fori.-.s designed to collect data for computer
                    input.

              (2)   Preprinted form layouts on continuous feed computer
                    paper.

              (3)   Form layouts on acetate overlays used to generate
                    formatted computer outputs.

              (4)   Programmed form layouts that are printed by computers.
    c    Agencies.
USDA agencies and staff offices.


    d    Agency Form.
 A form established by a USDA agency use only
         within that agency or other agencies serviced by that agency.

    e    Agriculture Department Form (AD).
 A form originating in USDA
         and used by two or more USDA agencies.

     f    Departmentwide Form.
  A form originating in USDA or in another
          Federal agency prescribed for use by two or more agencies
          within USDA (includes AD, Standard, Optional, or other
Federal
          agency forms).

    g    Directive Reference.
 The medium that authorized use of the
         form, such as a Departmental Regulation. The reference
         appears on the second line of a 2-line entry for each form.

     h    Electronic Form.
  An arrangement of fixed data elements that
          have been (1) electronically captured (scanned) or
          electronically created, (2) magnetically stored (hard or
          floppy disk) for use on a computer, (3) filled in on-screen
or
          sent to an output device (printer), and (4) electronically
          transmitted in its entirety or provided for transmission of
          data entered in the form.

    i    Exception.
 Approved changes in content, format, or printing
         specifications of an existing form.

     j    Form.
  A fixed arrangement of captioned spaces designed for
          entering and extracting information or descriptive material.
          Certain items such as contract stipulations, instruction
          sheets, notices, tags, labels, posters, envelopes, form
          letters or checklists, and ADP forms are considered forms
when
          it is necessary to control them for purposes of reference,
          printing, stocking, and distribution; to reproduce them in
          quantity; or to use them with other forms.

    k    Forms Analysis.
 The review of data elements, size, spacing,
         construction, layout, and flow of information on a form to
         assure the most effective design. It includes analyzing the
         instructions that accompany the form.

    l    Form Design.
 The art or science of developing a form for the
           purpose of efficiently collecting data to fill a given
           function or systems need. It includes construction and
           layout.

       m    Manual.
    A permanent Directive used for technical guidance or
            instructions.

       n    Optional Form.
    A form developed by a Federal agency for use
            in two or more Federal agencies, and approved by GSA for
            nonmandatory Governmentwide use.

       o    Other Federal Agency Form.
    A form that originated in another
            Federal agency that is commonly used by USDA agencies.
            Typical Federal agency forms are those of the Office of
            Personnel Management and the General Services Administration.

       p    Specially Form.
    Any form that is more complex in design or
            construction than a single sheet. Examples include multipart
            carbonless sets, computerized forms, optical character
            recognition forms, pads, card stock, labels and tags.

       q    Sponsor.
    The agency responsible for issuing the form; the
            office promulgating or originating the use of a form.

       r    Standard Form.
    A form prescribed by a Federal agency and
            approved by GSA for mandatory Governmentwide use.

7     ORDERING FORMS

      a    When ordering forms used Departmentwide, customers must use
           their customer ID numbers. Following are the forms that are
           used to order forms:

           AD-633 - Multiuse Standard Requisitioning and Issue System
           Document.

           AD-687 - Forms Action Request and Notice. (Departmental Forms
           and Publications)

           AD-838-7 - Purchase Order

           CFPDC Form 1 - Request for Forms and Publications

           CFPDC Form 1A - Request for Forms and Publications
           Continuation Sheet.

           CFPDC Form 2 - Forms Action Request and Notice (Agency Forms
           and Publications)

           CFPDC Form 4 - Customer File Action Request.
          SF 152 - Request for Clearance Procurement or Cancellation of
          Standard and Optional Forms.

     b    Listed below are the Standard Forms furnished to field
offices
          by the Consolidated Forms and Publications Distribution
          Center. Field offices must order All other Standard Forms
          from GSA. Use AD-633, Multiuse Standard Requisitioning Issue
          System Document.

          SF-8      SF-1166    SF-3106
          SF-83     SF-2801    SF-3106A
          SF-91A    SF-2809A   SF-3107
          SF-181    SF-2810    SF-3109
          SF-182    SF-2811    SF-3110
          SF-1103-9 SF-2824    SF-3111

    c     All optional forms and the forms listed below are issued to
          offices in the Washington area only.

          AD-582      Authorization for Restored Annual Leave
          AD-778      Secretary's Memorandum - Format Guidesheet
          AD-778A     Secretary's Announcement Series
          AD-811      Departmental Regulation
          AD-811A     Amendment to Departmental Regulation
          AD-812      Departmental Manual
          AD-812A     Amendment to Departmental Manual
          AD-813      Departmental Notice
          AD-814      Directive Format Guide
          AD-875      Guidesheet for First Page Directives
          AD-1030     USDA Photographic Identification Card
          SF-65A      U.S. Government Messenger Envelope
                      (4-1/8x9-l/2)
          SF-65B      U.S. Government Messenger Envelope (9-3/4xl2)
          SF-65C      U.S. Government Messenger Envelope (12xl6)

8   RESPONSIBILITIES

    a    Information Management Division .
The Office of Information
         Resources Management has overall responsibility for the
         Departmentwide forms management program. The Departmental
         Forms Management Officer will:

          (1)   Develop policies, procedures, standards, and guidelines
                to improve the effectiveness of the USDA forms
management
                program.

          (2)   Analyze, standardize, control, and approve AD forms.
                This includes:

                (a)   Evaluating AD forms on the basis of their content,
                      necessity, design, cost, estimated annual usage,
                      continuing effectiveness, quantity, and agreement
                      with the directive(s) containing instruction for
                      their use.
                 (b)   Approving new and revised forms and controlling the
                       assignment of form numbers and edition dates.


                 (c)   Ensuring that the most effective and economical
                       methods of reproducing and distributing forms are
                       used, commensurate with required quantity, quality,
                       and intended use.

                 (d)   Canceling forms that the sponsors have determined
                       are no longer needed.

                 (e)   Determining Whether AD forms are accountable forms.

           (3)   Establish and maintain a central historical file of AD
                 forms that includes at a minimum:

                 (a)   Copies of clearance forms and supporting
                       documentation

                 (b)   Copies Of previous editions of the form

                 (c)   Copies of directives or instructions (or at
                       least pertinent portions) requiring that the
                       forms-be used.

           (4)   Use the ADP Perpetual Inventory System reports to
monitor
                 forms usage and stocking quantities.

           (5)   Advise agencies on forms design and on establishing and
                 managing effective forms management programs and
systems.

           (6)   Direct, coordinate, or conduct selective reviews of USDA
                 agency forms management programs.

           (7)   Coordinate with the Personal Property Management
                 Division, Office Of Operations. on all matters relating
                 to printing, stocking, and distribution of forms used
                 Departmentwide.

           (8)   Represent the Department in matters relating to forms
                 management.

           (9)   Coordinate forms management with other areas of
                 information management.

           (10) Review and evaluate suggestions on all matters relevant
                to forms used Departmentwide.

           (11) Review and approve requests for exceptions to Standard
                and Optional forms.

    b      The Agency Forms management
          (1)   Issue directives establishing agency forms management
                programs and send a copy of these directives to the
DFMO.

          (2)   Establish internal controls to assure conformity with
                Departmental policies and standards, including adequate
                systems for reviewing, clearing, costing, and
controlling
                forms.

          (3)   Notify the DFMO as soon as it is known that there is a
                pending change to be made on an AD form, and submit
                copies to the DFMO for review.

          (4)   Establish and maintain a central historical file of AD
                forms sponsored by their agency and internal agency
                forms, that includes, at a minimum:

                (a)   Camera copy

                (b)   Copies of clearance forms and supporting
                      documentation

                (c)   Copies of previous editions of the form

                (d)   Copies of directives or instructions (or at least
                      pertinent portions) requiring that the forms be
                      used.

          (5)   Use the ADP Perpetual Inventory System reports to
monitor
                forms usage and stocking quantities.

          (6)   Evaluate the forms management programs of subordinate
                offices.

          (7)   Provide training and technical assistance to program
                managers and other agency staff members.

          (8)   Coordinate forms management with other areas of
                information management.

          (9)   Analyze proposed and existing agency forms.

          (10) Analyze, review and approve requests for exceptions to
               Standard, Optional and AD forms, before forwarding to
the
                DFMO.

    c    Sponsors of Forms.
 Sponsors of forms must ensure that all
         agency forms are entered into the Departmental Information
         Locator System. (See section 10.)

          (1)   Ensure that each form they sponsor is supported by a
                directive prescribing its use.
        (2)   Develop draft, design, and layout for the forms they
              sponsor.

        (3)   Establish initial quantities and determine inventory
              levels and reorder levels for the forms they sponsor.

        (4)   Develop justification statements to obtain approval for
              exceptions to Standard, Optional, and AD forms.

    d    Personal Property Management Division.
 The Office of
         Operations must:

        (1)   Develop and maintain procedures for ordering, stocking,
              and distributing forms used Departmentwide.

        (2)   Maintain budget and originate printing acquisition for
              all forms used Departmentwide.

        (3)   Operate the Consolidated Forms and Publications
              Distribution Center for forms used Departmentwide by:

              (a)   Developing and maintaining an operating budget.

              (b)   Establishing and maintaining a perpetual inventory
                    of all forms and publications by stock number and
                    title.

              (c)   Determining appropriate warehouse stock locations
                    and required warehouse space for each inventory.

              (d)   Determining the percentage of warehouse space used
                    for each inventory, and report warehouse space
usage
                    percentages to the USDA Working Capital Fund Staff
                    for cost share determination and billing.

              (e)   Providing and monitoring security for accountable
                    forms stocked at the Consolidated Forms and
                    Publications Distribution Center.

    e    Office of Public Affairs.
 The Office of Public Affairs will
         provide the following services for AD forms:

        (1)   Upon request, provide or arrange for preparation of
              camera copy.

        (2)   Notify the Personal Property Management Division of any
              requests to print AD forms that do not have PPMD
              approval.

        (3)   Determine where forms should be printed and arrange for
              printing.

        (4)   Provide advice on the most effective and economical
              method of printing forms.
           (5)   Assure that the camera copy is returned from the printer
                 and returned to CFPDC.

           (6)   The Design Division, OPA, is responsible for approving
                 the design of envelopes and letterhead.

9     GENERAL FORMS MANAGEMENT PRINCIPLES

       a    Creating New Forms.
    Before creating a new form, sponsors
            should ask themselves the following questions:

           (1)   Is the form really necessary?

           (2)   Can an existing form meet this need?

           (3)   Will the proposed form fit the present or anticipated
                 procedure?

           (4)   Will it improve operations?

           (5)   Will it be economical to use?

           If the answers to these questions justify the creation of a
           new form, sponsors should discuss their requirements with
           their FMOS, who will assist them in creating the form.

       b    Analyzing Proposed or Existing Forms.
    FMOs will analyze
            proposed or existing forms to ensure that:

           (1)   Requesting organizations have adequately justified the
                 need for collecting the data and have made plans for how
                 it will be used once collected, and how it will be
                 disposed of when it is no longer needed.

           (2)   The form serves its intended purpose.

           (3)   The cost of collecting and maintaining the data does not
                 exceed its value.

           (4)   Duplication, overlap, and conflict among forms are
                 eliminated.

           (5)   All opportunities for cost-effective application of
                 information management technology (e.g. ADP, source data
                 automation, word processing, micrographics, electronic
                 mail, facsimile, etc.) are considered to enhance the
                 collection, processing, use, dissemination, and storage
                 of data collected on forms.

           (6)   The layout is logical and permits easy data entry, the
                 construction is cost effective, and special binding
needs
                 such as punching, stapling, perforating, folding, and
                 padding, are kept to a minimum.
            (7)   Requests for colored ink are kept to a minimum.
Printing
                  forms in colored ink, or printing in two or more colors,
                  costs more than printing in the usual black.


10   DEPARTMENTAL INFORMATION LOCATOR SYSTEM

    a    Overview.
 DILS is a management tool designed to improve
         Departmental information resources management through the
         establishment of information resources inventories. The
         system is subdivided into six components, one of which is
         forms. The forms component will contain information on all
         forms used in USDA.

     b    Functions.
  Forms Managers have the capability to store,
          update, retrieve, display and print forms and related data.
          From that data, DILS will provide comprehensive or selected
          reports, including forms inventories. A major feature of
DILS
          is the keyword concept that describes the contents of a forms
          record. The system can be used to identify and eliminate
          duplication and overlap of forms.

11   REQUIRED STATEMENTS

    Some forms are subject to regulatory controls that require the
    inclusion of certain statements.
 For examples:

     a      Forms used for claims or certification are required to
include
            a declaration on the criminal penalties for deliberate
            falsification. Examples of acceptable language for these
            declarations are:

            (1)   Claim Forms: "A knowingly false claim is a criminal
                  offense. Title 18, U.S.C., section 1001."

            (2)   Forms not involving claims:

                  "Willful false statements on this form can be punishable
                  by fine or imprisonment. Title 18 U.S.C., section
1001."

                                 or

                  "A willful false statement is a criminal offense.   Title
                  18 U.S.C., section 1001."

     b      Forms approved by the Office of Management and Budget under
            the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 must contain a statement
            listing the burden estimate and a request for public
comments.
     c      The Privacy Act of 1974 requires that individuals from whom
            personal information is directly solicited must be advised of
            the following at the time the information is requested:

            (1)   The authority (whether granted by statute or by
executive
                  order of the President) that authorizes the solicitation
                  of the information.

            (2)   The principal purpose or purposes for which the
                  information is intended to be used.

            (3)   Routine uses of the information.

            (4)   Whether the disclosures of the information are mandatory
                  or voluntary and the effects on the individual for not
                  providing all or any part of the requested information.

            Until all forms that solicit personal information from
            individuals have been redesigned to include the required
            Privacy Act information on the form itself, temporary
            supplemental Privacy Act statement sheets must be provided to
            the individual completing the form.

12   FORMS DESIGN

    a    Standards.
 The General Services Administration requires that
         forms design be consistent throughout the Federal Government.
         GSA publishes handbooks that describe forms design standards,
         principles, and methods.

     b      Sponsors of AD forms need to work with their FMO to develop
an
            initial draft for new AD forms or for revisions to existing
AD
            forms. These drafts must be reviewed and approved by their
            FMO and the DFMO before camera copy is designed.

     c      To ensure cost effectiveness, eliminate legal size and
            oversize forms by reducing them to 8 1/2 x 11 inches whenever
            practical.

13   PRINTING AD FORMS

     a      Printing Arrangements

            (1)   FMOs must submit camera copy for all new and revised AD
                  forms to the DFMO with an original and one copy of
                  AD-687, Forms Action Request and Notice. No printing
                  requisitions for new or revised AD forms will be
                  processed without approval of the AD-687 by the DFMO.

            (2)   The DFMO will review the package, and after approval,
                  forward the AD-687 and camera copy to the Consolidated
                  Forms and Publication Distribution Center.
         (3)   The CFPDC will prepare the appropriate printing
               requisitions, update files, and make storage
               arrangements. The CFPDC will then forward the printing
               requisitions and camera copy to the Office of Public
               Affairs, which will then forward it to the printing
               contractor.

     b    Printing Charges.
  The Office of Operations generally pays for
          printing of AD forms. 00 is reimbursed for agency use of
forms
          by the Department's chargeback process (Greenbook charges).
          In the following instances, however, the sponsoring agency
          will be charged:

         (1)   Changes on a form after it is received by the printing
               contractor that result in increased costs.

         (2)   Any forms stocked at locations other than the Forms
               Warehouse.

     c    Printing Exception.
  Cut sheet AD forms, which when copied
          produce quality forms, may be reproduced locally. Printing
of
          all other AD forms will be handled as described in section
          12b.

14   STANDARD AND OPTIONAL FORMS

     a    General Procedure.
  Subpart 201-45.
5 of the Federal
          Information Resources Management Regulations establishes
          policy and procedures for the use of standard and Optional
          Forms. Any recommendations regarding these forms should be
          discussed with the USDA forms sponsor. If the sponsoring
          agency's FMO approves the recommendation, he or she will
refer
          the recommendation to the DFMO who will then take action as
          prescribed in the subpart 201-45.5. If it is not clear which
          agency has responsibility for the form, refer the
          recommendation to the DFMO.

    b    Exceptions to Standard and Optional Forms.
 Exceptions are
         granted only when an agency can demonstrate that changing the
         content, format, or printing is cost effective.

         (1)   Content exceptions are changes to the data elements of
               the form such as additions, deletions, or revisions.

         (2)   Format exceptions are changes made by rearranging the
               data elements or changing the spacing of entries on a
               form without change to data elements.
          (3)   Printing exceptions are changes in the printing
                specifications for a form (such as changes to paper,
                including size, and establishment of sets and
                margin-punched constructions) that result in no changes
                in content or format. To make requests for exceptions
to
                Standard Forms, sponsors must submit an original and
                three copies of SF-152, Request for Clearance,
                Procurement, or Cancellation of Standard and Optional
                Forms; sample copies of proposed changes; and
                justification or supporting documents, to the FMO for
                signature and approval. The FMO will then forward the
                package to the DFMO who will review the package and,
                after concurrence, will forward it to GSA for final
                approval.

    c    Overprinting Standard and Optional Forms.
Agencies wishing to
         have Standard an Options Forms overprinted must confer with
         and obtain approval from their FMO, who must confer with the
         DFMO. The DFMO will check with GSA to be sure that there are
         no planned changes to the forms.

15    CHALLENGING FORMS

     a    When Forms Should be Challenged.
  USDA personnel are
          encouraged to critically evaluate all forms they are required
          to submit or review and to recommend improvements or
deletions
          to their FMO. The recommendation should document the reasons
          why the form is being challenged and include one or more of
          the following:

          (1)   Identification of other forms that provide all or part
of
                the information requested.

          (2)   Explanation or description showing why the form is
overly
                cumbersome.

          (3)   Explanation of why information requested is not
                available, is available only at an unreasonable cost, or
                is of questionable value.

          (4)   Explanation of why the form has lost validity or
                currency.

      b   How Forms Should be Challenged

          (1)   A user challenging an agency form should contact his/her
                agency FMO, who will in turn contact the sponsor. If
the
                sponsor cannot justify the need for the form or the
data,
                the sponsor should cancel or modify the form.
         (2)   A user challenging an AD form should contact his/her
               agency FMO, who will then contact the sponsor. If the
               sponsor cannot justify the need for the form or the
data,
               the form should be eliminated or modified. If the issue
               cannot be resolved between FMOS, the DFMO should be
               contacted to resolve the issue.

Signed by:

JOHN P. KRATZKE

                           APPENDIX A

               CONSOLIDATED FORMS AND PUBLICATIONS
                       DISTRIBUTION CENTER

                    Operating instructions

 I.      Introduction

         The Consolidated Forms and Publications Distribution Center
is
         operated by the Property and Supply Operations Branch,
         Personal Property Management Division, Office of Operations,
         U.S. Department of Agriculture.

         The following are key areas of responsibility to assist you
         with any service concerns that you may have with the
         Consolidated Forms and Publications Distribution Center
         (CFPDC):

         Operation Area (Manager)         FTS or Area Code 301

         Inventory Control/ Electronic       436-8450
         Access

         Customer Order Processing           436-8450

         Shipping/Receiving                  436-8450

         Quality Control/Agency Liaison      436-8450

         General Manager                     436-5003

         The warehouse operating facilities are located at the
         Washington Commerce Center, 3222 Hubbard Road, Landover,
         Maryland 20785. Operating hours are 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.,
         Monday through Friday, except for legal government holidays.

         Hereafter, the Consolidated Forms and Publications
         Distribution Center will be referred to as CFPDC.

II.      Purpose

         The CFPDC provides inventory control, warehousing and
            distribution of forms and publications for participating
            federal agencies and activities by mutual agreement. These
            summary operating instructions establish functional
            responsibility for control of forms and publications
            inventories located in the CFPDC warehouse and customer use
of
            the CFPDC services.

            Hereafter, participating federal agencies and activities will
            be referred to as user agencies.

III.        Billing

            Each user is billed monthly for their cost share of the
            warehouse and distribution services. This cost share is
            determined by the percentage of square feet a user's
inventory
            occupies in the warehouse for agency stored forms and for
            their usage of AD and SF forms. In addition to the standard
            user's cost share, an agency's request for special handling
or
            services will be recovered on an actual cost basis from the
            requesting agency. USDA's office of Finance and Management
            forwards the billing data to the National Finance Center in
            New Orleans which in turn does the actual billing. For non-
            USDA agencies, billings are done via the SF 1081, Transfer of
            Funds. Billing inquiries should be directed to the Working
            Capital Fund Staff on FTS or (202) 382- 1885.

IV.         CFPDC Responsibility

            A.   Operate the forms and publications warehousing facility.

            B.   Develop and maintain an operating budget.

            C.   Establish and maintain a perpetual inventory of all
forms
                 and publications by stock number and title.

            D.   Determine appropriate warehouse stock locations and
                 required warehouse space for each inventory.

            E.   Determine the percentage of warehouse space used for
                 billing purposes.

            F.   Provide user agency Inventory Managers daily, monthly,
                 quarterly, and year-end inventory statistical data
                 provided in item VI and VII below.

            G.   Provide technical assistance to user agency program
                 personnel.

     V.          User Agency Responsibility

            A.   Designate an Inventory Manager for control and
                 coordination of each form and/or publication inventory
                 stored at the CFPDC.
            B.   Establish initial inventories by providing the CFPDC
with
                 inventory data to include: stock item number, title,
                 edition date, construction, unit- of-issue, annual stock
                 quantity, and reorder level for each stock item. Other
                 statistical and historical data may be provided if
                 compatible with CFPDC automated inventory system.

            C.   Establish customer ID codes by submitting CFPDC Form 4
                 for each new customer address.

            D.   In concert with CFPDC, maintain inventory stock control
                 in accordance with items VI, VII, VIII, and IX below.

VI.         Inventory and Reorder Levels

            The CFPDC encourages Inventory Managers to order a one year
            supply for revisions and reprints of forms and publications
            based on the rate of issue, the length of time needed to
            replenish stock, and conditions peculiar to the item itself,
            such as seasonal usage or pending discontinuance. An
            estimated one-year supply should be initially ordered for new
            forms and publications, after which, all subsequent order
            quantities should be determined by the automated inventory
            system's economical ordering quantity (EOQ). The reorder
            quantity of a form or publication may also depend on such
            factors as availability, program usage increases/decreases,
            outstanding backorders, ect.

VII.        Reports

            The automated inventory system provides ongoing daily,
            monthly, and quarterly reports to Inventory Managers. The
            system enables Inventory Managers to query the system via
READ
            ACCESS ONLY capability. This should assist staff with
            day-to-day stock status inquiries.

            A.   Reorder Level Notices are provided when a stock item
                 reaches its minimum stock quantity level. Inventory
                 Managers should review the stock item with program
                 personnel to determine if changes should be made to the
                 item itself or to inventory levels. If no changes are
                 necessary, a copy of the notice should be immediately
                 returned to CFPDC with replenishment order data
included.
                 If changes are necessary, CFPDC Form 2 should accompany
                 the return of the notice to CFPDC with required changes
                 indicated.

            B.   Depletion of Stock Notices are provided when stock
                 quantities are completely exhausted. If the action
                 required in item A above has not already been taken, it
                 should be expedited. Stock outages create backorders
                 which can severely effect order processing efficiency
                 when allowed to accumulate.
        C.   Receipt of Stock Notices are provided when replenishment
             stock is received from printers. Two copies of the
stock
             item received will be attached to the Notice for the
             Inventory Managers inspection. The CFPDC should be
             immediately notified if there are any discrepancies in
             the printing.

        D.   Monthly Stock Status Reports are provided to Inventory
             Managers. These reports include a shipment summary, a
             stock receipt summary, a backorder summary, and a stock
             dispensed summary.

        E.   Quarterly Inventory Reports are provided to Inventory
             Managers. An analysis of these reports will provide
             information on fast and slow moving stock items.
             Non-moving stock items will be highlighted for user
             agency disposition action determination. This report
             also provides year-to- date and year-end historical
             information.

VIII.   Stock Control

        After establishment of the initial inventory at the CFPDC,
the
        CFPDC Form 2 must be submitted to the CFPDC prior to shipping
        any new inventory. New stock items will be added to the
        appropriate inventory and a confirmation copy of CFPDC Form 2
        will be returned to the user agency's Inventory Manager.

IX.     Ordering

        A.   Electronic Ordering.   User agencies are strongly urged
to
             use electronic ordering when ordering forms and
             publications from the CFPDC. This method may be used if
             the ordering office has an appropriate computer terminal
             and telephone modem. The CFPDC strongly encourages the
             use of this method because it reduces required order
             turn- around time and minimizes data entry time and
             errors.

        B.   Mail Orders. Ordering offices must submit CFPDC Form 1
             when ordering 15 line items or less. When ordering more
             than 15 line items, use CFPDC Form 1A (Continuation
             Sheet). Transfer the order number from CFPDC Form 1 to
             the order number space provided on CFPDC Form 1A. This
             method will be honored, however, the electronic method
is
             preferred.

        C.   Seasonal or Periodic Distribution. Required
             distributions are negotiated and processed on an "as
             needed" basis. Bulk distributions should be held to a
             minimum. This distribution method should only be used
             when absolutely necessary to meet user needs. The CFPDC
                operation is based on an on-demand response and bulk
                distribution interferes with the orderly flow of normal
                user orders.

      X.        Accountable Stock Items

           A.   Use. Accountable stock are those forms and other items
                which can be used to gain financial profit or advantage.
                For example, SF-1169, U.S. Government Transportation
                Request, is an accountable form because it can be used
by
                the bearer to obtain transportation at Government
                expense. An agency photo ID card is an accountable form
                because it can be used to identify the bearer as an
                employee and allow the bearer access to Government
                buildings. When user agencies require accounting for
                certain controlled items, CFPDC Form 2 should be
                completed providing instructions on control needs.

           B.   Serial Number. All accountable stock items should be
                serially numbered to keep track of them. However, all
                serially numbered items are not necessarily accountable
                stock items.

           C.   Controls. The General Accounting Office requires
                accurate accountability for those forms and other items
                which are classified as accountable. Adequate controls
                must be followed to prevent duplication of numbers and
to
                maintain integrity and security of stock.

           D.   Shipment of Accountable Stock Items. Shipment of
                accountable stock items is made only by a method of
                transportation which requires signature control and
                return receipt service or by messenger for the local
                Washington, D.C., metropolitan area. AD- 107A, Report
of
                Transfer-Accountable Items (Printout), will accompany
                each accountable stock item shipment. The receiving
                officer must sign and return a copy of AD-107A to CFPDC.

           E.   Inquiries. If there are any questions about whether an
                inventory item should be classified as an accountable
                stock item, contact CFPDC.

XI.        Order Turn-Around

           A.   Routine orders are to be shipped within four working
days
                after the date of receipt of the order or order entry
                into the electronic ordering system. This turnaround
                does not include time required for mailing order or
                shipment delivery.

           B.   Rush orders are to be shipped within two working days
                after the date of receipt of the order or order entry
                into the electronic ordering system.
         C.    Emergency orders should be referred to the CFPDC user
               Agency Liaison Representatives.


XII.     Required Forms

         Copies of forms to use when doing business with the CFPDC are
         attached in Appendix B.

              A.   AD 687 - Forms Action Request and Notice
                    (Departmental Forms and Publications)

              B.   CFPDC Form 1 - Request for Forms and Publication

              C.   CFPDC Form 1A - Request for Forms and
                    Publication Continuation Sheet

              D.   CFPDC Form 2 - Forms Action Request and Notice
                    Agency Forms and Publications)

              E.   CFPDC Form 4 - Customer File Action Request

Form AD-14 and AD-14A are no longer used for ordering forms from
CFPDC.

Contact OIRM, IMD, on 720-8755 for the paper copy of the Following
images(s): Figure A-1 - Forms Action Request and Notice, AD-687;
Figure
A-2 - Request for Forms and Publications, CFPDC-1; Instructions for
ordering materials or services direct from CFPDC; Figure A-3 - Request
for Forms and Publications, CFPDC-1A; Figure A-4 - Forms Action Request
and Notice, CFPDC-2; and Figure A-5 - Customer File Action Request,
CFPDC-4.


Contact OIRM, IMD, on 720-8755 for a paper copy of the Following
images(s): Appendix B - Inventory Report, Appendix C - Subject Listing
in Numerical Order, Appendix D - Forms Listing by Subject in
Alphabetical Order, Appendix E - Source of Supply (Supply Codes),
Appendix F - Agency Forms Manager, Appendix G - Forms Obsoleted Since
Printing of Previous Catalog (12/88), and Appendix H - Regional Offices
GSA Map.




                            APPENDIX I


        EXPLANATION OF COLUMN HEADINGS IN FORMS LISTING


    FORM NUMBER.
 This is the form identifier which appears on
    the first line of the 2-line entry for each form.
    FORM TITLE.
 The name of the form that appears on the second
    line of a 2-line entry for each form.


    Edition Date.
 The current date of the form.
 The format is
    MM/YY (month/year)

    SPONSOR - The agency responsible for issuing the form.


    SUBJ CODES - The code number assigned to the subject matter
    of each form.
 See subject codes.


     CONSTR - Construction.
  The physical arrangement of the
     form, i.
e.
 card, cut sheet, pad, set, etc.
  See list of
     codes       for forms construction.


    UNIT - The smallest quantity of the form that will be issued
    by the source of supply.
 See list of codes for form
    units.


    SUPPLY.
 The source of supply of the form.
 See list of
    codes for sources of supply.


    DIRECTIVE REFERENCES - The medium which authorized use of
    the form, such as the Departmental Regulations, etc.
 This
    appears on the second line of a 2-line entry for each form.


                      SAMPLE FORM LISTING


FORM NUMBER/ EDITION         SPONSOR SUBJ CONSTR UNIT SUPPLY

FORM TITLE DATE              CODES   DIRECTIVE REFERENCES


AD-241      08/84       OP       1000       CS PD 100   OP-SE
                                             DR 1041-1




                          APPENDIX J

                      CONSTRUCTION CODES

    a    Book.
 Sheets of the same form bound between covers.


    b    Book Page.
 A single sheet form bound under a cover with other
         identical or similar forms to make a book.

    c    Book Set.
 Sets of forms bound between covers.


    d    Card.
 A form printed on finished heavy paper stock, generally
         used as a visible or vertical file card, postal card, etc.

     e    Construction.
  The physical arrangement of the form, i.
e.

         card, cut sheet, set, etc.

    f    Continuous Form Paper.
 A form in single, continuous sheets or
         sets of continuous sheets, perforated for easy separation,
         usually marginally punched for use in automatic data
         processing operations.

    g    Cut Sheet.
 A single sheet form, with printing on one or both
         sides of the sheet.

    h    Decalcomania.
 A notice or a decorative picture printed on
         specially prepared paper for transfer to wood, glass, metal,
         etc.

    i    Emblem.
 A charm, tie tack, or lapel pin which symbolizes
         employee length of Federal Service in terms of 10, 20, 30, 40
         or 50 years.

     j    Envelope.
  A flat paper container used to mail letters and
          similar correspondence for official mailing purposes via the
          U.S. Postal Service or other official letter carrying
service.
    k    Folder.
 A folded, unstitched binder, with or without prong
         fasteners, for filing papers.

    l    Form Letter.
 A letter with the same information, used for the
         same purpose, used repeatedly with space to fill in the
         addressee, or other information.

    m    Label.
 A piece of paper normally used to identify items or
         shipments; usually has an adhesive back suitable for affixing
         it to boxes, packages envelopes, etc.

    n    Looseleaf Publication.
 Can be updated by revising individual
         pages when necessary.

    o    Multiple Page.
 Two or more dissimilar pages requiring some
         fill-in, bound or fastened together as a single form.

    p    Noncarbon Pad.
 Cut sheets of the same form, usually glued
         together along one edge, printed on chemically treated paper
         not requiring carbon.

    q    Noncarbon Set.
 Original and one or more attached copies of
         the same form, printed on chemically treated paper not
         requiring carbon which may be completed in one operation.

    r    Pamphlet.
 A self-contained publication of two or more
         dissimilar pages bound or fastened together as a single form
         not requiring fill-in.

    s    Set.
 An original and one or more attached copies of the same
         form; may be completed in one operation.

    t    Sheet.
 A single page of more than one copy of a form joined
         by perforations for separating.

    u    Tab Card.
 A machine processible card of 99 lb.
stock which is
         designed for specific data processing needs.

     v    Tag.
  A cardboard, plastic or metal marker used for the
          identification of specific items and affixed to the items
with
          a string (cord) or wire.
Note: A number after the construction code represents: the number of
sheets in a pad or book, the number of parts in a set, the number of
parts for continuous form paper, the number of sets in a padded set or
book set, the number of forms printed on a cut sheet when more than
one,
etc (e.g. NCS-4 = a 4-part no-carbon- required set).




                            APPENDIX K


                         UNIT OF ISSUE

    a    Box.
 A container used to package a specific amount of forms;
         usually corrugated paper or other sturdy material.

    b    Each.
 A single copy of a form.


    c    Hundred.
 A quantity of paper in amounts of hundreds.


    d    Package.
 A quantity of paper in various amounts of hundreds.


    e    Pad.
 Cut sheets of the same form, usually glued together.


    f    Padded Set.
 A pad with sets of the same form bound together.


    g    Unit.
 The smallest quantity of the form that will be issued
         by the source of supply.

Note: A number after the unit code represents: The number of sheets,
sets, pads, labels, envelopes, etc., that are packaged together for
distribution (e.g., PD 100, BX 50).
