                              U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                    WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                Number:
          DEPARTMENTAL MANUAL                                   DM 3107-001
                                                                DATE:
                                                                May 18, 2016
     SUBJECT: Management of USDA IT Enterprise                  OPI:
              Initiatives Procedures                            Office of the Chief Information
                                                                Officer, Enterprise Management



Section                                                                                    Page

1.   Purpose                                                                               1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                    1
3.   Authority                                                                             2
4.   Background                                                                            2
5.   Definitions                                                                           2
6.   Procedures                                                                            3
7.   Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                            5
8.   References                                                                            5
9.   Inquires                                                                              6

1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Manual (DM) establishes the United States Department of Agriculture
     (USDA) process for identifying, evaluating, and designating information technology (IT)
     related enterprise initiatives in the form of a recommendation to the USDA Chief
     Information Officer (CIO). The intent of this DM is to promote the effective and efficient
     sharing of IT resources across the entire organization to drive down costs and improve
     customer service.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     a.   This DM transmits the procedures to implement Departmental Regulation (DR) 3107-
          001, Management of USDA IT Enterprise Initiatives.

     b.   This DM applies to all agencies and staff offices.

     c.   Nothing in this DM is intended to supplant the delegation of authorities and
          responsibilities of the USDA CIO, the USDA Chief Financial Officer (CFO), the
          Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights, and/or the Assistant Secretary for Administration
       under 7 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 2 or any other authorities otherwise
       provided by law, Federal regulation, or USDA Departmental Regulation.


3. AUTHORITY

  The authority for this DM is derived from 7 CFR 2.89(a)(11)(x), and other Federal and
  Departmental regulations which authorize the USDA CIO to improve the management and
  operational effectiveness of information resources.


4. BACKGROUND

  Enterprise-wide IT initiatives present special opportunities and management challenges for
  USDA, given its diverse set of missions and component agencies and staff offices. For
  example, the pooling of USDA’s purchasing power across the entire enterprise to purchase a
  commonly needed product can reduce the total cost of acquisition, but a shared investment in
  a one-dimensional service may not deliver a useful solution for all agencies and staff offices
  because of their mission diversity. The CIO Council (CIOC), established by the USDA CIO
  and comprised of the USDA CIO and senior IT representatives from the Office of the Chief
  Information Officer (OCIO) and agencies and staff offices, is uniquely positioned to evaluate
  potential IT initiatives and designate (under the authority of the CIO) those with the highest
  value as enterprise-level initiatives. The guidance in this DM is established to ensure that IT
  enterprise-wide initiatives are effectively identified, evaluated and implemented to
  accomplish the best possible value for USDA agencies, staff offices, and their customers.


5. DEFINITIONS

  a.   Executive Sponsor: The executive sponsor is a CIOC voting member from one USDA
       agency or staff office involved in establishing or to benefit from the enterprise initiative.
       The executive sponsor shall oversee the analysis and documentation process required for
       the CIOC evaluation of an enterprise initiative.

  b.   Initiative Owner: The initiative owner is an official from one USDA agency or staff
       office involved in establishing an enterprise initiative and shall be accountable for the
       establishment and management of an approved enterprise initiative, reporting initiative
       status and measureable outcomes to the CIOC, and for reporting changes that affect the
       viability and continued suitability of an initiative.

  c.   IT Enterprise Initiative: Typically a methodology, product or service shared across
       multiple agencies and/or staff offices. Examples of an IT enterprise initiative are:

       (1) A common approach or set of technologies across the Department or across one or
           more lines of business;



                                                2
       (2) An acquisition vehicle for use across the Department; or

       (3) An application or service used across the Department or across one or more lines of
           business.

  d.   Mandatory Enterprise-wide Initiative: All Agencies and staff offices shall use the
       enterprise-wide initiative for the functionality that it provides, unless exempted by the
       USDA CIO.

  e.   Optional Enterprise-wide Initiative: All organizational agencies and staff offices of the
       enterprise shall consider and may use the enterprise initiative for the functionality that it
       provides.


6. PROCEDURES

  a.   Identify: Consistent with the intent of this DM to promote the effective and efficient
       sharing of IT resources, the CIOC can designate an IT initiative brought to its attention
       as an enterprise-wide initiative. Although anyone can identify a prospective initiative,
       candidate initiatives must be proposed to the CIOC by a voting member. The proposing
       member must submit a Form AD-3107, Request for USDA CIO Council Action to the
       CIOC Advisory Board Chair that justifies the enterprise-wide designation requested.

  b.   Analyze: When an initiative is accepted by the CIOC as a candidate for enterprise-wide
       initiative designation, the requester shall perform an Enterprise Initiative Analysis that
       establishes the business case for the initiative supporting whether it should be mandatory
       or optional according to the enterprise-wide scope defined in Section 6a of DR 3107-001

       (1) When a mandatory enterprise-wide initiative is proposed, the CIOC will appoint an
           Executive Sponsor to lead an Enterprise Initiative Evaluation Working Group,
           which will conduct the enterprise-wide initiative analysis.

       (2) When optional enterprise-wide initiatives are proposed, the CIOC may vote on the
           designation at the same CIOC meeting during which the designation is first
           proposed and, if approved, set an effective date for use on or after the date proposed
           by the Executive Sponsor. If the CIOC determines that the proposed optional
           enterprise-wide initiative is complex or high-impact, it may appoint an Executive
           Sponsor to lead an Enterprise-wide Initiative Evaluation Working Group.

       (3) Working Groups will include representation from the Office of the Chief
           Information Officer’s Information Resources Management functional area to ensure
           that, whenever applicable, the USDA Enterprise IT Governance Process is
           followed.

  c.   Act: For mandatory enterprise-wide initiatives or complex optional enterprise-wide
       initiatives designated by the CIOC, the Executive Sponsor will present

                                                3
       recommendations to the CIOC following the completion of the Enterprise Initiative
       Evaluation Working Group analysis. The completed Enterprise Initiative Analysis shall
       be provided in advance of the CIOC vote regarding the designation and provide the
       CIOC with all necessary information in detail, proportional to the proposed cost and
       scope of the initiative. The CIOC will discuss the proposal, and either request additional
       information from the Enterprise Initiative Evaluation Working Group or vote on the
       designation of the proposed enterprise-wide initiative, including whether it shall be
       mandatory or optional. If approved, the CIOC shall establish an effective date for the
       execution of the shared approach implementation of each enterprise-wide initiative on or
       after that proposed by the Executive Sponsor.

  d.   Execute: The CIOC will designate an Initiative Owner to execute the enterprise-wide
       initiative. The Initiative Owner will ensure that all existing USDA policies, procedures,
       and governance processes (e.g., Capital Planning and Investment Control (CPIC), IT
       Governance, Earned Value Management (EVM), Acquisition Approval Request (AAR),
       Federal IT Dashboard) apply to approved enterprise-wide initiatives. The Initiative
       Owner will report to the CIOC on initiative progress and outcome metrics until the
       approach is deemed complete. For initiatives requiring or contemplating an enterprise-
       level contract, the CIOC will coordinate with Office of Procurement and Property
       Management (OPPM) to designate an acquisition specialist to support the initiative.

  e.   Monitor: All approved IT enterprise-wide initiatives will be reviewed twice a year by
       the CIOC at its January and June meetings, or as soon after as possible, to ensure
       continued compliance with the criteria for IT enterprise-wide initiatives established in
       Section 6b of DR 3107-001. The Initiative Owner shall update the CIOC whenever an
       initiative is experiencing operational issues and risks that will impact agency and staff
       office budgets or delivery of products or services. This review will leverage, if
       applicable, existing reporting requirements and reports already required as part of the
       CPIC, IT Governance, EVM, AAR, Federal IT Dashboard, and other existing
       governance reporting/artifact requirements.

  f. Consultation of the IT Enterprise Initiative Reference List: The IT Enterprise Initiative
     Reference List is maintained by OCIO Enterprise Management for mandatory or optional
     products or services. As part of the technology (IT) governance process, the Capital
     Planning office and USDA Enterprise Architecture Architect using the Department’s
     capital planning and enterprise architecture data management and reporting tools shall
     request confirmation from a single submitting agency that the Reference List was
     consulted, that mandatory initiatives (that involve technology investments) are being
     used, and that optional initiatives (that involve technology investments) were considered
     in advance of initiating any new product or service initiatives. If an initiative is not used
     or considered, a reasonable justification must be provided.


7. ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

  AAR        Acquisition Approval Request

                                               4
  AGAR          Agriculture Acquisition Regulation
  CFO           Chief Financial Officer
  CIO           Chief Information Officer
  CIOC          Chief Information Officer Council
  CFR           Code of Federal Regulations
  CPIC          Capital Planning and Investment Control
  DM            Departmental Manual
  DR            Departmental Regulation
  EVM           Earned Value Management
  FITARA        Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
  IT            Information Technology
  OCIO          Office of the Chief Information Officer
  OMB           Office of Management and Budget
  OPPM          Office of Procurement and Property Management
  P.L.          Public Law
  U.S.C.        United States Code
  USDA          United States Department of Agriculture


8. REFERENCES

  Authorities

     Title 7 CFR Part 2, Delegations of Authority by the Secretary of Agriculture and the
     General Officers of the Department

     Title 7 CFR 2.89, Delegations of Authority from the Secretary to the Chief Information
     Officer


  References

     Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), Public Law (P.L.)
     113-291, Title VIII, Subtitle D, Sections 831-837

     The Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, 40 U.S.C. §§11312 et seq.

     The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, 44 U.S.C. §3501 et seq.

     Federal CIO, 25 Point Implementation Plan to Reform Federal Information Technology
     Management, December 9, 2010

     Office of Management and Budget (OMB), Circular A-130, Management of Federal
     Information Resources, November 28, 2000, including policy regarding Information
     Management and Information Systems and Information Technology Management -
     Capital Planning, Enterprise Architecture, Security, Performance, and Acquisition

                                              5
     OMB, Federal Information Technology Shared Services Strategy, May 2, 2012

     OMB Memorandum M-11-29, Chief Information Officer Authorities, August 8, 2011

     OMB Memorandum M-13-08, Improving Financial Systems Through Shared Services,
     March 25, 2013

     OMB Memorandum M-13-09, Memorandum for the Heads of Executive Departments
     and Agencies: Fiscal Year 2013 PortfolioStat Guidance: Strengthening Federal IT
     Portfolio Management, March 27, 2013

     USDA DR 3107-001, Management of USDA IT Enterprise Initiatives, month dd, 2016

     USDA DR 3600-000, USDA Information and Technology Transformation, November 2,
     2004

     USDA DR 3630-001, USDA Enterprise Shared Services (ESS), June 1, 2005

  Other Guidance

     USDA, CIOC, Form AD-3107, Request for USDA CIO Council Action, May, 2016

     USDA, CIOC, USDA CIO Council Advisory Board, Operations Manual, Version 1.0,
     November 26, 2014

     USDA, OCIO, Integrated IT Governance Framework: Guidebook, version 3.2, April 1,
     2014

     USDA, OCIO, USDA Information Technology Capital Planning and Investment Control
     Guide, May 5, 2013

     USDA, Office of Procurement and Property Management (OPPM), Agriculture Advisory
     Regulation (AGAR) Advisory No. 101, Shared First Policy in USDA Contracts,
     September 26, 2012


9. INQUIRIES

  Inquiries regarding this DM should be directed to the USDA, OCIO, Executive Officer for
  Enterprise Management.


                                         -END-




                                            6
