                                 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                       WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                  NUMBER:
          DEPARTMENTAL MANUAL                                     DM 3180-001
 SUBJECT: Information Technology Standards                        DATE:
 Procedures                                                       July 29, 2019
 OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer, Information        EXPIRATION DATE:
 Resource Management Center (IRMC)                                July 29, 2024



Section                                                                                Page

1.   Purpose                                                                              1
2.   Scope                                                                                2
3.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                   2
4.   Background                                                                           2
5.   Requirements, Profiles, and Forecasts                                                4
6.   Procedures                                                                           6
7.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                           9
8.   Inquiries                                                                           10

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                 A-1
Appendix B – Authorities and References                                                 B-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.    This Departmental Manual (DM) establishes the processes required for determining
           which standards (technical, data, and hybrid (technical/data)) to use for the acquisition,
           configuration, and administration of information technology (IT) within the United
           States Department of Agriculture (USDA).

     b.    This DM provides the procedures necessary to apply Departmental Regulation (DR) DR
           3180-001, Information Technology Standards, throughout USDA. DR 3180-001
           supports and implements the guidance issued by the Office of Management and Budget
           (OMB), National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), the Federal
           Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), Public Law (P.L.) 113-291
           Sections 831-837, and other Federal oversight entities. It facilitates the uniform
           application of engineering and/or technical criteria, methods, processes, and practices
           when evaluating and procuring new technologies; ensures new technologies align with
           USDA enterprise architecture (EA), business goals, and processes; and meets the
           requirements of the following policy documents:
       (1) OMB, Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource; and

       (2) OMB, Circular A-119, Federal Participation in the Development and Use of
           Voluntary Consensus Standards and in Conformity Assessment Activities.

  c.   The benefits of standardization to all users within USDA include:

       (1) Providing cost avoidance and improved integration through elimination or
           consolidation of duplicative processes, systems, and/or technologies;

       (2) Ensuring acquisition and use of standard information technologies and/or cloud
           services;

       (3) Ensuring correctness, completeness, and currency of the standard profiles through
           the definition of roles, responsibilities, and processes;

       (4) Enhancing interoperability (data, security, technology) between programs, systems,
           and services; and

       (5) Improving consistency, accuracy, and timeliness of information shared across the
           USDA enterprise.


2. SCOPE

  This DM supports DR 3180-001 and applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff
  offices, employees, and contractors working for, or on behalf of, USDA.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   Use this DM in conjunction with DR 3180-001.

  b.   The term “agency” or phrase “agency and staff office,” unless otherwise noted in this
       document, will be considered to encompass the Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
       offices of USDA.


4. BACKGROUND

  The Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, 40 United States Code (U.S.C.) Section 11101 et seq. (2017)
  was enacted to improve the way the Federal Government acquires, uses, and disposes of IT.
  The E-Government Act of 2002, Public Law (P.L.) 107-347 (codified at various sections of
  Title 44, Chapters 35 and 36) drives the design and development of an EA within Federal
  Agencies.




                                              2
Circular A-119 requires Federal Agencies to use voluntary consensus standards in lieu of
unique Government standards, with the intention of reducing to a minimum the reliance by
Agencies on unique Government standards. The following are examples of voluntary
consensus standards bodies: International Organization for Standardization (ISO), Federal
Geographic Data Committee (FGDC), National Information Exchange Model (NIEM), and
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C).

IT standards are rules or specifications designed to simplify, unify, or rationalize the design,
interoperability, portability, and scalability of IT infrastructure components (e.g., network,
hardware, systems, cloud services, and software).

FITARA requires that the Department’s Chief Information Officer (CIO) coordinate
FITARA-related activities with other senior Department officials including: the Chief
Financial Officer (CFO), the Chief Acquisition Officer (CAO), the Chief Operating Officer
(COO, the Deputy Secretary; represented by the USDA Assistant Secretary for
Administration, the Senior Procurement Executive (SPE), the Chief Human Capital Officer
(CHCO), and the Director of the Office of Budget and Program Analysis (OBPA). The
USDA CIO, CFO, COO, CAO, SPE, CHCO, and OBPA Director, as a group, identify as the
Chief Executive Officers (CXO). The CXOs tasks include fully defining and understanding
the costs of Mission Area, agency, and staff office IT investments, products, and services be
incorporated into the USDA budget formulation, budget execution, acquisition, and IT
workforce-planning processes.

DR 3185-001, Enterprise Architecture, states, “A documented and understood EA provides a
framework for the organization to respond quickly to changes in its operating environment.
It serves as a ready reference that enables the organization to assess the impact of the changes
on each of the six EA components (business, data, infrastructure, technology, applications,
and security), as well as ensuring the components continue to operate smoothly through the
changes.” The Technical Standards Profile is part of the Infrastructure domain.

The Common Approach to Federal Enterprise Architecture (Common Approach) presents an
overall approach to developing and using EA in the Federal Government by promoting
increased levels of mission effectiveness by standardizing the development and use of
architectures within and between Federal Agencies. Within the Common Approach, in the
Infrastructure Domain, the I-3, Technical Standards Profile is the artifact that captures the
relevant standards that are in support of the systems that the Mission Area, agency, or staff
office maintains. Related implementation guidance from the OMB is contained in various
documents, including Circulars A-11, Preparation, Submission, and Execution of the Budget;
A-130; OMB, Memoranda M-00-10, OMB Procedures and Guidance on Implementing the
Government Paperwork Elimination Act; M-05-22, Transition Planning for Internet Protocol
Version 6 (IPv6); M-11-29, Chief Information Officer Authorities; M-12-10, Implementing
PortfolioStat; and the Digital Government: Building a 21st Century Platform to Better Serve
The American People. The Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework, v 2.0 (FEAF v2) is
the suite of tools to help Government planners implement the Common Approach.




                                              3
5. REQUIREMENTS, PROFILES, AND FORECASTS

  a.   Requirements

       (1) Identification of standards for systems relies on the business, functional, and
           technical requirements of the system as determined by the system
           owners/stakeholders. Business, functional, and technical requirements will help to
           identify standards for a system.

       (2) Business requirements, which are not technical in nature, focus on fulfilling
           Mission Area, agency, and staff office needs or business goals. Functional
           requirements are technical and provide detailed information about how a software
           system functions. Business requirements for a project are a series of needs that
           achieve a high-level objective.

       (3) Business requirements describe the customers’ needs. They clearly state Mission
           Area, agency, and staff office objectives and prioritize the problems Mission Areas,
           agencies, and staff offices need to solve. These documents do more than just
           narrate the needs and solutions. They may contain diagrams, organizational charts,
           and flowcharts.

       (4) Functional requirements describe how a software system functions. They delve into
           how users interact with the software, such as what actions occur after users click on
           buttons and show the outcome of these actions. Functional requirements also show
           how other databases or software applications integrate with each other. They
           specify the hardware and operating system requirements that the software system
           will be using. Functional requirements are a detailed breakdown that explains how
           the outcome of a project will operate to meet the specified business requirements
           that address a specific need or pain point identified by the end user or stakeholder.

       (5) Technical requirements establish what a Mission Area, agency, or staff office needs
           to do to support the project’s outcome during and after implementation.

       The standards profile defines the technical, operational, business, policy, and guidance
       standards applicable to the architecture. In addition to identifying applicable technical
       standards, the standards profile also documents the policies and standards that apply to
       the operational or business context.

  b.   Profiles

       (1) In most cases, building a standards profile consists of identifying and listing the
           applicable portions of existing and emerging documentation. A Standards Profile
           should identify both existing guidelines, as well as any areas lacking guidance. As
           with other models, each profile is assigned a specific timescale (e.g., as-is, to-be, or
           transitional). Linking the profile to a defined timescale enables the enterprise
           architect to consider both emerging technologies and any current technical



                                                4
         standards that are being updated (becoming mature) or becoming obsolete (to be
         retired).

     (2) The standards profile collates and delineates the various systems and services,
         standards, and rules that implement and constrain the choices in the design and
         implementation of an architectural description. The technical standards govern
         what hardware and software may be implemented and on what system. The
         standards cited may be international (such as ISO standards), national standards, or
         organizational specific standards.

     (3) With associated standards, as with other elements of the architecture, a distinction
         between applicability and conformance. If a standard is applicable to a given
         architecture, that architecture need not fully conform with the standard. The degree
         of conformance to a given standard is based on a risk assessment at each approval
         point.

         Note that an association between a standard and an architectural element does not
         indicate that the element is fully compliant with that standard; rather further detail
         would need to confirm the level of compliance.

     (4) Standards profiles for an architectural design must maintain full compatibility with
         the root standards. Furthermore, the standards profile model may state a method of
         implementation for a standard, as compliance with a standard does not ensure
         interoperability.

c.   Forecasts

     The standards forecast contains expected changes in technical, operational, business,
     guidance, and policy standards and conventions documented in the standards profile.

     (1) A standards forecast is a detailed description of emerging standards relevant to the
         systems, operational, and business activities covered by the Architectural
         Description. The forecast focuses on areas that relate to the purpose for which a
         given architectural description should identify issues that affect the architecture. A
         standards forecast complements and expands on the standards profile and should be
         used when more than one emerging standard period is applicable to the architecture.

     (2) One of the prime purposes of a standards forecast is to identify critical technology
         standards, their fragility, and the impact of these standards on the future
         development and maintainability of the architecture and its constituent elements.

     (3) The standards forecast contains expected changes in standards and conventions,
         documented in the standards profile. One of the prime purposes of a standards
         forecast is to identify critical standards, their life expectancy, and the impact of
         these standards on the future development and maintainability of the architectural
         description and its constituent elements.



                                             5
           A Standards forecast lists emerging or evolving standards relevant to the solutions
           covered by the architectural description.

       (4) Ensure that the specific periods selected (e.g., 6-month, 18-month, 36-month
           intervals) and the standards being tracked are coordinated with architecture
           transition plans. That is, inserting new capabilities and upgrading existing solutions
           may depend on the availability of new standards and models incorporating those
           standards. The forecast specifies potential standards, thus influences current
           architectures and influences the development of transition and objective (i.e., target)
           architectures. The forecast focuses on standards/service areas that relate to the
           purpose for which a given architecture design described and should identify
           potential standards affecting that architecture.

       (5) The standards forecast delineates the standards that potentially affect the relevant
           system and service elements and relates them to the periods. A system’s evolution,
           or service’s evolutions, ties to a future standard listed in the standards forecast. A
           timed technology and skills forecast relates to the standards forecast in the
           following manner: a certain technology may depend on a standards forecast
           standard (i.e., a standard listed in the standards forecast may not be adopted until a
           certain technology becomes available). This is how a prediction on the adoption of
           a future standard may be related to standards listed in the standards profile.


6. PROCEDURES

  a.   Mission Area, agency, and staff office Enterprise Architects shall adhere to the
       following procedures when determining relevant standards for their respective systems
       profiles and forecasts:

       (1) Establish uniform engineering and technical criteria;

       (2) Establish methods, practices, and processes;

       (3) Align with NIST and the Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014
           (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. 3551, et seq., security requirements;

       (4) Establish net-centric and interoperably-shared services throughout the Mission
           Areas, agencies and staff offices throughout USDA;

       (5) Develop and establish technical maturity among systems and applications;

       (6) Ensure alignment of investments, systems, and applications to include
           infrastructure;




                                               6
     (7) The use of open standards, which means widely accepted and supported standards
         set by recognized standards organizations or the marketplace. The standards should
         support interoperability, portability, and scalability and be equally available;

     (8) Manage the replacement of systems, applications, hardware, software, and other
         technologies that are in alignment with the current in-force standards; and

     (9) Promote best practices regarding alignment with business, performance,
         application, infrastructure, data, and security configurations.

b.   Construct technical system standards profiles and forecasts using the following
     procedure/steps:

     (1) Determine the specific need or pain point based on requirements that need to be
         addressed:

         (a) Systems do not exist that could address the needs of the stakeholder.

         (b) Are there current systems not meeting needs of the customer/stakeholder?

         (c) The customer/stakeholder identifies requirements that a Mission Area, agency,
             or staff office needs to ensure mission completeness.

     (2) Identify business, functional, and technical requirements for system(s) to address
         the need/pain point experienced by the stakeholder/customer:

         (a) Determine the business, functional, and technical requirements that currently
             exist or need to be developed.

         (b) Identify and capture requirements based on information gathering with the
             stakeholders.

         (c) Discuss with the development staff the requirements obtained from the
             stakeholder and determine if a current system needs enhancement or if a new
             system needs development.

     (3) Determine if there is an existing, approved capability that will satisfy the new
         requirements:

         (a) Is there a known shared service that can be used to address the need/pain point
             identified by another Mission Area, agency, or staff office?

         (b) Will the identified system interoperate with the current Mission Area, agency,
             or staff office’s system or application?

         (c) Is there an existing standards profile/forecast?



                                             7
    (d) Provide standards profile/forecast to shared site.

         1    Profiles/forecasts should reflect ability to address the current system or
              application requirements.

         2    Profiles/forecasts should also incorporate identified requirements.

(4) If no system/shared service exists:

    (a) Consult with the Enterprise Architecture Division (EAD) to determine if there
        is an approved platform standard for the business need.

    (b) If not, conduct an analysis of alternatives (AOA) and identify recommended
        solution (s) (to include systems and subsystems); and

    (c) Use identified requirements to:

         1    Identify standards to address system requirements to operate within the
              Mission Area, agency, and staff office environment; and

         2    Use a standards forecast to identify the future state once a commercial off-
              the-shelf (COTS) or Government off-the-shelf (GOTS) product is
              identified.

(5) A Determination needs to be made:

    (a) Is the product a COTS or customized GOTS system/subsystem?

    (b) If COTS, ensure that the vendor is compliant with a baseline standards profile,
        identified in DR 3180-001, to operate within the Mission Area, agency, and
        staff office network; and

    (c) If GOTS, ensure that the development staff works with the entities that can
        identify current and in-force standards as identified in DR 3180-001.

  (6) Are the products COTS products that make up the system/subsystem on the
      Common Criteria Certified Products List?

    (a) Are the COTS products certified to standard International Standards
        Organization/International Electrotechnical Commission ISO/IEC 15408-
        1:2009, Information technology — Security techniques — Evaluation criteria
        for IT security - Part 1: Introduction and general model Common Criteria)?




                                          8
           (b) If not, an alternative/approved product will need researching, or a waiver with
               risk mitigation plan and strategy needs submission for consideration to the
               OCIO, Information Resource Management Center (IRMC), EAD.

       (7) Determine service areas (web services, network, security, etc.):

           (a) Is the system providing email services?

           (b) Is it a shared service (interoperability)?

           (c) Is it using cloud or providing cloud services?

       (8) Identify standards:

           (a) When identifying standards keep in mind they can cover more than one service
               area.

           (b) Does the baseline standards profile or forecast contain the standards as noted in
               DR 3180-001?

           (c) If not listed in the DR 3180-001 profiles:

                1    Consult with the Standards Architect to determine if adding to profile or
                     forecast or need for more research; and

                2    Determination of which product (profile or forecast) is based on age of the
                     standard and use of the standard in user community (other government or
                     private entities).

       (9) Build standards profiles/forecasts:

           (a) List the standards and service area(s) needed for system procurement or build
               based on requirements; and

           (b) Provide profiles and forecasts with portfolio review packages.


7. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA CIO will address the responsibilities as delineated in DR 3180-001, Section
       6a.

  b.   The Associate Chief Information Officer (ACIO), IRMC will address the responsibilities
       as delineated in DR 3180-001, Section 6b:




                                                 9
  c.   The USDA Enterprise Architecture Committee (EAC) will:

       (1) Collaborate with Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices in the creation,
           maintenance, and updating of enterprise architecture standards, guidelines,
           directives and policies within USDA;

       (2) Establish EA value and performance measures;

       (3) Assess compliance with, completeness of, and benefits derived directly and
           indirectly from the use of the USDA EA standards; and

       (4) Develop and maintain a standards profile and forecast for the USDA EA standards
           domain, and make recommendations to the USDA’s CIO Council for improvements
           to USDA’s EA standards domain.

  d.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Enterprise Architects will:

       (1) Implement the policies, requirements, and standards for the IT environment;

       (2) Develop internal procedures and controls in support of this DM as necessary;

       (3) Establish effective communication between internal stakeholders and IRMC
           leadership; and

       (4) Incorporate the policies, requirements, and standards into Mission Area, agency,
           and staff office capital planning and investment control (CPIC) processes.


8. INQUIRIES

  All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are to direct all questions and inquiries
  to the OCIO, IRMC, EAD via email at enterprise.architecture@ocio.usda.gov.


                                            -END-




                                              10
                         APPENDIX A

              ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ACIO     Associate Chief Information Officer
AOA      Analysis of Alternatives
CAO      Chief Acquisition Officer
CFO      Chief Financial Officer
CHCO     Chief Human Capital Officer
CIO      Chief Information Officer
COO      Chief Operating Officer
COTS     Commercial Off-The-Shelf
CPIC     Capital Planning and Investment Control
CXO      Senior Agency Official such as a CAO, CFO, CHCO, CIO, COO
DAU      Defense Acquisition University
DM       Departmental Manual
DR       Departmental Regulation
EA       Enterprise Architecture
EAC      Enterprise Architecture Committee
EAD      Enterprise Architecture Division
FEAF     Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework
FGDC     Federal Geographic Data Committee
FISMA    Federal Information Security Modernization Act
FITARA   Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
GOTS     Government Off-The-Shelf
IEC      International Electrotechnical Commission
IETF     Internet Engineering Task Force
IPT      Integrated Project Team
IPv6     Internet Protocol version 6
IRMC     Information Resource Management Center
ISO      International Organization for Standardization
IT       Information Technology
NIEM     National Information Exchange Model
NIST     National Institute of Standards and Technology
OBPA     Office of Budget and Program Analysis
OCIO     Office of the Chief Information Officer
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
P.L.     Public Law
RFC      Request for Comments
SCAP     Security Content Automation Protocol
SP       Special Publication
SPE      Senior Procurement Executive
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture
W3C      World Wide Web Consortium


                             A-1
                                    APPENDIX B

                        AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


The Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, 40 U.S.C. 11101 et seq., February 10, 1996 (2017)

Common Criteria, Certified Products List

Defense Acquisition University (DAU), Glossary of Defense Acquisition Acronyms and
Terms, 16th Edition, September 2015

DR 3180-001, Information Technology Standards, May 12, 2015

DR 3185-001, Enterprise Architecture, June 28, 2016

The E-Government Act of 2002, P.L. 107-347, December 17, 2002

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. 3551, et seq.,
December 18, (2017)

Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), Public Law (P.L.) 113-
291, Title VIII, Subtitle D, Sections 831-837, December 19, 2014
Internet Engineering Task Force/Request for Change (IETF/RFC) 3339, Date and Time on
the Internet: Timestamps, July 2002

ISO 3166, Codes for the Representation of Names of Countries and their Subdivisions,
November 2013

ISO 8601:2004, Data elements and interchange formats -- Information interchange --
Representation of dates and times, December 2004

ISO/IEC Guide 2:2004, Standardization and related activities – General vocabulary,
November 2004 This standard was last reviewed and confirmed in 2016, therefore this
version remains current

ISO/IEC 15408-1:2009, Information technology — Security techniques — Evaluation criteria
for IT security - Part 1: Introduction and general model Common Criteria), Third Edition,
December 15, 2009 This standard was last reviewed and confirmed in 2015, therefore this
version remains current

NIST, Security Content Automation Protocol (SCAP), May 12, 2009

NIST, Special Publication (SP) 800-128, Guide for Security-Focused Configuration
Management of Information Systems, August 2011


                                           B-1
National Technology Transfer and Advancement Act of 1995; P.L. 104-113, 1996 (codified
in various sections of 15 U.S.C.)

OMB, Circular A-11, Preparation, Submission, and Execution of the Budget, June 29, 2018

OMB, Circular A-119, Federal Participation in the Development and Use of Voluntary
Consensus Standards and in Conformity Assessment Activities, January 27, 2016

OMB, Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource, July 28, 2016

OMB, The Common Approach to Federal Enterprise Architecture, May 2, 2012

OMB, Digital Government: Building a 21st Century Platform to Better Serve The American
People, May 23, 2012

OMB, Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework, v 2.0 (FEAF v 2.0), January 29, 2013

OMB, Memorandum M-00-10, OMB Procedures and Guidance on Implementing the
Government Paperwork Elimination Act, April 25, 2000

OMB, M-05-22, Transition Planning for Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6), August 2, 2005

OMB, M-11-29, Chief Information Officer Authorities, August 8, 2011

OMB, M-12-10, Implementing PortfolioStat, March 30, 2012

Definitions, 44 U.S.C. 3502 (2017)




                                        B-2
