                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, DC 20250

                                                                         NUMBER:
            DEPARTMENTAL MANUAL                                          DM 3160-001

                                                                         DATE:
 SUBJECT: Licensed Information Technology (IT) Software
                                                                         June 11, 2019
 Procedures

 OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer – Client Experience        EXPIRATION DATE:
 Center                                                                  June 11, 2022




Section                                                                                  Page

1.   Purpose                                                                             1
2.   Scope                                                                               1
3.   Background                                                                          2
4.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                  3
5.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                          3
6.   Procedures                                                                          4
7.   Penalties and Disciplinary Actions for Non-Compliance                               6
8.   Inquiries                                                                           7

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                  A-1
Appendix B – Authorities and References                                                  B-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Manual (DM) establishes the process for how the United States
     Department of Agriculture (USDA) manages licensed information technology (IT) software
     and how to determine payment for fewer or additional licenses using an annual reconciliation
     process, in accordance with the enterprise agreement between the vendor and USDA.


2. SCOPE

     This DM applies to USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, employees, appointees,
     contractors, volunteers, and others working for, or on behalf of, USDA who manage USDA-
     supplied computer hardware and software in the performance of their duties on behalf of
     USDA.
3. BACKGROUND

  a.   The Federal Government spends a significant amount annually on software acquisitions
       to enable business or mission functions. It is incumbent on USDA to ensure practices as
       a purchaser and user of licensed software are carried out effectively, efficiently, and in
       compliance with all applicable legislation and copyrights, for example Federal
       Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), Public Law (P.L.) 113-291
       § 831-837; Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44
       United States Code (U.S.C.) § 3551, et seq.; and Office of Management and Budget
       (OMB), Memorandum M-16-12, Category Management Policy 16-1: Improving the
       Acquisition and Management of Common Information Technology: Software Licensing.

  b.   USDA acquires software licenses and must only use the software and documentation in
       accordance with applicable license agreements. USDA does not own such software or
       its related documentation. Except as specifically authorized by a software licenser in an
       agreement, USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, employees, appointees,
       contractors, volunteers, and others who are working for, or on behalf of, USDA and are
       authorized to use USDA-supplied licensed software in performing their functions are
       prohibited from reproducing licensed software or related documentation.

  c.   Licensed agreements, licensed software means that “free software” is prohibited from
       installation on USDA systems without approved waiver requests. Penalties will apply to
       any violation of this requirement.

  d.   USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are responsible for distributing and
       maintaining software license agreements reflecting their purchased/installed software
       licenses that should be available for reference to determine if copies can be made, for
       example, for backup or archival purposes, and to assure compliance with all provisions
       of the software agreement.

  e.   USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, employees, and others working for, or on
       behalf of, USDA and are authorized to purchase software outside of the standard
       acquisition procedures for USDA are responsible for the licensing, compliance,
       maintenance, service, and annual “true-up” for software purchases. The annual “true-
       up” is a process for reconciling licenses purchased by USDA against those that are
       installed on USDA computer systems.

  f.   Respect for intellectual effort and creativity is vital. This principle applies to works of
       all authors and publishers in media. Because software is easily reproduced, respect for
       the work and creativity of others is especially critical. USDA has both a legal and
       ethical responsibility to prevent unauthorized duplication and distribution of software.




                                                2
4. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This DM is effective immediately and shall remain in effect until superseded or
       expiration;

  b.   The overarching policies and roles and responsibilities for this DM are provided in
       Departmental Regulation (DR) 3160-001, Licensed Information Technology (IT)
       Software;

  c.   If a specific provision of this DM is superseded by another regulation or otherwise
       invalidated by external laws, directives, or standard practices the remaining provisions
       shall not be invalidated; and

  d.   The term “agency” or phrase “agency and staff office,” unless otherwise noted in this
       directive, will be considered to encompass the Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices
       of USDA.


5. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   USDA Mission Area Assistant CIOs, Agency and Staff Office IT Directors, and
       Contractor IT Leads will:

       (1) Communicate the terms and restrictions of IT licensed software;

       (2) Make clear USDA’s policy and penalties for the installation and use of free and/or
           unauthorized free software; and

       (3) Include a statement along with the yearly reconciliation process certification that
           users of computer software have been made aware of the terms and conditions of an
           acquired software product’s license agreement and to abide by such agreement and
           the associated penalties for not adhering to the terms of agreement.

  b.   USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, employees, appointees, contractors,
       volunteers, and others working for, or on behalf of, USDA using reconciliation software
       other than approved and authorized software programs or applications will receive
       written approval from the USDA Client Experience Center (CEC) Category
       Management Office (CMO) before using and submitting their reconciliation report.

  c.   End users who provide information services and products, including instruction in the
       use of software resources, will refrain from copying and distributing software and
       related documentation, except as specifically authorized by licensed agreement, but also
       clearly inform users they are responsible licensees of such proprietary products.




                                               3
6. PROCEDURES

  a.   This section provides an overview of the procedures for managing USDA licensed IT
       software and how to determine payment for additional licenses during the annual
       reconciliation process, in accordance with the enterprise agreement between the vendor
       and USDA to include the use of approved configuration management tools (or similar
       approved products), to track and manage licensed software.

  b.   To get an accurate picture of the versions and licenses deployed across the environment,
       many USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices have enabled client software on
       hardware devices that can be leveraged to pull asset reports that detail the versions and
       quantities of software deployed on desktops, laptops, and servers. These reports are
       used to develop and confirm procurement requirements to ensure that software contracts
       are licensed appropriately.

       Requirement: On an annual basis, each March, the USDA Office of the Chief
       Information Officer (OCIO) approved reconciliation software is used to identify all
       installed software products across USDA in support of the required yearly reconciliation
       (or subsequent requirement name).

  c.   As part of the reconciliation process, the Mission Area, agency, and staff offices
       Contracting Officer’s Representative (COR) provides the CMO (or subsequent name)
       with the initial number of installed enterprise software licenses. Mission Areas,
       agencies, and staff offices must pay for any additional software licenses installed on
       servers, desktops, laptops, or any device that exceeds the initial number of licenses
       purchased and/or the additional licenses paid for from a previous reconciliation.

       A major benefit to the reconciliation is that customers automatically receive software
       upgrades.

  d.   Annual Reconciliation Process Inputs

       (1) USDA IT software license reconciliation numbers are based on enterprise software
           agreements; and

       (2) Yearly reconciliation pricing based on enterprise software agreements.

  e.   Servers, Desktops, Laptops, and Tablets

       USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are responsible for installing server,
       desktop, and laptop software and running annual software reconciliation reports that
       compare installed software quantities against authorized software quantities. When
       installed software quantities exceed the amount authorized under the contract USDA
       Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are required to:

       (1) Remove the exceeded quantities;


                                               4
     (2) Provide authorized funding to pay for the additional installed software; and

     (3) Forward the authorized funding to the OCIO-CEC-Category Management Office
         (hereby referred to as CMO staff).

f.   CMO Staff

     The CMO staff prepares the formal request with the authorized funding and coordinates
     with USDA Mission Area Senior Contracting Officials (MASCO) to authorize and pay
     for the additional licenses.

g.   Annual Reconciliation Process Outputs

     (1) USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices complete the formal request and
         funding authorization which are then submitted to CMO staff at:
         ITCategoryManagement@ocio.usda.gov.

     (2) Reconciliation funding memorandums are retained by CMO staff overseeing
         enterprise licensed software contracts.

h.   Licensed Software Reconciliation Sub-Process Steps

     (1) USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices shall provide oversight in:

         (a) Performing an annual reconciliation process; and

         (b) Running the approved software management tool(s) to determine how many
             licensed IT software copies are installed.

     (2) Determine the number of additional licenses to be purchased by referencing the
         previous reconciliation licenses spreadsheet.

i. Add the base licenses plus reconciliation licenses already purchased. If the configuration
   report shows more licenses installed than paid for, then the USDA Mission Area, agency,
   or staff office must pay the reconciliation amount.

j. Exit Criteria for Yearly Reconciliation

     The Yearly Reconciliation is completed when:

     (1) An accurate count of approved and authorized software installed is completed;

     (2) A comparison of reconciliation process software quantity with the software contract
         is completed and provided to the CMO and the MASCO; and



                                             5
       (3) Payment is executed by the MASCO for overage or refund or credit requested for
           being under the contract maximum.

  k.   Supporting Documents

       Users will find supporting documents at the Category Management Interest Group
       SharePoint site.

  l.   Verification

       CMO staff will verify that the process is being performed by annually reviewing this
       document and the artifacts that are the output of this document.

  m. Validation

       To validate this process, CMO staff will have the verification document peer reviewed
       by relevant subject matter experts (SME) before approval. Afterward, its continued
       validity will be determined during periodic management reviews.

  n.   Training

       CMO staff will include training in this process for appropriate staff as part of its
       comprehensive training program.

  o.   Sustainment

       CMO staff will sustain this process by conducting routine management reviews of this
       verification document during the period of performance to determine if the process
       needs to be revised.

  p.   CMO Staff Updates

       (1) USDA, DM 3160-001, Licensed Information Technology (IT) Software Procedures;

       (2) Category Management Reconciliation Licenses Spreadsheet; and

       (3) Configuration or approved reports.


7. PENALTIES AND DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS FOR NON-COMPLIANCE

  The reporting USDA Mission Area, agency, or staff office shall make clear its policy and
  penalties for installing and using free and/or unauthorized software and management oversite
  failures.




                                                6
  DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, Section 16, sets forth USDA
  policies, procedures, and standard practices on employee responsibilities and conduct
  regarding the use of computers and telecommunications equipment. In addition, DR 4070-
  735-001, Section 21, Disciplinary or Adverse Action, states:

  a.   A violation of any of the responsibilities and conduct standards contained in this DR
       may be cause for disciplinary or adverse action; and

  b.   Disciplinary or adverse action shall be affected in accordance with applicable law and
       regulations.

  Such disciplinary or adverse action shall be effected in accordance with applicable law and
  regulations such as the Code of Ethics for Government Employees, Office of Personnel
  Management (OPM) regulations, OMB regulations, and Standards of Ethical Conduct for
  Federal Employees of the Executive Branch, 5 CFR 2635.


8. INQUIRIES

  Questions and comments concerning the requirements of this regulation should be directed to
  OCIO-CEC-CMO at ITCategoryManagement@ocio.usda.gov.


                                           - END -




                                              7
                          APPENDIX A

              ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


COR      Contracting Officer’s Representative
CEC      Client Experience Center
CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
CMO      Category Management Office
DM       Departmental Manual
DR       Departmental Regulation
FISMA    Federal Information Security Modernization Act
FITARA   Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
IT       Information Technology
MASCO    Mission Area Senior Contracting Officials
OCIO     Office of the Chief Information Officer
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
OPM      Office of Personnel Management
P.L.     Public Law
SME      Subject Matter Expert
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                               A-1
                                       APPENDIX B

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Executive Order 13103, Computer Software Piracy, September 30, 1998

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. § 3551, et seq.,
December 18, 2014 (2017)

Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), P.L. 113-291 § 831-837,
December 19, 2014

OMB, Circular A-130, Appendix III, Responsibilities for Protecting Federal Information
Resources, July 28, 2016

OMB, Memorandum M-16-12, Category Management Policy 16-1: Improving the Acquisition
and Management of Common Information Technology: Software Licensing, June 2, 2016

Standards of Ethical Conduct for Federal Employees of the Executive Branch, 5 CFR 2635
(2018)

USDA, Category Management Interest Group SharePoint site

USDA, DR 3160-001, Licensed Information Technology (IT) Software, May 16, 2019

USDA, DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007




                                             B-1
