                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                               NUMBER:
          DEPARTMENTAL MANUAL                                  DM 3300-015
                                                               DATE:
 SUBJECT: Secure Communication Systems                         November 15, 2021
 OPI: Office of Homeland Security – National Security          EXPIRATION DATE:
 Systems Program                                               November 15, 2024



Section                                                                                  Page

1. Purpose                                                                                   1
2. Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                        2
3. Scope                                                                                     2
4. Policy                                                                                    4
5. Procedures                                                                                4
   a. Acquiring and Maintaining Classified Systems                                           4
   b. Transferring Information to or from a Classified Environment                           9
   c. Use of Secure Video Teleconferencing                                                  11
   d. HSDN User Accounts and Access                                                         11
   e. Joint Worldwide Intelligence Communications System Access                             14
   f. Classified Cyber Security Incidents                                                   15
6. Roles and Responsibilities                                                               17
7. Inquiries                                                                                21

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                  A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                 B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                  C-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.   This Departmental Manual (DM) provides United States Department of Agriculture
          (USDA) guidance at the Departmental, Mission Area, agency, and staff office levels for:

          (1) Requesting and responsibly managing:

              (a) Communications and information technology systems used to process or
                  transmit classified national security information (CNSI) throughout its
                  lifecycle; and

              (b) Equipment, devices, and cryptographic material for secure communications;


                                                1
       (2) Requesting access to a national security system (NSS) or a network that transmits or
           processes CNSI;

       (3) Moving information between classified and unclassified environments; and

       (4) Responding to classified system incidents, spillage of CNSI, and loss of
           cryptographic keys or secure communication devices or equipment.

  b.   This DM serves as the foundation for USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices
       to develop and implement their own procedures for classified systems and CNSI-related
       activities that comply with Federal and Departmental requirements and are consistent
       with the overarching guidance provided in this DM.

  c.   This DM is in compliance with Executive Order (E.O.) 13526, Classified National
       Security Information; 32 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 2001, Classified National
       Security Information Implementing Directive for E.O. 13526; policies and standards
       issued by the Committee on National Security Systems (CNSS); and Intelligence
       Community Directives (ICD). Guidance references are provided in Appendix C,
       Authorities and References of this document.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This manual is effective immediately and remains in effect until superseded or expired.

  b.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must align their procedures with this
       manual within 6 months of its publication date.


3. SCOPE

  a.   This DM applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, employees,
       appointees, contractors, subcontractors, and others who work for or on behalf of USDA,
       and who access or will access CNSI, or support, or will support, an NSS.

  b.   This DM applies to:

       (1) All personnel who generate, collect, provide, transmit, store, maintain, or access
           CNSI on or via Communications Security (COMSEC) equipment or systems by or
           on behalf of USDA;

       (2) NSS or services developed, maintained, or operated by, for, or on behalf of USDA;

       (3) NSS or services used for accessing, transmitting, or processing CNSI, whether
           internal to USDA or externally with other Federal agencies or organizations;



                                               2
     (4) Secure, classified communications hardware and software:

         (a) Devices and systems such as telephones, mobile devices, video teleconference
             systems, servers, laptops, desktops, and wireless devices;

         (b) Required applications; and

         (c) Materials or items designed to secure or authenticate communications, such as
             cryptographic keys, devices, software, or documents.

     (5) Facilities or spaces within a facility, such as a room or floor, that are approved by
         Office of Homeland Security (OHS) Personnel and Document Security Division
         (PDSD) Classified National Security Information Staff (CNSIS) to house these
         systems, services, or devices and from which these systems and services operate,
         whether owned or operated by USDA, or owned or operated on behalf of USDA by
         a contractor, subcontractor, or other organization; and

     (6) Any space, open area, or facility approved and accredited by OHS/PDSD/CNSIS
         for CNSI activities where portable, secure communication devices are used.

c.   This DM focuses on NSS and CNSI from the perspective of the OHS National Security
     Systems Program (NSSP). Other aspects of safeguarding NSS and CNSI are the
     responsibility of the OHS PDSD, with which OHS NSSP coordinates their activities.

d.   This DM complements Departmental Regulation (DR) 3440-001, USDA Classified
     National Security Information Program, and DM 3440-001, USDA Classified National
     Security Information Program Manual.

e.   For more detailed procedures on managing cybersecurity incidents affecting classified
     systems and CNSI, see DM 3505-005, Cybersecurity Incident Management Procedures.

f.   The following terms are used in this document. See Appendix C for more detail:

     (1) An NSS may also be referred to as a classified system, a classified information
         system, or a secure communication system that meets the criteria defined in CNSS
         Instruction (CNSSI) 4009, Committee on National Security Systems (CNSS)
         Glossary. These terms encompass information systems and telecommunications
         systems and their components. For ease of understanding, the term “classified
         systems” is used in this document.

     (2) CNSI may also be referred to as classified information. Confidential business
         information and proprietary information are not the same as classified information.




                                            3
       (3) A managed CNSI service is one that is owned or operated by another organization,
           such as the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), to provide access to or
           transmission and processing of CNSI.


4. POLICY

  The procedures in this DM expand on the policies established by DR 3300-015, Secure
  Communication Systems, which covers:

  a.   Appropriate management and control of assets for classified systems and CNSI;

  b.   Securing the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of CNSI through coordination
       with CNSIS;

  c.   Coordination of activities at USDA by OHS’s NSSP and OHS, Mission Areas, agencies,
       staff offices, and the user community; and

  d.   System and device security awareness training for all personnel who access or use
       COMSEC equipment or support a classified system.


5. PROCEDURES

  a.   Acquiring and Maintaining Classified Systems

       This section explains the procedures for requesting, implementing, using, and operating
       classified systems and devices, or controlled cryptographic items (CCI) encryption
       devices, including classified stand-alone systems; equipment used to establish classified
       data network connectivity or secure video teleconferencing; data encryption devices
       used to protect CNSI; and secure communication devices used to transmit CNSI, such as
       fixed, mobile, and satellite telephones and radios.

       Procedures for using secure video teleconferencing facilities or accessing classified
       networks are described in the following Procedures Sections 5c through e.

       Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are responsible for funding the acquisition,
       implementation, and operations and maintenance (O&M) of these classified devices, as
       well as the costs for assessment and authorization (A&A).

       All classified systems and their components must be operated in facilities or spaces
       approved and cleared for CNSI activities by OHS PDSD or by a properly delegated
       USDA Mission Area, agency, or staff office authority, or at a Government facility with
       which an approved Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) exists by PDSD. The
       standard operating procedures (SOP) for the cleared facility must include procedures to
       ensure classified systems are stored and operated in accordance with DM 3440-001.



                                               4
Portable secure communication devices, such as mobile phones or radios, must be used
in accordance with applicable security doctrine and USDA SOPs when deployed in
spaces not formally approved for CNSI activities.

The preferred type of classified stand-alone system is a computer with a removable hard
drive or laptop that can be stored in a General Services Administration (GSA)-approved
security container, which will require that the facility be approved, at a minimum, for
closed storage and processing by PDSD. Computers without removable hard drives, or
laptops that are not capable of being stored inside a GSA-approved security container,
require the facility to be cleared for open storage of CNSI systems at a classification
level equal to or higher than the system.

(1) Requesting and Implementing Classified Systems or Devices

    (a) The requesting agency or staff office must complete the Agriculture
        Department (AD) Form AD-3084, Justification for a Classified National
        Security Information System, in which the system owner identifies the
        requested system or device and provides a detailed justification and system
        capabilities for the request.

    (b) OHS NSSP works with the system owner to document the “proposed solution”,
        which details the requirements for the classified system.

    (c) The system owner obtains the signatures of the agency funding authority and
        agency approving authority, indicating that the requesting agency or staff
        office is able to fund the request, along with the amount of funds available.
        This does not obligate the funds; it only identifies the requestor’s ability to
        fund the request and ongoing O&M capabilities.

    (d) The requesting agency or staff office submits the signed Form AD-3084 to
        OHS NSSP, which routes the form to OHS PDSD for review and signature.

    (e) OHS PDSD reviews the proposed solution requests within 20 business days of
        receipt to determine if the requesting entity can properly safeguard CNSI.
        OHS PDSD’s review is based on the:

         1   Intended purpose of the system and use of classified information;

         2   Secure storage requirements and capabilities (where and how storage will
             be maintained);

         3   Security accreditation of the facility and the facility SOP;

         4   Security operating guidelines for the equipment;

         5   Appropriate security clearances for personnel; and



                                       5
        6    Documented risk assessment.

    (f) OHS PDSD, in its review, identifies the security processes and procedures
        required before implementation of the proposed system. The requirements
        may apply to the requestor, the OHS NSSP Manager (NSSPM) or OHS NSSP,
        or a managed CNSI service provider.

    (g) OHS PDSD validates that security requirements exist prior to the introduction
        of the proposed system into an accredited space.

    (h) The Director or designee of OHS either approves or disapproves the request to
        implement the system or solution.

    (i) The Designated Approval Authority (DAA) reviews the form, certifies through
        signature that the Information Assurance Risk Management process, in
        accordance with CNSSI 1253, Security Categorization and Control Selection
        for National Security Systems, has been completed, and indicates whether the
        system must undergo A&A.

    (j) Once the solution is approved, OHS NSSP assists the system owner with
        following proper acquisition procedures; beginning the A&A process, if
        required; and implementing the solution.

    (k) All CCI-type devices and COMSEC materials must be delivered to the USDA
        COMSEC Manager, who generates Standard Form (SF) 153, COMSEC
        Material Report, and issues the device(s) to the authorized hand receipt holder.

    (l) OHS PDSD updates the facility equipment inventory when the solution is
        implemented. OHS PDSD also reviews the SOPs for the facility and any SOPs
        for the system.

(2) A&A of Classified Systems

    (a) Most systems, components, and devices requested are accredited by a Federal
        partner agency or managed CNSI service provider. The USDA DAA for CNSI
        systems determines whether to accept the external A&A under reciprocity or to
        require an internal A&A and documents the decision on AD-3084. The
        common exception to this is for stand-alone computer systems. For other
        exceptions, contact the OHS NSSPM.

    (b) The system owner must develop and maintain a detailed system security plan
        (SSP) for any classified system requiring A&A.

        1    The SSP must follow the format and contain the controls outlined in the
             Master System Security Plan (MSSP) generated by the OHS NSSPM.



                                       6
        2    CNSSI 1253F Attachment 1, Security Overlays Template, identifies the
             controls for a NSS, based on its security categorization.

        3    CNSSI 1253F Attachment 5, Classified Information Overlay, provides
             additional controls for safeguarding CNSI.

        4    The OHS NSSPM and OHS PDSD must review and concur on the SSP.

    (c) The system must successfully undergo a formal A&A before it may be used for
        operations.

        1    If there are two classified stand-alone systems, where one is the primary
             and the other is the alternate or backup, they may be assessed and
             authorized together as part of a single A&A.

        2    Certifiers (the personnel who perform the assessment) must have
             appropriate security clearances, applicable security training, and approved
             accounts for the systems to be assessed. When performing the assessment,
             the certifiers will determine whether the system is properly configured and
             complies with stated requirements and produce a security assessment
             report for the DAA.

    (d) Other outputs of the A&A process are the plans of action and milestones
        (POA&M) to correct any weaknesses identified during the assessment.

    (e) In addition to A&A, the Mission Area, agency, or staff office must complete
        and submit Form AD-3081, Classified Stand-alone Computer
        Registration/Certification to the USDA COMSEC Manager. The form
        provides information about the system and personnel and includes attestations
        about the facility, system, and personnel.

    (f) Relying on the security assessment report and representations on Form AD-
        3081 by OHS PDSD and the certifiers, the DAA makes a risk-based decision
        on whether to allow the system to operate. The DAA’s signature on Form AD-
        3081 authorizes processing of CNSI on the system and serves as the
        authorization to operate (ATO). The authorization will be valid for no longer
        than 3 years, although the DAA may set a shorter time.

(3) Accessing and Using Classified Systems

    (a) Use of classified devices or equipment is restricted to authorized personnel
        with appropriate security clearances.

    (b) All users, system administrators, and certifiers must complete initial classified
        user training and refresher security training.



                                       7
    (c) For classified stand-alone systems:

        1    Both of the following forms must be completed, submitted, and approved
             for user, system administrator, and certifier accounts on classified stand-
             alone computers:

             a    Form AD-3085, Classified Stand-Alone Computer User Account
                  Authorization; and

             b    Form AD-3080, Classified Stand-Alone Computer User Agreement.

        2    OHS PDSD approves Form AD-3085.

        3    The system owner and the Mission Area, agency, or staff office security
             official approve Form AD-3080.

        4    All personnel are required to use different passwords for classified and
             unclassified system accounts. They are also required to use different
             passwords for accounts on classified systems that have different
             classification levels (i.e., the password for a system at the Top Secret level
             must be different from the password for a system at the Secret level).

        5    Only an individual with a security clearance equal to or higher than the
             classification of information on the system may serve as system
             administrator.

        6    A certifier must have a security clearance equal to or higher than the
             classification of information on the system and is prohibited from serving
             as system administrator or user.

        7    System users are prohibited from performing or having system
             administration privileges.

        8    When a user, certifier, or system administrator is no longer eligible for an
             account on a classified stand-alone system, the system owner must
             complete Form AD-3082, Classified Stand-Alone Computer User Account
             Termination. As part of the process, a system administrator must attest on
             the AD-3082 form that the account has been deactivated or removed.

(4) Operating Classified Systems

    (a) If the official recipient (i.e., the hand receipt holder) of a classified device,
        equipment, or material is being transferred or reassigned, or will be absent for
        more than 30 calendar days, the system owner must contact the USDA




                                        8
              COMSEC Manager to return the equipment. OHS PDSD must be informed to
              update the equipment inventory.

              1    If the device or material is needed by another individual, only the USDA
                   COMSEC Manager is authorized to re-issue and transfer the material. The
                   USDA COMSEC Manager will arrange for a secure transfer of the device
                   or equipment and delegation of responsibility prior to the official
                   recipient’s departure. If the equipment is to be transferred to another
                   location, PDSD must pre-approve and accredit the space where the device
                   is to be located.

              2    Failure to properly return or transfer the device or equipment prior to
                   departure may result in a reportable COMSEC incident.

         (b) When a device or equipment is no longer needed, the system owner must
             return it to the USDA COMSEC Manager, with a completed SF153. The
             USDA COMSEC Manager must properly inventory and account for returned
             items before they can be re-issued. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices
             are not authorized to re-issue or key the device or equipment to another
             individual.

         (c) To remove or relocate classified non-mobile devices or equipment, the system
             owner must complete and submit form SF153 to the USDA COMSEC
             Manager. If equipment needs to be relocated, the system owner must provide
             at least 30 calendar days’ advance notice to the USDA COMSEC Manager.
             This allows time for NSSP coordination with OHS PDSD to address any
             logistical changes or security concerns. Only authorized personnel with
             appropriate security clearance can remove or relocate the devices or
             equipment.

         (d) As part of ongoing operations, OHS PDSD reviews and approves equipment
             inventories for the secure facility or space, and conducts compliance and
             oversight inspections.

b.   Transferring Information to or from a Classified Environment

     This section discusses procedures for moving data or information between unclassified
     and classified domains, or from one security domain level to another, such as from
     unclassified to Secret or from Secret to Top Secret.

     A security domain is an environment within system entities that have a single
     classification or sensitivity level operating under a common security policy, security
     model, or security architecture. Classification levels include unclassified, controlled,
     Secret, Top Secret, and Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information (TS/SCI).

     (1) Transferring Information from a Classified to an Unclassified Environment



                                             9
    Only sanitized information on a printed document may be transferred from a
    classified to an unclassified environment, following these steps:

    (a) Create and print a sanitized version of the document by removing all classified
        information from the document, so the resulting document contains only
        statements with unclassified (U) markings and insert headers and footers to
        designate the document as unclassified.

    (b) Two authorized individuals must review the printed document to verify that the
        document contains no classified information.

    (c) One of those individuals scans the document to the unclassified network, using
        an unclassified device.

(2) Transferring Information from an Unclassified to a Classified Environment

    (a) Information being transferred from an unclassified environment to a classified
        network or system must be in the form of a printed document.

    (b) Use a scanner connected to the classified network or system to upload the
        printed unclassified document.

    (c) Retrieve the document electronically on the classified network or system after
        the transfer is complete.

(3) Transferring from a Lower-Level Classified Environment to a Higher-Level
    Classified Environment

    (a) Information being transferred from a lower-level classified environment to a
        higher-level classified network or system must be in the form of a printed
        document.

    (b) Use a scanner connected to the higher-level classified network or system to
        upload the printed document.

    (c) Retrieve the document electronically on the higher-level classified network or
        system after the transfer is complete.

(4) Managed CNSI Service Provider Information Transfers

    Obtain and follow the instructions for the managed CNSI service provider’s method
    and tools for transferring information.




                                      10
c.   Use of Secure Video Teleconferencing

     The OHS NSSP staff supports all secure video teleconferencing systems (SVTS) for
     USDA and maintains the SOPs for SVTS operation and use. USDA has two types of
     SVTS systems. The Homeland Secure Data Network (HSDN) SVTS is located in
     Washington, DC, and planned for other locations. The Crisis Management System
     SVTS is located in various USDA facilities. Contact OHS NSSP for further
     information.

     (1) Users who need to attend or host a classified secure video teleconference must
         submit a completed PDSD Reservation Request Form. The form can be requested
         from PDSD or NSSP.

     (2) Submit the form via email to CNSIS@usda.gov and OHSEC-NSSP-
         SupportTeam@usda.gov 3 business days prior to the scheduled event.

     (3) PDSD will verify if the space is available, the participants have the appropriate
         clearance level, and they are allowed unescorted access to the facility. NSSP will
         coordinate the logistics of the call after PDSD confirms space availability and
         participant clearance levels.

d.   HSDN User Accounts and Access

     HSDN is the Secret-level wide area network, owned and managed by DHS, that
     provides Federal agencies involved in homeland security missions with access to
     classified information. HSDN services include full-service network operations,
     collaboration tools, enterprise applications, and common workstation configurations.
     Personnel who require access to HSDN must apply for an account, which may also be
     used to access classified State Department cables.

     OHS NSSP assists USDA personnel by processing requests for HSDN access and
     interfacing with DHS on their behalf. All requests for HSDN accounts or HSDN
     support in general must be sent to the HSDN Support Team in OHS NSSP.

     (1) Obtaining an HSDN Account and HSDN Token

         (a) The user must work with their information security (IS) Coordinator and PDSD
             to complete initial and biannual Derivative Classification Training.

         (b) The new user must complete Form AD-3083, Justification Request for an
             HSDN Account, and obtain the signature of their supervisor.

         (c) The completed form must be submitted electronically to via e-mail OHSEC-
             NSSP-SupportTeam@usda.gov.




                                            11
    (d) OHS NSSP will forward the completed AD-3083 form to the approving
        authority or the person to whom that authority has been delegated. For HSDN
        accounts, that authority has been delegated to the OHS PDSD Chief, the
        Special Security Officer (SSO), and alternate SSO.

    (e) If the requestor has not received a response within 5 business days, contact
        OHS NSSP at USDA-HSDN-SupportTeam@usda.gov or 202-720-0594.

    (f) A user approved for an HSDN account will receive DHS’s HSDN Account
        Request Application Package to complete. The HSDN Support Team is
        available to assist.

        1    Only designated OHS PDSD personnel may complete the Component
             Security Clearance Verification Block and Derivative Classification
             Training Block.

        2    OHS PDSD can provide a list of personnel authorized to sign the form.
             Mission Area, agency, and staff office IS Coordinators are not authorized
             to sign the form. The OHS NSSPM and Deputy NSSPM are authorized to
             sign the component Mission Area, agency, or staff office’s representative
             block.

    (g) Upon approval, the HSDN user will be issued a public key infrastructure (PKI)
        token and must set a personal identification number (PIN) to access HSDN.
        For questions or issues with the token, or to set or reset the PIN, contact the
        HSDN Support Team at USDA-HSDN-SupportTeam@usda.gov or 202-720-
        0594.

    (h) Another Federal partner department or agency may issue an HSDN PKI token,
        with prior coordination between the USDA point of contact (POC) for PKI and
        the other department’s PKI POC.

(2) Maintaining an HSDN Account and PKI Token

    (a) HSDN users are required to login to their accounts every 30 calendar days to
        maintain an active account.

    (b) DHS manages HSDN accounts as follows:

        1    The account is locked after 45 calendar days of inactivity; and

        2    The account is deactivated after 180 calendar days of inactivity.

    (c) A user whose account is locked or deactivated must contact the HSDN Support
        Team at OHSEC-NSSP-SupportTeam@usda.gov or 202-720-0594.




                                      12
    (d) The HSDN PKI token is the property of DHS and is considered a high-value
        unclassified item. The PIN is classified at the Secret level.

        1   The token and PIN are solely for the use of the person to whom the token
            is issued and must not be shared with anyone else.

        2   The token may not be used on an unclassified system; doing so constitutes
            a reportable violation.

        3   Taking the token into a foreign country or into the embassy or consulate of
            another country is a reportable security violation.

        4   Loss, loss of control, suspected or actual compromise of the token, or
            compromise of the PIN must be reported within 24 hours of detection to
            OHS NSSP at OHSEC-NSSP-SupportTeam@usda.gov or 202-720-0594.

        5   The token must be returned to OHS NSSP upon termination of the
            account.

(3) Termination or Temporary Suspension of HSDN Accounts

    (a) Notify OHS NSSP within 24 hours when:

        1   An HSDN account is no longer needed because the account holder is
            terminating employment or changing job responsibilities;

        2   The security clearance status of the account holder changes; or

        3   Use of the account must be restricted for reasons such as conducting an
            inquiry.

    (b) OHS NSSP processes the account termination or suspension with DHS and
        restricts access to HSDN facilities.

(4) Facilities Where HSDN Access Is Available

    (a) OHS NSSP operates the HSDN Suite access for the convenience of personnel
        from Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices that have HSDN accounts.

        1   The USDA South Building, room S100-E, in Washington, DC, is available
            during normal duty hours, Monday through Friday, 7:30 a.m. until 6:00
            p.m. (Eastern Time), excluding Federal holidays, times of approved early
            release, closure of the Federal Government, or closure of the South
            Building; and




                                     13
              2    HSDN users in Washington, DC, with an urgent need for HSDN access
                   outside normal duty hours may go to the USDA Security Operations
                   Center, South Building, room S310.

         (b) Other USDA facilities with HSDN access are:

              1    The Beacon facility in Kansas City, MO;

              2    The Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) headquarters
                   facility in the National Capitol Region;

              3    The Emergency Relocation Facility in Elkins, WV; and

              4    The APHIS facility in Fort Collins, CO.

         (c) DHS maintains HSDN access at Fusion Centers across the United States. OHS
             NSSP can provide a list of these locations. To obtain access to a Fusion
             Center, the following steps are required in advance:

              1    Contact OHS NSSP at OHSEC-NSSP-SupportTeam@usda.gov or 202-
                   720-0594 to coordinate the access request; and

              2    Contact OHS PDSD at cnsis@usda.gov or 202-720-7373. OHS PDSD
                   will:

                   a    Determine if an agreement is required between USDA and DHS for
                        access and, if so, put the agreement in place; and

                   b    Pass the user’s personnel security clearance verification information
                        to the Fusion Center.

e.   Joint Worldwide Intelligence Communications System Access

     The Joint Worldwide Intelligence Communications System (JWICS) for processing and
     transmitting TS/SCI is operated by a managed CNSI service provider.

     OHS PDSD personnel serve as the local administrators for this system and handle all
     aspects of the system and customer support other than cryptographic support. OHS
     NSSP provides cryptographic support functions for JWICS.

     Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are required to fund their allocated percentage
     of the annual O&M costs for JWICS access, working through OHS NSSP, which
     coordinates with the managed CNSI service provider.

     (1) To obtain JWICS access:




                                            14
         (a) Request initial JWICS access by contacting OHS PDSD at cnsis@usda.gov or
             202-720-7373;

         (b) Complete the JWICS request account package and submit it to OHS PDSD;
             and

         (c) The Director or Deputy Director of OHS will review the submitted package to
             approve or disapprove the request.

     (2) To modify or terminate JWICS access, contact OHS PDSD at cnsis@usda.gov or
         202-720-7373.

f.   Classified Cybersecurity Incidents

     This section provides a high-level summary of essential information regarding incidents
     affecting classified systems, spillage of CNSI, and loss of cryptographic keys or
     COMSEC devices or equipment. More extensive details can be found in DM 3440-001
     and, for CNSI spillage, DM 3505-005.

     (1) Operational Security Requirements for Reporting

         When reporting a classified or potentially classified incident, including spillage of
         CNSI, utilize operational security discipline for all communication, to minimize
         further exposure of the incident and damage to CNSI. Specifically:

         (a) Provide only the minimum amount of information to convey that there has
             been an incident, then request a face-to-face meeting or a secure call;

         (b) Avoid indicating what the information is or its classification, unless using
             approved secure methods of communication; and

         (c) Only discuss the incident or potential incident with personnel who have a need
             to know.

     (2) Reporting Incidents and Deadlines for Reporting

         (a) The physical loss of a cryptographic key, COMSEC device, or other secure
             communication system or component used to process CNSI must be reported
             within 12 hours of discovery to:

              1   The USDA COMSEC Manager via OHS NSSP; and

              2   OHS PDSD.




                                            15
    (b) All actual or suspected cybersecurity incidents affecting a classified system or
        CNSI must be reported immediately upon discovery, or notification of the
        incident, to the:

         1   Office of the Chief Information Officer – Information Security Center –
             Cyber Defense Operations Division (OCIO-ISC-CDOD);

         2   OHS PDSD;

         3   Agency or staff office IS Coordinators, if applicable; and

         4   Agency or staff office information security support staff.

    (c) The OHS SSO also reports incidents to the OCIO-ISC-CDOD.

(3) Contact Information for Reporting Classified Cybersecurity Incidents

    (a) OCIO-ISC-CDOD: Email cyber.incidents@usda.gov or call 866-905-6890;
        both are staffed 24x7x365.

    (b) OHS PDSD: Email cnsis@usda.gov or call 202-720-7373; the phone is staffed
        Monday through Friday, 7 a.m. until 5 p.m. (Eastern Time).

    (c) The USDA COMSEC Manager via OHS NSSP: Email OHSEC-NSSP-
        SupportTeam@usda.gov or call 202-720-0594.

(4) Responding to Reported Classified Cybersecurity Incident

    (a) OHS PDSD:

         1   Determines whether an official investigation is necessary;

         2   Contacts the data owner and agrees on steps needed for cleanup; and

         3   Notifies and coordinates with the security staff of any affected external
             network provider.

    (b) OHS NSSP:

         1   Assists and advises in the incident containment and cleanup strategies and
             activities, if CNSI systems are involved;

         2   Coordinates with classified network owners, as appropriate; and

         3   Submits a report to OHS PDSD.




                                      16
           (c) The OCIO-ISC-CDOD:

                1   Coordinates with OHS PDSD on the approved incident containment and
                    cleanup processes; and

                2   Manages the incident containment and cleanup by:

                    a    Investigating the spread of the incident and communicating that
                         information to OHS PDSD; and

                    b    Notifying and advising USDA network owners, external network
                         providers, and network administrators how to contain the incident,
                         isolate and protect classified or potentially classified information, and
                         clean up the incident.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Director of the OHS, in the capacity as DAA, will:

       (1) Review and approve Form AD-3084;

       (2) Certify that the Information Assurance Risk Management process has been
           completed and indicate whether the system must undergo A&A;

       (3) Upon completion of A&A, make a risk-based decision on allowing the system to
           operate; and

       (4) Sign Form AD-3081 to authorize processing of CNSI on the system.

  b.   The OHS NSSPM serving as the USDA COMSEC Manager will:

       (1) Review and concur on SSPs for classified systems;

       (2) Coordinate with managed CNSI service providers; and

       (3) Sign as the component agency representative on requests for HSDN accounts.

  c.   The OHS NSSP Manager will:

       (1) Assist the system owner or requestor with documenting detailed requirements and
           the proposed solution for the system;

       (2) Assist the system owner with implementing the approved solution;




                                              17
     (3) Coordinate with SVTS facility owners and requestors to schedule secure video
         teleconferences;

     (4) Verify PDSD has confirmed all attendees’ clearances prior to the start of any secure
         video teleconference;

     (5) Operate facilities for HSDN access;

     (6) Guide users who need access to classified communications systems at Fusion
         Centers to OHS/PDSD, which will assist in establishing an MOU;

     (7) Manage HSDN account requests, account terminations and suspensions, and related
         support processes;

     (8) Provide cryptographic support functions for JWICS;

     (9) Provide initial and annual refresher communications system user security training
         for authorized users; and

     (10) Assist and advise in containment and cleanup, and coordinate with classified
          network owners, as appropriate, when an actual or suspected cybersecurity incident
          is reported.

d.   The OHS Director or Deputy Director will:

     Review and approve or disapprove requests for implementing a classified system or
     device, based on information from the review by OHS NSSP and OHS PDSD, and
     JWICS access.

e.   The OHS PDSD Chief will:

     Review and approve or disapprove requests for new CNSI systems and HSDN accounts.

f.   The OHS PDSD Division Chief will:

     (1) Review the proposed solution for a requested system or device, and identify
         security processes and procedures required to implement the system before
         approving the introduction of the proposed system into an accredited space;

     (2) Review and concur on the SSP for the system;

     (3) Maintain, review, and approve equipment inventories for secure facilities or spaces;

     (4) Conduct compliance and oversight inspections of facilities and spaces containing
         classified systems and equipment;




                                           18
     (5) Manage Fusion Center agreements through DHS, and provide Fusion Centers with
         security clearance information for properly cleared personnel who require access;

     (6) Serve as local administrators for JWICS, manage JWICS account accesses and
         terminations, and provide general JWICS customer support; and

     (7) Determine whether an official investigation is necessary when an actual or
         suspected cybersecurity incident is reported, coordinate with the data owner on
         cleanup strategies, and notify and coordinate with the security staff of any affected
         external network.

g.   Mission Area, agency, and staff office Funding Authority and Approving Authority will:

     Sign Form AD-3084 indicating the ability to fund the request and the amount of funds
     available.

h.   The System Owner or Requestor must:

     (1) Complete Form AD-3084 and obtain signoff from the Mission Area, agency, or
         staff office funding authority and approving authority;

     (2) Budget for initial and reoccurring A&A of the requested system, unless the system
         or device is already accredited by another Federal agency;

     (3) Develop a concept of operations (CONOPS) for the requested system;

     (4) Collaborate with OHS NSSP to document the detailed requirements and proposed
         solution for the system;

     (5) Develop and maintain a detailed SSP for the system;

     (6) Ensure that the system A&A is completed, with all weaknesses corrected or
         documented as POA&Ms, prior to system implementation or operation;

     (1) Ensure that all users, system administrators, and certifiers complete all required
         security training pertinent to the system;

     (2) Approve accounts for users, system administrators, and certifiers, and ensure that
         accounts are terminated in a timely manner when someone is or may no longer be
         eligible for an account; and

     (3) Submit SF153 to the USDA COMSEC Manager to install, relocate, or remove
         classified devices or equipment, at least 30 calendar days in advance for relocations.




                                            19
i.   Certifiers must:

     (1) Assess whether the system is properly configured and complies with stated
         requirements; and

     (2) Produce a security assessment report for the DAA.

j.   Authorized users will:

     (1) Complete all required security training, both initially and annually, pertinent to the
         system;

     (2) Use assigned accounts properly, protect passwords, PINs, and tokens, and return
         tokens to OHS NSSP upon termination of HSDN accounts;

     (3) Promptly report to OHS NSSP any loss, loss of control, suspected or actual
         compromise of an HSDN token, or compromise of an HSDN PIN;

     (4) Promptly report the loss of a cryptographic key, COMSEC device, or other secure
         communication system or component to the USDA COMSEC Manager via OHS
         NSSP, and to OHS PDSD;

     (5) Promptly report all actual or suspected cybersecurity incidents affecting a classified
         system or CNSI to (at a minimum) the OCIO-ISC-CDOD, OHS PDSD, and the
         Mission Area, agency, or staff office IS Coordinator; and

     (6) Follow proper procedures for transferring information to or from a classified
         environment.

k.   The OCIO-ISC-CDOD must, when an actual or suspected classified cybersecurity
     incident is reported:

     (1) Coordinate with OHS PDSD on the approved incident containment and cleanup
         processes;

     (2) Investigate the spread of the incident and communicate that information to OHS
         PDSD; and

     (3) Notify and advise USDA network owners, external network providers, and network
         administrators how to contain the incident, protect CNSI, and clean up the incident.




                                             20
7. INQUIRIES

  Direct all questions regarding this DM to the OHS NSSPM or the HSDN team at OHSEC-
  NSSP-SupportTeam@usda.gov.


                                         -END-




                                         21
                              APPENDIX A

                  ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


A&A       Assessment and Authorization
AD        Agriculture Department
APHIS     Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
ATO       Authorization to Operate
CCI       Controlled Cryptographic Item
CDOD      Cyber Defense Operations Division
CFR       Code of Federal Regulations
CHVP      Cryptographic High Value Product
CIO       Chief Information Officer
CMCS      COMSEC Material Control System
CNSI      Classified National Security Information
CNSIS     Classified National Security Information Staff
CNSS      Committee on National Security Systems
CNSSI     Committee on National Security Systems Instruction
CNSSP     Committee on National Security Systems Policy
COMSEC    Communications Security
CONOPS    Concept of Operations
DAA       Designated Approval Authority
DHS       Department of Homeland Security
DM        Departmental Manual
DR        Departmental Regulation
E.O.      Executive Order
ECCM      Electronic Counter-Countermeasure
FISMA     Federal Information Security Modernization Act
GSA       General Services Administration
HAIPE     High Assurance Internet Protocol Encryptor
HSDN      Homeland Secure Data Network
IA        Information Assurance
ICD       Intelligence Community Directive
IS        Information Security
ISC       Information Security Center
IT        Information Technology
JWICS     Joint Worldwide Intelligence Communications System
MOU       Memorandum of Understanding
MSSP      Master System Security Plan
NSA       National Security Agency
NSA/CSS   National Security Agency/Central Security Service
NSS       National Security System
NSSP      National Security Systems Program
NSSPM     National Security Systems Program Manager
O&M       Operations and Maintenance



                                   A-1
OCIO      Office of the Chief Information Officer
ODNI      Office of the Director of National Intelligence
OHS       Office of Homeland Security
P.L.      Public Law
PDS       Protected Distribution System
PDSD      Personnel and Document Security Division
PIN       Personal Identification Number
PKI       Public Key Infrastructure
POA&M     Plan of Action and Milestones
POC       Point of Contact
SCI       Sensitive Compartmented Information
SF        Standard Form
SOP       Standard Operating Procedure
SSO       Special Security Officer
SSP       System Security Plan
SVTS      Secure Video Teleconferencing System
TACLANE   Tactical Local Area Network Encryption
TS/SCI    Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information
U         Unclassified
U.S.C.    United States Code
USDA      United States Department of Agriculture




                                    A-2
                                          APPENDIX B

                                         DEFINITIONS


Certifier. Individual responsible for making a technical judgment of the system’s compliance
with stated requirements, identifying and assessing the risks associated with operating the
system, coordinating the certification activities, and consolidating the final certification and
accreditation packages. An alternate term is “security control assessor.” (Source: CNSSI 4009,
adapted)

Classified Information. See “classified national security information.” (Source: CNSSI 4009)

Classified Information Spillage. Security incident that occurs whenever classified data is spilled
either onto an unclassified information system or to an information system with a lower level of
classification or different security category. (Source: CNSSI 4009)

Classified National Security Information (CNSI). Information that has been determined pursuant
to Executive Order (E.O.) 13526 or any predecessor order to require protection against
unauthorized disclosure and is marked to indicate its classified status when in documentary form.
(Source: CNSSI 4009)

Clearance. Formal security determination by an authorized adjudicative office that an individual
is authorized access, on a need to know basis, to a specific level of classified information (Top
Secret, Secret, or Confidential). (Source: CNSSI 4009)

Closed Storage. The storage of classified information in properly secured General Services
Administration-approved security containers. (Source: CNSSI 4009)

Communications Security (COMSEC). A component of Information Assurance that deals with
measures and controls taken to deny unauthorized persons information derived from
telecommunications and to ensure the authenticity of such telecommunications. COMSEC
includes cryptographic security, transmission security, emissions security, and physical security
of COMSEC material. (Source: CNSSI 4009)

COMSEC Account. Administrative entity, identified by an account number, used to maintain
accountability, custody, and control of COMSEC material. (Source: CNSSI 4009)

COMSEC Account Manager. An individual designated by proper authority to be responsible for
the receipt, transfer, accountability, safeguarding, and destruction of COMSEC material assigned
to a COMSEC account. This applies to both primary accounts and subaccounts. (Source:
CNSSI 4009)

COMSEC Equipment. Equipment designed to provide security to telecommunications by
converting information to a form unintelligible to an unauthorized interceptor and, subsequently,
by reconverting such information to its original form for authorized recipients; also, equipment



                                               B-1
designed specifically to aid in, or as an essential element of, the conversion process. COMSEC
equipment includes cryptographic-equipment, crypto-ancillary equipment, cryptographic
production equipment, and authentication equipment. (Source: CNSSI 4009)

COMSEC Incident. Any occurrence that potentially jeopardizes the security of COMSEC
material or the secure electrical transmission of national security information. COMSEC
incident includes Cryptographic Incident, Personnel Incident, Physical Incident, and Protective
Technology/Package Incident. (Source: CNSSI 4009)

USDA COMSEC Manager. Individual who manages the COMSEC resources of an
organization. The more accurate and used term is “COMSEC account manager.” (Source:
CNSSI 4009)

COMSEC Material. Item(s) designed to secure or authenticate telecommunications. COMSEC
material includes, but is not limited to key, equipment, modules, devices, documents, hardware,
firmware, or software that embodies or describes cryptographic logic and other items that
perform COMSEC functions. This includes Controlled Cryptographic Item (CCI) equipment,
Cryptographic High Value Products (CHVP) and other Suite B equipment, etc. (Source: CNSSI
4009)

COMSEC Module. Removable component that performs COMSEC functions in a
telecommunications equipment or system. (Source: CNSSI 4009)

Confidential Business Information. Information which concerns or relates to the trade secrets,
processes, operations, style of works, or apparatus, or to the production, sales, shipments,
purchases, transfers, identification of customers, inventories, or amount or source of any income,
profits, losses, or expenditures of any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other
organization, or other information of commercial value, the disclosure of which is likely to have
the effect of either impairing the International Trade Commission's ability to obtain such
information as is necessary to perform its statutory functions, or causing substantial harm to the
competitive position of the person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other organization from
which the information was obtained, unless the International Trade Commission is required by
law to disclose such information. The term “confidential business information” includes
“proprietary information.” (Source: Adapted from 19 CFR § 201.6, Confidential business
information)

Controlled Cryptographic Item (CCI). Secure telecommunications or information system, or
associated cryptographic component, that is unclassified and handled through the COMSEC
Material Control System (CMCS), an equivalent material control system, or a combination of the
two that provides accountability and visibility. Such items are marked “Controlled
Cryptographic Item” or, where space is limited, “CCI.” (Source: CNSSI 4009)

Cryptographic. Pertaining to, or concerned with, cryptography. (Source: CNSSI 4009)




                                               B-2
Cryptography. Art or science concerning the principles, means, methods for rendering plain
information unintelligible and for restoring encrypted information to intelligible form. (Source:
CNSSI 4009)

Cyber Incident. Actions taken through the use of an information system or network that result in
an actual or potentially adverse effect on an information system, network, and/or the information
residing therein. See also “incident.” (Source: CNSSI 4009)

Designated Approval Authority (DAA). Official with the authority to formally assume
responsibility for operating a system at an acceptable level of risk. This term is synonymous
with authorizing official, designated accrediting authority, and delegated accrediting authority.
(Source: CNSSI 4009)

Domain. An environment or context that includes a set of system resources and a set of system
entities that have the right to access the resources as defined by a common security policy,
security model, or security architecture. See security domain. (Source: CNSSI 4009)

Encryption. The cryptographic transformation of data to produce cipher text (data in
unintelligible form). (Source: CNSSI 4009, adapted)

Incident. An occurrence that results in actually or potential jeopardy to the confidentiality,
integrity, or availability of an information system or the information the system processes, stores,
or transmits or that constitutes a violation or imminent threat of violation of security policies,
security procedures, or acceptable use policies. (Source: CNSSI 4009)

Key. A numerical value used to control cryptographic operations, such as decryption,
encryption, signature generation, or signature verification. Usually, a sequence of random or
pseudorandom bits used initially to set up and periodically change the operations performed in
cryptographic equipment for the purpose of encrypting or decrypting electronic signals, or for
determining electronic counter-countermeasures (ECCM) patterns, or for producing other keys.
(Source: CNSSI 4009)

Keying Material. Key, code, or authentication information in physical, electronic, or magnetic
form. It includes key tapes and list, codes, authenticators, one-time pads, floppy disks, and
magnetic tapes containing keys, plugs, keyed microcircuits, electronically generated key, etc.
(Source: CNSSI 4009)

National Security System (NSS). Any information system (including any telecommunications
system) used or operated by an agency or by a contractor of an agency, or other organization on
behalf of an agency, the function, operation, or use of which:

   a.   Involves intelligence activities or cryptologic activities related to national security; or

   b.   Is protected at all times by procedures established for information that have been
        specifically authorized under criteria established by an Executive order or an Act of




                                                B-3
        Congress to be kept classified in the interest of national defense or foreign policy.
        (Source: Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), adapted)

NSA-Approved Product. Cryptographic equipment, assembly or component classified or
certified by the National Security Agency (NSA) for encrypting and decrypting classified
national security information and sensitive information when appropriately keyed. Developed
using established NSA business processes and containing NSA approved algorithms. (Source:
CNSSI 4009)

Open Storage. Any storage of classified national security information outside of approved
containers. This includes classified information that is resident on information systems media
and outside of an approved storage container, regardless of whether or not that media is in use
(i.e., unattended operations). Open storage of classified cryptographic material and equipment
must be done within an approved COMSEC facility, vault, or secure room when authorized
personnel are not present. (Source: CNSSI 4009)

Secure Communications. Telecommunications deriving security through the use of NSA-
approved products and/or protected distribution systems (PDS). (Source: CNSSI 4009)

Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI). Classified information concerning or derived from
intelligence sources, methods, or analytical processes, which is required to be handled within
formal access control systems established by the Director of National Intelligence. (Source:
CNSSI 4009)

Spillage. Security incident that results in the transfer of classified information onto an
information system not authorized to store or process that information. (Source: CNSSI 4009)

Unclassified. Information that does not require safeguarding or dissemination controls pursuant
to E.O. 13556, Controlled Unclassified Information, and has not been determined to require
protection against unauthorized disclosure pursuant to E.O. 13526, Classified National Security
Information, or any predecessor or successor Order. (Source: CNSSI 4009, adapted)




                                               B-4
                                       APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


NOTE: CNSS references and the NSA policy manual may not be accessible on the unclassified
network. Please contact the OHS NSSPM if you need to obtain a copy of a document.

Classified National Security Information Implementing Directive for E.O. 13526, 32 CFR 2001,
July 1, 2010

CNSS, CNSSI 1001, National Instruction on Classified Information Spillage, June 15, 2021

CNSS, CNSSI 1253, Security Categorization and Control Selection for National Security
Systems, March 27, 2014

CNSS, CNSSI 1253F Attachment 1, Security Overlays Template, August 27, 2013

CNSS, CNSSI 1253F Attachment 5, Classified Information Overlay, May 9, 2014

CNSS, CNSSI 3021, Operational Security Doctrine for the AN/CYZ-10/10A Data Transfer
Device, January 10, 2006

CNSS, CNSSI 3029, Operational Systems Security Doctrine for TACLANE (KG-175), April 19,
2006

CNSS, CNSSI 4000, Maintenance of Communications Security (COMSEC) Equipment, October
12, 2012

CNSS, CNSSI 4001, Controlled Cryptographic Items, (FOUU), May 07, 2013

CNSS, CNSSI 4003, Reporting and Evaluating Communications Security (COMSEC) Incidents,
(FOUO), June 16, 2016

CNSS, CNSSI 4005, Safeguarding COMSEC Facilities and Materials, August 22, 2011

CNSS, CNSSI 4009, Committee on National Security Systems (CNSS) Glossary, April 6, 2015

CNSS, CNSSI 4031, Cryptographic High Value Products (CHVP), September 18, 2019

CNSS, CNSS Policy (CNSSP) 1, National Policy for Safeguarding and Control of COMSEC
Material, September 30, 2004

CNSS, CNSSP 3, National Policy on Granting Access to U.S Classified Cryptographic
Information, October 1, 2007




                                            C-1
CNSS, CNSSP 11, National Policy Governing the Acquisition of Information Technology (IT)
Products, July 19, 2021

CNSS, CNSSP 15, Use of Public Standards for the Secure Information Sharing, October 20,
2016

CNSS, CNSSP 19, National Policy Governing the Use of High Assurance Internet Protocol
Encryptor (HAIPE) Products, June 1, 2013

CNSS, CNSSP 22, Cybersecurity Rick Management Policy, August 31, 2016

CNSS, CNSSP 26, National Policy on Reducing the Risk of Removable Media for National
Security Systems, June 22, 2021

Confidential Business Information, 19 CFR § 201.6

Executive Order 13526, Classified National Security Information, December 29, 2009

Executive Order 13556, Controlled Unclassified Information, November 4, 2010

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014, (FISMA), Public Law (P.L.) 113-283,
December 18, 2014, codified at 44 United States Code (U.S.C.) §§ 3551 et seq.

GSA, SF153, COMSEC Material Report, September 1988

National Security Agency Central Security Service (NSA/CSS) Policy Manual 3-16, Control of
Communications Security (COMSEC) Material, August 5, 2005

Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI), ICD 503, Intelligence Community
Information Technology Systems Security Risk Management, Certification and Accreditation,
September 15, 2008

USDA, AD-3080, Classified Stand-Alone Computer User Agreement, December 2014

USDA, AD-3081, Classified Stand-Alone Computer Registration/Certification, December 2014

USDA, AD-3082, Classified Stand-Alone Computer User Account Termination, December 2014

USDA, AD-3083, Justification Request for an HSDN Account, December 2014

USDA, AD-3084, Justification for a Classified National Security Information System, December
2014

USDA, AD-3085, Classified Stand-Alone Computer User Account Authorization, December
2014




                                            C-2
USDA, DM 3440-001, USDA Classified National Security Information Program, June 9, 2016

USDA, DM 3505-005, Cybersecurity Incident Management Procedures, November 30, 2018

USDA, DR 3300-015, Secure Communication Systems, July 14, 2016, as amended

USDA, DR 3440-001, USDA Classified National Security Information Program, June 9, 2016

USDA, DR 3440-002, Control and Protection of “Sensitive Security Information,” January 30,
2003

USDA, DR 3505-005, Cybersecurity Incident Management, November 30, 2018

USDA, DR 3540-003, Security Assessment and Authorization, August 12, 2014

USDA, OHS, PDSD Reservation Request Form




                                            C-3
