                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                               NUMBER:
          DEPARTMENTAL MANUAL                                  DM 3465-001
                                                               DATE:
 SUBJECT: Geospatial Metadata Standards                        August 25, 2023
 OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer, Enterprise      EXPIRATION DATE:
 Geospatial Management Office                                  August 25, 2026



Section                                                                                 Page

1.   Purpose                                                                               1
2.   Scope                                                                                 1
3.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                    2
4.   Procedures                                                                            2
5.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                            6
6.   Procedures Exceptions                                                                 9
7.   Inquiries                                                                            10

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                  A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                 B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                  C-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.   This Departmental Manual (DM) provides procedures to accompany Departmental
          Regulation (DR) 3465-001, Enterprise Geospatial Data Management.

     b.   This DM enhances data sharing and reuse throughout the data lifecycle for discovery,
          access, and interoperability with machine-readable, searchable standard metadata using
          the Federal Geographic Data Committee (FGDC)-Endorsed Metadata Standards, per the
          FGDC Geospatial Standards web page.


2. SCOPE

     This DM supports DR 3465-001. It applies to all United States Department of Agriculture
     (USDA) Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, programs, teams, organizations, appointees,
     and employees, including contractors and grantees receiving Federal funds that utilize and
     collect geospatial data.
3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   Use this DM along with DR 3465-001.

  b.   This DM is effective immediately when published.

  c.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align processes, procedures, and
       application of metadata standards with this DM for geospatial authoritative data (GAD)
       within 6 months of publication.


4. PROCEDURES

  a.   This section describes how a FGDC-Endorsed Metadata Standard is interpreted for
       USDA-funded geospatial metadata to increase its value for both USDA and other
       geospatial data creators and users.

  b.   Establishment of the USDA geospatial metadata standard:

       (1) The metadata standard adopted by USDA must meet the following criteria.

           (a) The metadata standard must be endorsed and recommended by the FGDC; and

           (b) The implementation must fully support the metadata standard.

                1   Every metadata element and attribute defined in the metadata standard
                    must be available for the creation, maintenance, import, and export of
                    metadata.

                2   This requirement ensures that no metadata content is lost during the
                    transfer of a record between systems fully supporting the metadata
                    standard.

       (2) The preferred FGDC-Endorsed Metadata Standard is the USDA representation of
           geospatial metadata, serving as the authoritative version of the metadata, if a
           derived or exported format differs.

  c.   USDA-Specific Metadata:

       (1) USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may add requirements for
           metadata elements.




                                              2
     (2) USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will use this DM as their internal
         policy. They may create a more restrictive policy, but they will not create a policy
         that is less restrictive or less comprehensive than, or not compliant with, this DM.

     (3) USDA metadata must adhere to FGDC-Endorsed Metadata Standards, regardless of
         the tools used to create, maintain, manage, or use metadata.

     (4) Allowable changes to the official metadata standard will include, but are not limited
         to:

         (a) Requiring metadata that is optional in the metadata standard; and

         (b) Requiring the use of specific lists of values to use for particular elements.
             Well-known and widely used lists are preferrable to creating a new list.

              1    USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may define quality
                   requirements for the content of elements to improve Findable, Accessible,
                   Interoperable, and Reusable (FAIR) characteristics;

              2    USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may enforce additional
                   interrelationships between elements and element values;

              3    USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may require metadata at
                   various stages of the geospatial data lifecycle; and

              4    Categories or types of geospatial data may have different metadata
                   requirements from other geospatial data.

d.   All geospatial metadata must be valid. For geospatial metadata, valid means that:

     (1) The metadata contains the required metadata elements;

     (2) The format meets the structure and content defined by FGDC-Endorsed Metadata
         Standards;

     (3) Interrelationships between elements specified in the metadata standard are enforced;
         and

     (4) The metadata from USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must meet the
         applicable criteria identified in Section 4c(4).

e.   Metadata Workflows:

     (1) Geospatial data creators must minimize duplicate submission of metadata to
         geospatial catalogs, geospatial portals, and other collections and inventories, and
         must choose one of the following:



                                             3
         (a) FGDC GeoPlatform.gov;

         (b) General Services Administration (GSA) Data.gov; or

         (c) Any USDA data catalog identified by the Office of the Chief Information
             Officer’s (OCIO) Enterprise Geospatial Management Office (EGMO).

     (2) Geospatial data creators may be required to output FGDC-endorsed metadata in
         various other formats to facilitate intersystem services and readability.

f.   Metadata Access:

     (1) Metadata must be available when data is downloaded, obtained from a web service,
         or otherwise distributed.

         (a) Metadata must be available in an FGDC-Endorsed Metadata Standard format.

         (b) For metadata standards-based geospatial data formats that permit the inclusion
             of metadata with the data, the metadata must be included. For download
             formats that do not embed metadata, the link for the data download is to be
             accompanied by an equally prominent link to download the metadata in the
             required FGDC-Endorsed Metadata Standard. Additional links to metadata in
             other formats are acceptable only if the required metadata standard is also
             available.

     (2) If metadata (and data) are available using web services, open standard services must
         be used even if proprietary services are also implemented.

     (3) Metadata must be downloadable in FGDC-Endorsed Metadata Standard formats
         from the geospatial catalogs.

     (4) Geospatial metadata must accompany geospatial data during the Federal records
         management processes identified in DR 3080-001, Records Management.

     (5) Common metadata-derived products may be identified as required or optional.
         Potential purposes may include but are not limited to:

         (a) Web page content for optimizing search engine indexing of data; and

         (b) Alternative display formats for metadata viewed on a web page.

g.   Metadata Creation and Curation:

     (1) Valid metadata is needed for GAD.




                                            4
         (a) The OCIO EGMO Geospatial Information Officer (GIO) may authorize and
             allow use of certain data before comprehensive metadata is finalized.

         (b) Valid metadata must meet USDA requirements before their release.

     (2) Metadata must be included with the data when retention of the data is required.
         This includes litigation holds, Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) (5 United States
         Code (U.S.C.), § 552, Public information; agency rules, opinions, orders, records,
         and proceedings) requests, or other administrative or legal mandates. This may
         require retention of data and metadata for specific versions or revisions of the data
         or products.

     (3) Updates to published metadata must be documented within the metadata record to
         inform geospatial data creators and users of the change.

     (4) Due diligence must be used when moving metadata records to ensure that links to
         related metadata within the control of the Department, Mission Area, agency, or
         staff office remain valid.

     (5) Curation may be required for the development and maintenance of shared, reusable
         metadata building blocks and other approaches to reduce metadata creation effort
         and improve consistency with shared metadata building blocks.

h.   Acquired Geospatial Data:

     (1) Geospatial data paid for in whole or in part from other sources must comply with
         FGDC-Endorsed Metadata Standards. USDA-funded data includes contracts to
         acquire data, purchase of existing data, cooperative agreements, grants, cost
         sharing, and other means of procurement.

     (2) Address metadata requirements with respect to:

         (a) Variations in the funding source and acquisition vehicle;

         (b) USDA funding a portion of the acquisition costs;

         (c) The type and urgency of data;

         (d) Allocation of metadata creation between the provider and acquiring entity;

         (e) Use of no-cost data that is not accompanied by FGDC-Endorsed Metadata
             Standards; and

         (f) Other significant characteristics.




                                             5
       (3) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will use Geospatial Data Act (GDA)
           (codified at 43 U.S.C. Ch. 46, Geospatial Data) instructions for new contracts and
           agreements for new metadata requirements.


5. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  The roles and responsibilities identified in this DM align to DR 3465-001.

  a.   The USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO) will:

       (1) Delegate executive leadership for geospatial technology, data, and information
           solutions to the USDA GIO;

       (2) Approve revisions; and

       (3) Review and approve processes, procedures, and metadata standards for waiver or
           exception requests. As the owner of this DM, the CIO will have the final review
           and approval authority for any waiver or exception requests.

  b.   The USDA GIO will:

       (1) Serve as the senior executive responsible for Departmental geospatial strategy,
           planning, coordination, assessment, and synchronization of all USDA geospatial
           data activities assigned to the GIO per Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
           Circular A-16, Revised, Coordination of Geographic Information and Related
           Spatial Data Activities, requirements;

       (2) Have authority, responsibility, and coordination for USDA’s geospatial information
           technology (IT) portfolio;

       (3) Oversee and facilitate USDA internal and external implementation of the geospatial
           IT and geospatial data policies, governance, directives, requirements, management,
           product, and service standardization;

       (4) Review geospatial procedural DMs. Ensure that they provide specific guidance.
           The CIO will approve these prior to publication;

       (5) Serve as the policy-level official representing USDA at the FGDC;

       (6) Appoint Mission Area, agency, and staff office representatives to serve on FGDC
           coordination groups, governance, and working groups;

       (7) Maintain a knowledge base of USDA geospatial portfolio investments;




                                              6
     (8) Oversee the enterprise geospatial capital planning process per DR 3130-013,
         Information Technology Capital Planning and Investment Control; and

     (9) Oversee the enterprise geospatial investment control process per DR 3130-010,
         United States Department of Agriculture Enterprise Information Technology
         Governance; and advocate for Mission Area, agency, and staff office geospatial
         portfolio budgets and acquisition plans;

     (10) Advocate for the use, value, and benefits of geospatial innovation and information
          supporting decision makers, citizens, partners, and others;

     (11) Collaborate with the CIO, EGMO Program Manager (PM), the USDA Chief Data
          Officer, and other OCIO Service Center Associate CIOs (ACIO) to implement
          strategic initiatives;

     (12) Provide the Departmental response to external geospatial portfolio data calls; and

     (13) Review and provide a recommendation to the CIO on any submitted and completed
          waivers to the primary requesting office for any requirement that is not in
          compliance with this DM. The CIO, as the policy owner, will make the final
          decision.

c.   The EGMO PM will:

     (1) Initiate reviews and updates to this DM in a timely manner;

     (2) Act as the primary Departmental PM for geospatial matters, overseeing and
         coordinating various programs, projects, and staff;

     (3) Support and coordinate the geospatial portfolio with USDA Mission Areas,
         agencies, and staff offices; and

     (4) Collaborate with USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices researching new
         geospatial technologies and potential implementations across Mission Areas,
         agencies, and staff offices to meet geospatial data management requirements.

d.   The USDA Chief Data Officer will collaborate with the CIO, the GIO, the EGMO PM,
     and OCIO Service Center ACIOs on geospatial matters to implement strategic
     initiatives.

e.   USDA Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Geospatial Leads will:

     (1) Use FGDC-Endorsed Geospatial Data Standards per the GDA, and as stated on the
         FGDC Geospatial Standards web page;




                                             7
     (2) For all geospatial data, follow USDA-specific requirements for metadata content, to
         include future DMs and guidelines;

     (3) Ensure that metadata is certified and documented:

         (a) The specific Mission Area, agency, or staff office owner will certify all
             metadata as compliant with data standards;

         (b) Metadata will include identification that confirms its nature as authoritative
             data;

         (c) Metadata will be documented in an authoritative system that can be queried to
             find the data themes in OMB Circular A-16; and

         (d) All metadata will be certified and documented even if the underlying data is
             subject to restrictions on public release;

     (4) Make the metadata available through the FGDC’s GeoPlatform, unless legally
         restricted;

     (5) Be accountable for monitoring and reporting geospatial data quality, governance,
         metadata, and lifecycle management to ensure alignment to DR 3465-001;

     (6) Establish responsibility for the performance of metadata duties such as writing,
         revising, versioning, validating, reviewing, and approving release; and

     (7) Submit Mission Area, agency, or staff office-specific metadata requirements and
         guidance (if any) to the EGMO PM for review and approval.

f.   USDA Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Geospatial Data Creators will:

     (1) Use FGDC-Endorsed Geospatial Data Standards per the GDA, and as stated on the
         FGDC Geospatial Standards web page;

     (2) For all geospatial data, follow USDA-specific requirements for metadata content, to
         include future DMs and guidelines;

     (3) Ensure that metadata is certified and documented:

         (a) The specific Mission Area, agency, or staff office geospatial data owner will
             certify all metadata as compliant with data standards;

         (b) Metadata will include identification that confirms its nature as authoritative
             data;




                                            8
           (c) Metadata will be documented in an authoritative system that can be queried to
               find the data themes in OMB Circular A-16; and

           (d) All metadata will be certified and documented even if the underlying data is
               subject to restrictions on public release;

       (4) Make the metadata available through the FGDC’s GeoPlatform, unless legally
           restricted.

  g.   USDA Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Heads and Mission Area Assistant CIOs
       will:

       (1) Align processes, procedures, and application of metadata standards with this DM
           for GAD within 6 months of publication;

       (2) Establish processes and infrastructure necessary to maintain, disseminate, preserve,
           and identify GAD;

       (3) Ensure that geospatial data are managed in a coordinated and documented manner
           that meet the requirements of this DM; and

       (4) Ensure that geospatial data management roles and functions are defined and
           assigned for their Mission Area, agency or staff office, and that GAD are
           understood and managed throughout the data lifecycle.


6. PROCEDURES EXCEPTIONS

  a.   If a specific process, procedure, or metadata standards requirement cannot be met as
       explicitly stated, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may submit a waiver request.
       The waiver request will:

       (1) Identify the sponsoring Mission Area, agency, or staff office executive;

       (2) Explain the reason for the request;

       (3) Identify compensating controls and actions that meet or exceed the intent of the
           process, procedure, or metadata standards; and

       (4) Identify how the compensating controls and actions provide a similar or greater
           level of quality, mitigation, or compliance than the process, procedure, or metadata
           standards requirement.

  b.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must address all process, procedure, or
       metadata standards waiver request documentation to the USDA GIO and submit the
       request to usdageospatial@usda.gov.



                                                 9
  c.   The CIO, as the owner of this DM, will have the final review and approval authority for
       any waiver or exception requests.


7. INQUIRIES

  Information regarding this DM, policy recommendations, updates, or changes, and
  relationships to other Administration, Departmental, Mission Area, agency, staff office, and
  Federal geospatial-related policy, directives, and memoranda are to be directed to the USDA
  GIO, located in the OCIO EGMO at usdageospatial@usda.gov.


                                           -END-




                                             10
                              APPENDIX A

                 ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ACIO     Associate Chief Information Officer (OCIO Service Centers)
CIO      Chief Information Officer
CUI      Controlled Unclassified Information
DM       Departmental Manual
DR       Departmental Regulation
EGMO     Enterprise Geospatial Management Office (OCIO component)
FAIR     Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable (data)
FGDC     Federal Geographic Data Committee
FOIA     Freedom of Information Act
FY       Fiscal Year
GAD      Geospatial Authoritative Data
GDA      Geospatial Data Act
GIO      Geospatial Information Officer
GSA      General Services Administration
IT       Information Technology
NGDA     National Geospatial Data Asset
NIST     National Institute of Standards and Technology
OCIO     Office of the Chief Information Officer
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
PII      Personally Identifiable Information
P.L.     Public Law
PM       Program Manager
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture
USGS     United States Geological Survey




                                   A-1
                                          APPENDIX B

                                         DEFINITIONS


Certified and Documented. All metadata will be certified as compliant with data standards by
the specific Mission Area, agency, or staff office owner. Metadata will include identification
that confirms its nature as authoritative data. Metadata will be documented in an authoritative
system that can be queried to find the data themes in OMB Circular A-16. All metadata will be
certified and documented even if the underlying data is subject to restrictions on public release.
(Source: Adapted from OMB, Circular A-16)

Federal Geospatial Data Committee (FGDC)-Endorsed Metadata Standards. A list of FGDC
approved metadata standards. The GDA directs the FGDC to select and endorse the required
metadata standards to be followed by specified Federal agencies, including USDA. The GDA
establishes the FGDC as the lead entity in the Executive Branch of Government for the
development, implementation, and review of policies, practices, and standards relating to
geospatial data. These responsibilities are reinforced by Circular A-16 and Circular A-119,
Federal Participation in the Development and Use of Voluntary Consensus Standards and in
Conformity Assessment Activities. The FGDC has endorsed other geospatial standards and can
update its endorsements to keep up with technology and geospatial standards without waiting for
Congress to include the changes in a new law. (Source: Adapted from FGDC, FDGC
Geospatial Standards)

Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable (FAIR). FAIR data principles provide a set of
mileposts for data producers and publishers. They guide the implementation of the most basic
levels of good data management and stewardship practice. The end result, when implemented,
will be more rigorous management and stewardship of these valuable digital resources. These
are data principles agreed upon by a diverse set of stakeholders, representing academia, industry,
funding agencies, and scholarly publishers. The 2016 Scientific Data publication The FAIR
Guiding Principles for Scientific Data Management and Stewardship is the first formal
publication of these data principles and explains the rationale behind FAIR and offers examples
of implementation. (Source: Adapted from Scientific Management, The FAIR Guiding
Principles for Scientific Data Management and Stewardship)

Geospatial Authoritative Data (GAD). Any geospatial data that meets one or more of the
following: is required by statute, is used to support policy, is used to manage programs, is used
to inform the public, is shared outside of USDA, or is considered a high-value asset. For many
geographic information system practitioners, the term usually means that the data was produced
or is approved by some authority. Authoritative data is officially recognized data provided by an
authoritative source. The data may be original, or it may come from one or more external
sources, all of which are validated for quality and accuracy. (Source: Adapted from FGDC,
Authority and Authoritative Sources: Clarification of Terms and Concepts for Cadastral Data,
Version 1.1)




                                               B-1
Geospatial Catalog. Any searchable collection of geospatial metadata records compliant with
FGDC-Endorsed Metadata Standards.

Geospatial Lead. The USDA Mission Area, agency, staff office, or service lead responsible for
geospatial data. This could be the Chief Data Officer, Mission Area Assistant CIO, GIO, or
another lead as determined by the Mission Area, agency, or staff office.

Geospatial Portfolio. USDA geospatial assets that can be brought to bear to address an issue.
These assets include funding, data, infrastructure, hardware, software, applications, personnel,
services, and products.

Information. Any communication or representation of knowledge, such as facts, data, or
opinions in any medium or form, including textual, numerical, graphic, cartographic, narrative,
or audiovisual forms. (Source: FGDC web page, Lexicon of Geospatial Terminology,
Information definition)

Metadata. Information describing the characteristics of data including, for example, structural
metadata describing data structures (e.g., data format, syntax, and semantics), and descriptive
metadata describing data contents (e.g., information security labels). (Source: NIST, Computer
Security Resource Center, Topics, Glossary, Metadata definition)

National Geospatial Data Asset (NGDA). In November 2010, OMB released Memorandum M-
11-03, Issuance of OMB Circular A-16 Supplemental Guidance. Its primary focus was on
geospatial data as a capital asset and providing the foundation for a portfolio management
approach to a NGDA Portfolio. The portfolio consists of NGDA Themes and their associated
NGDA Datasets. An NGDA Dataset is an asset that has been designated as such by the FGDC
Steering Committee and meets at least one of the following criteria:

   a. Used by multiple [Federal] agencies or with agency partners such as State, Tribal and
      local Government;

   b. Applied to achieve Presidential priorities as expressed by OMB;

   c. Required to meet shared mission goals of multiple Federal agencies; or

   d. Expressly required by statutory mandate.

   (Source: OMB, M-11-03, Issuance of OMB Circular A-16 and Supplemental Guidance)




                                               B-2
                                        APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


5 U.S.C. § 101, Executive Departments

FGDC, Authority and Authoritative Sources: Clarification of Terms and Concepts for Cadastral
Data, Version 1.1, August 2008

FGDC, FGDC Geospatial Standards web page

FGDC, FGDC.gov website

FGDC, FGDC Structure and Federal Agency and Bureau Representation web page

FGDC, FGDC Technical Guidance: Data.gov and The GeoPlatform Metadata
Recommendations, December 13, 2022

FGDC, GeoPlatform.gov website

FGDC, Geospatial Standards web page

FGDC, Lexicon of Geospatial Terminology, Information definition web page

FOIA Improvement Act, Public Law (P.L.) 114-185, June 30, 2016

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), 5 U.S.C. § 552, Public information; agency rules, opinions,
orders, records, and proceedings

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), P.L. 89-487, July 4, 1966

Geospatial Data Act (GDA) of 2018, 43 U.S.C. Ch. 46, Geospatial Data, as amended

GSA, Data.gov, June 7, 2023

National Archives, Federal Records Management, Records Management Regulations, Policy,
and Guidance, March 3, 2023

National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), Computer Security Resource Center,
Glossary, Information definition web page

NIST, Computer Security Resource Center, Topics, Glossary, Metadata definition web page

OMB, Circular A-16, Revised, Coordination of Geographic Information and Related Spatial
Data Activities, August 19, 2002



                                             C-1
OMB, Circular A-119, Federal Participation in the Development and Use of Voluntary
Consensus Standards and in Conformity Assessment Activities, January 27, 2016

OMB, Memorandum M-11-03, Issuance of OMB Circular A-16 Supplemental Guidance,
November 10, 2010

USDA, DR 1110-002, Management’s Responsibility for Internal Control, March 5, 2021

USDA, DR 3080-001, Records Management, August 16, 2016

USDA, DR 3090-001, Litigation Retention Policy for Documentary Materials including
Electronically Stored Information, May 28, 2008

USDA, DR 3130-010, United States Department of Agriculture Enterprise Information
Technology Governance, April 20, 2021

USDA, DR 3130-013, Information Technology Capital Planning and Investment Control, May
24, 2021

USDA, DR 3440-001, USDA Classified National Security Information Program, June 9, 2016

USDA, DR 3440-002, Control and Protection of “Sensitive Security Information,” January 30,
2003

USDA, DR 3440-003, Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) Program, September 13, 2021

USDA, DR 3450-002, Freedom of Information Act Implementing Regulations, February 7, 2003

USDA, DR 3465-001, Enterprise Geospatial Data Management, March 15, 2023

USDA, DR 3515-002, Privacy Policy and Compliance for Personally Identifiable Information
(PII), October 30, 2020

USDA, Geospatial Strategic Plan, 2020

USDA, Information Technology Strategic Plan FY [Fiscal Year] 2022-2026, June 2022

USDA, Strategic Plan Fiscal Years 2022-2026, March 2022

United States Geological Survey (USGS), Stewardship: Data Steward Roles and
Responsibilities

USGS, Stewardship – Data Steward Roles and Responsibilities website




                                            C-2
Wilkinson, M., Dumontier, M., Aalbersberg, I., et al., Scientific Data, The FAIR Guiding
Principles for Scientific Data Management and Stewardship, March 15, 2016




                                              C-3
