                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                 NUMBER:
          DEPARTMENTAL MANUAL                                    DM 3410-001
                                                                 DATE:
 SUBJECT: Information Collection Procedures                      August 25, 2023
 OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer, Information       EXPIRATION DATE:
 Resource Management Center                                      August 25, 2026



Section                                                                                     Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                      1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                           1
3.   Scope                                                                                        2
4.   Procedures                                                                                   2
5.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                                   8
6.   Inquiries                                                                                   14

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                      A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                     B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                      C-1
Appendix D – Public Burden Statement                                                         D-1
Appendix E – Privacy Act Statement (5 U.S.C. § 552a)                                         E-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Manual (DM) provides processes and procedures in support of the United
     States Department of Agriculture (USDA) policy provided in Departmental Regulation (DR)
     3410-001, Information Collection Request Activities: Collection of Information from the
     Public, dated January 26, 2022.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     a.   This DM is effective immediately and remains in effect until it is superseded, or it
          expires.

     b.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must align their policies and procedures
          with this DM within 6 months of the publication date.
3. SCOPE

  This DM applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, employees, appointees,
  contractors, and others who work for, or on behalf of, USDA that are involved with
  developing or processing information collection requests (ICR).


4. PROCEDURES

  a.   Clearance Types

       The following are the eight types of clearances that require an information collection
       (IC).

       (1) Full ICR

           (a) New Collections

                For new collections, 60 and 30 calendar day Federal Register Notices (FRN)
                are required to allow for public comment, along with IC instruments and
                supporting statements.

           (b) Revisions

                Revisions involve substantive changes to an approved IC. Such revisions are
                generally a result of changes required by law or Mission Area, agency, or staff
                office action (e.g., program budget cuts). Office of Management and Budget
                (OMB), Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) review and
                approval is required before revisions can be implemented.

           (c) Extensions without Change

                In this case, there are no changes to an approved IC’s information, such as the
                respondents, responses, or burden.

           (d) Reinstatement

                There can be reinstatement of an expired or discontinued IC. It is acceptable to
                reuse the original OMB control number and IC instrument.

       (2) Non-Substantive Change

           Verify with the Mission Area, agency, or staff office Paperwork Reduction Act of
           1995 (PRA), Public Law (P.L.) 104-13, Clearance Officer or the OMB Desk
           Officer that the request will be accepted as a change versus a revision.




                                               2
     (3) Substantive Change

         Per OMB discretion (the OMB Desk Officer), a Mission Area, agency, or staff
         office may be allowed to publish a 30-day FRN instead of a 60-day FRN for a
         substantive change.

     (4) Emergency Extensions

         These must be discussed and determined by the OMB Desk Officer. If granted, an
         emergency extension cannot exceed 90 calendar days.

     (5) Emergency Requests

         Some extenuating circumstances may be considered grounds for justifying an
         emergency approval. These include circumstances that result or may result in
         public harm; that prevent the Mission Area, agency, or staff office from responding
         to an unanticipated event; or that cause the Mission Area, agency, or staff office to
         miss a statutory or court-ordered deadline.

     (6) Discontinuation Requests

         Requests to discontinue IC is usually a result of a Mission Area, agency, or staff
         office decision that the IC is no longer needed.

     (7) Generic IC

         The OMB response is within 5 business days. FRNs are not required for each IC
         covered under the USDA, Mission Area’s, agency’s, or staff office’s fast track
         generic clearance.

     (8) Request for Common Forms (RCF)

         Use for a common form must be obtained through approval from the Host agency
         sponsoring the form within or outside of USDA. Prior to submitting the RCF, the
         program office must check with their Mission Area, agency, or staff office forms
         manager and the USDA Departmental Forms Management Officer (DFMO). This
         process can be found in the Regulatory Information Service Center and Office of
         Information and Regulatory Affairs Consolidated Information System (ROCIS)
         document ROCIS How to Guide for Agency Users of the Information Collection
         Request (ICR) Module (“ROCIS Guide”).

b.   Clearance Process Steps

     (1) Step 1 – Development of Information




                                            3
    The Mission Area, agency, or staff office along with the Agency Information
    Collection Officer (AICO) develops the information request and follows the
    instructions below.

    (a) Step 1(a) – Construct the Supporting Statement A

        The Supporting Statement A is required for all ICRs. It is comprised of 18
        questions (see the ROCIS Guide, Section 26, Creating a Supporting Statement)
        that address the need for collecting the information from the public, how the
        information will be utilized by USDA, and how USDA will account for the
        burden on the public, whether by means of forms, surveys, or focus groups.

        Note: The OMB Form 83-I, Paperwork Reduction Act Submission, is no
        longer used because the information contained on that form is now collected in
        ROCIS.

    (b) Step 1(b) – Construct the Supporting Statement B

        The Supporting Statement B is used for statistical methods only. It is a
        document that consists of five questions (see the ROCIS Guide, Section 26,
        Creating a Supporting Statement) that allows the Mission Area, agency, or
        staff office to address statistical methods they plan to use within a survey.

        Note: The National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS) needs to review the
        completed package before it is forwarded to the Office of the Chief
        Information Officer (OCIO), Information Resource Management Center
        (IRMC), Information Management Division (IMD), Departmental Information
        Clearance Officers (DICO). NASS only reviews the package if a Supporting
        Statement B is needed.

    (c) Step 1(c) – Information Collection Instruments (e.g., Forms, Surveys,
        Questionnaires)

        These instruments must contain the OMB control number, expiration date,
        public burden statement, and Privacy Act statement (see Appendices D, Public
        Burden Statement, and E, Privacy Act Statement, respectively).

        Note: After the completion of Steps 1(a), 1(b), and 1(c) of the clearance
        process, forward the completed documents to the DICO and the USDA DFMO
        for review.

(2) Step 2 – Publish the 60-day FRN

    The Mission Area, agency, or staff office develops the 60-day FRN and follows the
    Mission Area, agency, or staff office process for its completion.




                                      4
(3) Step 3 – Consideration of Public Comments

    The Mission Area, agency, or staff office receives and reviews comments from the
    public and provides responses as needed.

    Note: Response to comments must be added to Question 8 in the Supporting
    Statement A (see the ROCIS Guide, Section 26, Creating a Supporting Statement),
    whether the comments are related to the collection or not. They must also be added
    to the collection in ROCIS under the supplementary comments section.

(4) Step 4 – Outside Agency Consultation

    The Mission Area, agency, or staff office consults with three individuals regarding
    burden estimates, time it takes to complete the forms and surveys, etc. Upon
    completion of the consultations, the feedback is integrated into the Supporting
    Statement, forms, or surveys.

(5) Step 5 – Publish the 30-day FRN as a Final Package Submission

    Once the Mission Area, agency, or staff office has finalized the information
    collection packet the DICO prepares and submits the 30-day notice to the Federal
    Register for comment.

    Note: For this notice, the AICO and the Mission Area, agency, or staff office must
    respond to comments if a response is warranted. These responses may be required
    by their Desk Officer to be added to the collection in ROCIS.

(6) Step 6 – Submission of the ICR

    Upon publication of the 30-day FRN and the uploading of all required documents to
    ROCIS, the DICO submits the ICR to OMB.

(7) Step 7 – OMB Review and Decision

    OMB reviews and engages with the Mission Area, agency, or staff office on any
    questions or comments prior to issuing a decision.

    Note: During or after the 30-day comment period OMB may provide comments to
    the DICO and AICO for adjudication. Once these comments have been
    adjudicated, the ICR will move to Step 8 below in the clearance process.

(8) Step 8 – OMB Final Approval of the ICR

    This is a 3-year approval, unless otherwise directed by OMB within the notice of
    approval (NOA).




                                       5
c.   Privacy Requirements

     Personally Identifiable Information (PII) – If an ICR collects PII, the responsible
     Mission Area, agency, or staff office must consult with their respective privacy office to
     ensure that the correct privacy information is incorporated into the collection and the
     necessary steps are taken to determine the following: whether a privacy impact
     assessment (PIA) is required; whether a privacy threshold analysis (PTA) is required;
     and whether an existing system of records notice (SORN; see the USDA System of
     Records Notices web page) covers the information being collected.

     Note: The Departmental Chief Privacy Officer (CPO) will only be consulted if the
     Mission Area, agency, or staff office does not have a Privacy Officer or if the Mission
     Area, agency, or staff office Privacy Officer seeks additional assistance from the CPO
     regarding PII in the collection.

d.   Estimating Burden

     (1) Calculating Burden Time

         Include the time needed to read instructions, gather records, complete a response,
         and submit the information to the Mission Area, agency, or staff office.

     (2) Financial Cost

         Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must account for the time it takes for the
         respondents to complete the information. To develop respondents’ cost, they must
         obtain current hourly wage information from the United States (U.S.) Bureau of
         Labor Statistics (BLS). This can be found at:

         (a) Occupational Employment and Wages – May 2022; and

         (b) Employer Costs for Employee Compensation – December 2022.

     (3) Burden Conversion

         To request a Portable Document Format (PDF) copy of the burden conversion chart,
         contact the DICO at usda.pra@usda.gov.

     (4) Burden Calculation

         To request a copy of the burden spreadsheet, contact the DICO at
         usda.pra@usda.gov.

e.   Information Collection Budget (ICB) Activities




                                             6
     OMB requires each Federal agency to submit an annual ICB estimating the hours of
     burden to be imposed on the public in the next fiscal year (FY) and verifying
     accomplishments in prior FYs. Each FY, OMB determines the ICB format, reduction
     goals, and other required inputs. It is the responsibility of the AICO and program
     leadership to provide the information to the IRMC Associate Chief Information Officer
     (ACIO) for the ICB.

f.   Forms, Surveys, Questionnaires, and Other Instruments

     (1) Forms

         All Mission Area-, agency-, or staff office-specific forms must be reviewed by the
         respective Mission Area, agency, or staff office forms manager. All Agriculture
         Department (AD) forms must be received and reviewed by the USDA DFMO in the
         Departmental Forms Office within the Office of Budget and Program Analysis.
         This must be done before OIRA submission, and again once OMB approval is
         received prior to finalization and publication of the form. These forms must include
         the OMB control number and expiration date in the upper right corner of the form,
         the OMB public burden statement, and the Privacy Act statement (if PII is being
         collected).

     (2) Standard Forms (SF)

         Standard forms are common forms. In the event that a Mission Area, agency, or
         staff office must create an SF form, they must go through their forms manager and
         the USDA DFMO to obtain approval for use. The Mission Area, agency, or staff
         office must submit an RCF in the ROCIS.

     (3) Optional Forms (OF)

         Optional forms are not always common forms. In the event that a Mission Area,
         agency, or staff office must create an OF form as a common form, they must go
         through their forms manager and the USDA DFMO.

     (4) Surveys and Questionnaires

         Surveys and questionnaires must include the OMB control number and expiration
         date in the upper right corner of the form, the OMB public burden statement, and
         the Privacy Act statement (if PII is being collected).

     (5) Instruments

         The instruments category constitutes any other type of system or web-based
         instrument that the Mission Area, agency, or staff office will use to collect
         information from the public. Instruments must include the OMB control number




                                           7
           and expiration date in the upper right corner of the form, the OMB public burden
           statement, and the Privacy Act statement (if PII is being collected).

       (6) All forms being utilized for USDA ICs must be Plain Language and Section 508
           compliant.


5. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Secretary, USDA, will:

       (1) Comply with the requirements of the PRA and related policies as established by the
           OMB Director; and

       (2) Delegate the responsibility for IC activities to the USDA Chief Information Officer
           (CIO), serving as the Senior Agency Official (SAO) for IC within USDA.

  b.   The USDA CIO will:

       (1) Serve as the delegated SAO for IC activities and reports directly to the Secretary;

       (2) Serve as the focal point for all Departmentwide matters relating to ICRs, privacy,
           paperwork reduction, and burden reduction where applicable;

       (3) Establish an office to manage USDA’s compliance with and implementation of the
           information policies and information resources management responsibilities,
           including the reduction of IC burdens on the public; and

       (4) Review and approve the Departmental ICR management policy, procedures,
           objectives, standards, and guidelines for the establishment and use of ICRs in
           accordance with governing statutes, regulations, policies, and procedures.

  c.   The OCIO ACIO for the IRMC will:

       (1) Designate one or two staff members to serve as the DICO; and

       (2) Submit the ICB to OMB in a timely manner to meet assigned due dates.

  d.   The OCIO-IRMC IMD Director will:

       (1) Review and approve the ICB for submission to the IRMC ACIO;

       (2) Review the Departmental ICR management policy, procedures, objectives,
           standards, and guidelines for the establishment and use of ICRs in accordance with
           governing statutes, regulations, policies, and procedures;




                                               8
     (3) Assist the DICOs with any issues or concerns related to an ICR the DICOs may
         have with any Mission Area, agency, or staff office or OMB.

e.   The DICO within OCIO-IRMC-IMD will:

     (1) Serve as the central point of contact (POC) for communications with OMB
         concerning the ICR;

     (2) Ensure that the ICR contains all required information;

     (3) Serve as the liaisons to OMB on ICR management clearances and activities;

     (4) Develop, establish, and publish Departmental ICR management policy, procedures,
         objectives, standards, and guidelines for the establishment and use of ICRs in
         accordance with governing statutes, regulations, policies, and procedures;

     (5) Ensure that ICRs comply with the legal requirements of the PRA; E-Government
         Act of 2002, P.L. 107-347; and Privacy Act, as applicable, to reduce, minimize, and
         control burden; protect sensitive information; and maximize practical use and
         public benefit;

     (6) Consolidate responses from the AICOs for the ICB and submit it to IMD Director
         for review and approval before submission to the IRMC ACIO;

     (7) Provide monthly reports to AICOs and the USDA DFMO showing ICRs expiring
         within the next 12 months;

     (8) Review each ICR to ensure consistency with USDA and OMB policy,
         appropriateness of the statistical designs for proposed ICs, and practical utility of
         the information being collected, as well as:

         (a) Ensure that an ICR is necessary; and

         (b) Encourage consolidation of collections and forms when practicable;

     (9) Review and submit new ICRs in ROCIS to OMB, and extensions and revisions of
         currently approved ICRs before their expiration dates;

     (10) Prepare and forward a notice with a 30-calendar-day comment period to the Federal
          Register of all new and expiring ICRs. Upon publication of the notice, submit the
          ICR to OMB in ROCIS for review and approval;

     (11) Respond to inquiries from OMB, maintain records of transmittals and clearances,
          and notify Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices of OMB action;




                                              9
     (12) Ensure that each ICR is inventoried, displays an OMB control number, and
          discloses all necessary information as described in 44 United States Code (U.S.C.) §
          3506, Federal Agency Responsibilities;

     (13) Provide training and technical assistance to Mission Area, agency, and staff office
          personnel in the development and clearance of ICR submissions; and

     (14) Notify the Mission Area, agency, and staff office clearance contacts of the
          requirements and current procedures to prepare and submit its ICB information to
          the IRMC ACIO.

f.   Mission Area Under Secretaries, and Agency and Staff Office Heads will:

     (1) Establish and implement an effective Mission Area, agency, or staff office ICR
         management program within their respective organizations to meet the requirements
         of this DM;

     (2) Designate an AICO who will serve as a single POC within their Mission Area,
         agency, or staff office on ICR matters. This individual interacts with program
         managers to ensure that ICRs are submitted in the time frames required to prevent
         ICR violations or require emergency or extension approvals from OMB. The
         Mission Area, agency, or staff office will report any changes in this designation
         immediately to the DICOs within OCIO, including the name, title, email address,
         and telephone number of the designee;

     (3) Ensure that Mission Area, agency, and staff office program managers understand
         and comply with all laws including the PRA, E-Government Act, and Privacy Act as
         it relates to information collected from the public, including individuals and
         entities;

     (4) Ensure that new and existing ICRs meet the time frames outlined in this DM; and

     (5) Ensure that ICR needs within their Mission Area, agency, or staff office are
         analyzed, including a periodic review of all regulations that result in paperwork
         burden, to ensure that an ICR is necessary.

g.   Mission Area, agency, and staff office AICO Supervisors will request, through the
     DICO, the ROCIS training course to obtain login privileges to access ROCIS.

h.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office AICOs will:

     (1) Coordinate ICR management activities with the DICO;

     (2) Ensure that each ICR meets the requirements of DR 3140-001, this DM, and 5 Code
         of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 1320, Controlling Paperwork Burdens on the
         Public;



                                            10
(3) Assist program managers or specialists by providing training, technical assistance,
    and guidance in preparing ICRs to keep public burden to a minimum;

(4) Monitor Mission Area, agency, or staff office ICR activities to ensure compliance
    with applicable statutes, regulations, policies, procedures, and standards on all
    ICRs:

    (a) Review and clear the PRA section in regulatory actions for any paperwork
        burden;

    (b) Review and monitor Mission Area, agency, or staff office ICRs to ensure that
        the 60-day FRN is published 6 months prior to the expiration date of an
        existing ICR, or the use date of a new ICR; and

    (c) Begin inputting the ICR data into ROCIS and notify the DICO 4 months prior
        to the ICR expiration date of an existing ICR, or the use date of a new ICR.

(5) Review the monthly reports generated by the DICO and OMB in ROCIS to
    coordinate the preparation of renewal ICRs;

(6) Identify and resolve PRA violations;

(7) Ensure that an up-to-date inventory is maintained for all Mission Area, agency, or
    staff office ICRs, submissions, approvals, burden hours, total responses, and
    supporting materials;

(8) Ensure that Mission Area, agency, or staff office program managers are in
    compliance with the PRA and verify their adherence to the Privacy Act and E-
    Government Act;

(9) Coordinate with the USDA DFMO to ensure that AD, SF, and OF compliance
    requirements are met, or with the Mission Area, agency, and staff office forms
    managers and webmasters for USDA component forms to ensure that all public use
    forms, surveys, or non-forms (collections of standardized information on the
    internet) contain instructions, the OMB-approved control number, the burden
    disclosure statement, and the expiration date, unless otherwise exempted. This
    information should be on the first page or as close to the front as possible, when
    posted on the internet or used with a web-based system;

(10) Consult with the Mission Area, agency, or staff office records management officer
     about ICRs to ensure that records have an authorized disposition per the applicable
     records retention schedule as indicated by the National Archives and Records
     Administration (NARA) General Records Schedule (GRS), other posted USDA
     Records Schedules, and DR 3080-001, Records Management; and




                                       11
     (11) As necessary, and at the request of the DICO, the Mission Area, agency, or staff
          office AICO should provide the NASS AICO with a copy of any ICR containing
          statistical methodology for review and comments before submitting to the DICO.

i.   The NASS Director will delegate to the NASS AICO to submit the Mission Area,
     agency, or staff office’s ICR Supporting Statement B to the assigned statistical reviewer
     for review and comments.

j.   Mission Area, agency, and staff office Records Management Officers will, regarding
     ICRs, ensure that records have an authorized disposition per the applicable records
     retention schedule as indicated by the NARA GRS, other posted USDA Records
     Schedules, and DR 3080-001.

k.   Webmasters will:

     (1) Ensure that all public use forms, surveys, or non-forms (collections of standardized
         information on the internet) contain instructions, the OMB approved control
         number, the burden disclosure statement, and the expiration date, unless otherwise
         exempted; and

     (2) Ensure that this information is on the first page or as close to the front as possible,
         when posted on the internet or used with a web-based system.

l.   Program Managers will:

     (1) Coordinate ICR activities with AICOs when developing a new or renewing an
         existing ICR;

     (2) Ensure that the ICR is necessary for the proper performance of the Mission Area,
         agency, or staff office’s function and has practical use;

     (3) Prepare and initiate publication of the 60-day FRN 6 to 8 months prior to the
         expiration date of an existing ICR or the use date of a new ICR;

     (4) Submit the ICR package to the AICO;

     (5) Comply with the Privacy Act, E-Government Act, and PRA;

     (6) Ensure that all employees, and those who act on behalf of USDA (including
         contractors), do not disclose PII. For more information regarding the handling of
         PII, please refer to DR 3515-002, Privacy Policy and Compliance for Personally
         Identifiable Information (PII);

     (7) Institute procedures to protect the information’s confidentiality as required by law
         when respondents submit proprietary or other confidential information;




                                             12
     (8) Coordinate ICRs with the USDA DFMO per DM 3020-001, Departmental Forms
         Manual, or with the Mission Area, agency, and staff office forms managers and
         webmasters for USDA component forms, and USDA CIO for those ICRs that will
         be posted on the internet;

     (9) Prepare an ICR for any collection of information contained in a proposed rule; and

     (10) Notify AICO of any upcoming proposed rules containing a collection of
          information.

m. The USDA DFMO will:

     (1) Ensure that AD-687, Forms Action Request and Notice, accompanies the
         Departmental form submission and contains the appropriate approvals;

     (2) Verify that Section 508 accessibility requirements are met; however, final Section
         508 edits and corrections will remain the responsibility of the sponsoring Mission
         Area, agency, or staff office’s Section 508 staff;

     (3) Confirm that form submissions meet grammar, spelling, and Plain Language
         requirements; however, final Plain Language edits and corrections will remain the
         responsibility of the sponsoring Mission Area, agency, or staff office forms staff;

     (4) Validate that form numbers, OMB control numbers, revision information,
         publication dates, and expiration dates are accurate and meet any Departmental
         formatting requirements;

     (5) Finalize and publish forms to the Departmental forms website (Electronic Forms)
         once they are approved by OMB; and

     (6) Contact the DICO to notify their AICOs about the form’s availability.

n.   The Departmental CPO will ensure that the correct privacy information is incorporated
     into the collection and the necessary steps are taken to determine the following: whether
     a PIA is required, whether a PTA is required, and whether an existing SORN covers the
     information being collected.

o.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Privacy Officers will ensure that privacy
     requirements are met as detailed in Section 4c, Privacy Requirements.

p.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Forms Managers will ensure that the
     specifications of Sections 4f, 5h(8), and 5h(9) are followed.

q.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office staff and Section 508 Compliance Officers will
     ensure that any forms or documents associated with the ICR are Plain Language and
     Section 508 compliant.



                                            13
  r.   The General Counsel will ensure that the specifications of Section 5h(4)(a) are followed
       and review 60-day FRNs for the Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices that require
       it.


6. INQUIRIES

  Direct all questions concerning this DM to the OCIO IRMC IMD via email to
  usda.pra@usda.gov.


                                           -END-




                                             14
                            APPENDIX A

                ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ACIO    Associate Chief Information Officer
AD      Agriculture Department (Departmental form number prefix)
AICO    Agency Information Collection Officer
BLS     Bureau of Labor Statistics (Department of Labor component)
CFR     Code of Federal Regulations
CIO     Chief Information Officer
CPO     Chief Privacy Officer
CUI     Controlled Unclassified Information
DFMO    Departmental Forms Management Officer
DICO    Departmental Information Clearance Officer
DG      Departmental Guidebook
DM      Departmental Manual
DR      Departmental Regulation
EEOC    Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
E-Gov   Electronic Government
EIT     Electronic and Information Technology
E.O.    Executive Order
FRN     Federal Register Notice
FY      Fiscal Year
GAO     Government Accountability Office
GRS     General Records Schedule
IC      Information Collection
ICB     Information Collection Budget
ICR     Information Collection Request
IMD     Information Management Division (OCIO-IRMC component)
IRMC    Information Resource Management Center (OCIO component)
NARA    National Archives and Records Administration
NASS    National Agricultural Statistics Service
NOA     Notice of Approval
OASCR   Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
OCIO    Office of the Chief Information Officer
OF      Optional Form
OIRA    Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs
OMB     Office of Management and Budget
PDF     Portable Document Format
PIA     Privacy Impact Assessment
PII     Personally Identifiable Information
P.L.    Public Law
POC     Point of Contact
PRA     Paperwork Reduction Act
PTA     Privacy Threshold Analysis



                                 A-1
RCF      Request for Common Forms
ROCIS    Regulatory Information Service Center and Office of Information and
         Regulatory Affairs Consolidated Information System
SAO      Senior Agency Official
SF       Standard Form
SORN     System of Records Notice
U.S.     United States
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                                   A-2
                                         APPENDIX B

                                         DEFINITIONS


Burden. The total time, effort, or financial resources expended by persons to generate, maintain,
or provide information to, or for, a Federal agency, including:

   a.   Reviewing instructions;

   b.   Acquiring, installing, and using technology and systems;

   c.   Adjusting the existing ways to comply with any previously applicable instructions and
        requirements;

   d.   Searching data sources;

   e.   Completing and reviewing the collection of information; and

   f.   Transmitting or otherwise disclosing the information.

   (Source: 44 U.S.C. § 3502, Definitions)

Common Form. A “common form” is an information collection that can be used by two or more
[Federal] agencies, or Governmentwide, for the same purpose. The new [ROCIS] Common
Forms Module allows a “host” agency to obtain Office of Management and Budget approval of
an information collection for use by one or more “using” agencies. After OMB grants approval,
any prospective using agency that seeks to collect identical information for the same purpose can
obtain approval to use the “common form” by providing its agency-specific information to OMB
(e.g., burden estimates and number of respondents). (Source: The White House, Frequently
Asked Questions Related to Common Forms)

Data. Information in a specific representation, usually as a sequence of symbols that have
meaning.

Electronic Government (E-Gov). The use by the Government of internet-based applications and
other digital technologies, combined with processes that implement these technologies to:

   a.   Enhance the access to, and delivery of, Government information and services to the
        public, other agencies, and other Government entities; and

   b.   Leverage investments in information technology to eliminate unnecessary duplication
        and improve effectiveness, efficiency, and service quality.




                                              B-1
This includes addressing the people and process changes associated with transformed business
delivery. (Source: USDA, Departmental Guidebook (DG) 0100-002, USDA Departmental
Directives Definitions Glossary)

Information. Any communication or representation of knowledge such as facts, data, or opinions
in any medium or form, including textual, numerical, graphic, cartographic, narrative, or
audiovisual. An instance of an information type.

Information Collection Budget (ICB). OMB’s annual report to Congress, providing a detailed
accounting of the ICR activities of the Federal Government in a given FY.

Information Collection Request (ICR). Obtaining, causing to be obtained, soliciting, or requiring
the disclosure to third parties or the public of facts or opinions regardless of the form or format.
Typical formats include written report forms, application forms, schedules, questionnaires,
reporting or recordkeeping requirements, or similar methods calling for the collection of
information. The following are methods used to collect information under an ICR:

   a.   Mail (forms);

   b.   Personal or telephone interviews or group interviews (such as focus group sessions);

   c.   Communication via a web-based application;

   d.   Automated, electronic, mechanical, or other technological collection techniques (such as
        electronic transmissions from airplanes or boats, to ground or satellite receiving
        stations); and

   e.   Any other approach through which the respondent or potential respondent can provide
        the response, recordkeeping, or disclosure requested.

   (Source: 44 U.S.C. § 3502).

Practical Utility. The ability of an agency to use information, particularly the capability to
process such information in a timely and useful fashion. (Source: 44 U.S.C. § 3502)

Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA). A tool for identifying and assessing privacy risks throughout
the development life cycle of a program or system. A PIA states what personally identifiable
information (PII) is collected and explains how that information is maintained, how it will be
protected, and how it will be shared.

Personally Identifiable Information (PII). Any information about an individual maintained by an
agency, including:

   a.   Any information that can be used to distinguish or trace an individual’s identity, such as
        name, social security number, date and place of birth, mother’s maiden name, or
        biometric records; and



                                                B-2
   b.   Any other information that is linked or linkable to an individual, such as medical,
        educational, financial, and employment information.

   (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

Plain Language or Plain Writing. The term “plain writing” means writing that is clear, concise,
well-organized, and follows other best practices appropriate to the subject or field and intended
audience. Covered documents include any document that:

   a.   Is necessary for obtaining any Federal Government benefit or service or filing taxes;

   b.   Provides information about any Federal Government benefit or service;

   c.   Explains to the public how to comply with a requirement the Federal Government
        administers or enforces; and

   d.   Includes (whether in paper or electronic form) a letter, publication, form, notice, or
        instruction.

   (Source: Plain Writing Act of 2010, P.L. 111-274)

Recordkeeping Requirement. A requirement imposed by or for an agency on persons to
maintain specified records, including a requirement to:

   a.   Retain such records;

   b.   Notify third parties, the Federal Government, or the public of the existence of such
        records;

   c.   Disclose such records to third parties, the Federal Government, or the public; or

   d.   Report to third parties, the Federal Government, or the public regarding such records.

   (Source: 44 U.S.C. § 3502)

Regulatory Information Service Center and Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs
Consolidated Information System (ROCIS). The electronic database system used to input the
ICR documentation and submissions to OMB.

Section 508. Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, requires that Federal
agencies’ electronic and information technology (EIT) be accessible to people with disabilities,
including employees and members of the public. (Source: 29 U.S.C. § 794d, Electronic and
Information Technology)




                                               B-3
                                       APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


5 CFR Part 1320, Controlling Paperwork Burdens on the Public

29 CFR Part 1614, Federal Sector Equal Employment Opportunity

44 U.S.C. § 3502, Definitions

44 U.S.C. § 3506, Federal Agency Responsibilities

BLS, Occupational Employment and Wages – May 2022, April 25, 2023

BLS, Employer Costs for Employee Compensation – December 2022, March 17, 2023

Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, P.L. 104-106, February 10, 1996

Data Quality Act, P.L. 106-554, § 515, December 21, 2000

E-Government Act of 2002, P.L. 107-347, December 17, 2002

Executive Order (E.O.) 12866, Regulatory Planning and Review, September 30, 1993

E.O. 13422, Further Amendment to Executive Order 12866 on Regulatory Planning and Review,
January 18, 2007

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014, P.L. 113-283, December 18, 2014

Freedom to E-File Act, P.L. 106-222, June 20, 2000

General Services Administration, Section508.gov website

Government Accountability Office (GAO), GAO-08-536, Privacy: Alternatives Exist for
Enhancing Protection of Personally Identifiable Information, May 19, 2008

National Archives, Federal Register

NARA, GRS

OMB, Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource, revised, July 28, 2016

OMB, Memorandum M-03-22, OMB Guidance for Implementing the Privacy Provisions of the
E-Government Act of 2002, September 26, 2003




                                             C-1
OMB, Office of Management and Budget Information Quality Guidelines, October 1, 2002

OMB, Statistical Policy Directive No. 15, Flexibilities and Best Practices for Implementing the
Office of Management and Budget’s 1997 Standards for Maintaining, Collecting, And
Presenting Federal Data on Race and Ethnicity, July 2022

Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, P.L. 104-13, May 22, 1995

Plainlanguage.gov, Federal Plain Language Guidelines (web page)

Plainlanguage.gov, Federal Plain Language Guidelines (PDF), Revision 1, May 2011

Plainlanguage.gov, Home website

Plain Writing Act of 2010, P.L. 111-274, October 13, 2010

Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. § 552a, Records Maintained on Individuals, as amended

ROCIS.gov, ROCIS How to Guide for Agency Users of the Information Collection Request (ICR)
Module, November 4, 2022

ROCIS.gov, User Information and How to Guides website

Section 508, Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. § 794d, Electronic and Information
Technology

USDA, AD-687, Forms Action Request and Notice, March 1991

USDA, Departmental Forms website, Electronic Forms

USDA, DG 0100-002, USDA Departmental Directives Definitions Glossary, September 26,
2018

USDA, DM 3020-001, Departmental Forms Manual, September 16, 1991

USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System, January 4, 2018

USDA, DR 1270-001, U.S. Department of Agriculture Customer Experience Policy, June 17,
2022

USDA, DR 1512-001, Regulatory Development and Review, February 4, 2022

USDA, DR 3080-001, Records Management, August 16, 2016

USDA, DR 3410-001, Information Collection Request Activities: Collection of Information from
the Public, January 26, 2022



                                              C-2
USDA, DR 3440-003, Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) Program, September 13, 2021

USDA, DR 3445-001, Media Protection, October 30, 2019

USDA, DR 3515-002, Privacy Policy and Compliance for Personally Identifiable Information
(PII), October 30, 2020

USDA, Records Management Schedule

USDA, DR 4030-001, Section 508 Program, September 8, 2014

USDA, OCIO, Information Quality Activities

USDA, System of Records Notices web page

White House, Frequently Asked Questions Related to Common Forms




                                             C-3
                                          APPENDIX D

                               PUBLIC BURDEN STATEMENT


(This statement must go on every form, survey, or instrument that the agency will require the
public to complete. It should go at the top or bottom of the document, per the agency’s
discretion.)

A Federal agency may not conduct or sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to, nor
shall a person be subject to a penalty for failure to comply with an information collection subject
to the requirements of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 unless the information collection
has a currently valid Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Control Number. The approved
OMB Control Number for this information collection is 05XX-XXX. Without this approval, we
could not conduct this (survey or information collection). Public reporting for this information
collection is estimated to be approximately XX (minutes or hours) per response, including the
time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the
data needed, and completing and reviewing the information collection. All responses to this
information collection are (voluntary or mandatory or required) to obtain benefits. Send
comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this information collection,
including suggestions for reducing this burden, to the BUREAU Name at: address, Attn: Title
or Point of Contact Name, and email if desired.




                                               D-1
                                          APPENDIX E

                        PRIVACY ACT STATEMENT (5 U.S.C. § 552a)


(This statement must go on every form, survey, or instrument that the agency will require the
public to complete. It should go at the top or bottom of the document, per the agency’s
discretion.)

Purpose: The Privacy Act of 1974 requires that the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil
Rights (OASCR) provide the following statements to each individual from whom it requests
information.

Authority: Collection of this information is authorized by the regulations of the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), 29 CFR § 1614. The submission of this
information is voluntary, but the failure to do so may hamper the investigation of a claim and
could also lead to dismissal of the complaint.

Routine Uses: The information collected will be used to determine whether your complaint is
acceptable for investigation and in connection with any subsequent investigation and processing
of your complaint.

Disclosure: A copy of this complaint will be provided to the Civil Rights office of the agency
against whom it is filed. This form may be shown to any individual who may be required by
regulations, policies or procedures of the EEOC or OASCR to provide information in connection
with this complaint. Other disclosures may be: (a) to respond to a request from a Member of
Congress regarding the status of the complaint or appeal; (b) to respond to a court subpoena or
refer to a district court in connection with a civil suit; (c) to disclose information to authorized
officials or personnel to adjudicate a complaint or appeal; or (d) to disclose information to
another Federal agency or to a court or third party in litigation when the Government is party to a
suit before court.




                                                E-1
