                              U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                    WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                               NUMBER:
  DEPARTMENTAL MANUAL                                          DM 3505-005
  SUBJECT: Cybersecurity Incident Management                   DATE:
  Procedures                                                   November 30, 2018
  OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer,                EXPIRATION DATE:
  Information Security Center                                  November 30, 2023



Section                                                                                      Page

1. Purpose                                                                                         1
2. Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                              2
3. Background                                                                                      3
4. Scope                                                                                           3
5. Procedures                                                                                      4
6. Departmental Incident Management Procedures                                                     4
7. Agency and Staff Office Incident Management Procedures                                         15
8. Notification to Congress about Incidents Procedures                                            30
9. Annual and Quarterly Incident Reporting Procedures                                             31
10. Incident Management Preparation Procedures                                                    32
11. Roles and Responsibilities                                                                    39
12. Inquiries                                                                                     46

Appendix A Authorities and References                                                            A-1
Appendix B Definitions                                                                           B-1
Appendix C Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                            C-1


1. PURPOSE

   a.     This Departmental Manual (DM) provides guidance for cybersecurity incident
          management and reporting and describes essential preparations for effective incident
          management.

   b.     This DM supports compliance by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)
          with Federal laws, regulations, and guidance on cybersecurity incident management.

   c.     This DM serves as the foundation for Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to
          develop and implement cybersecurity incident management procedures and plans that
          comply with Federal and Departmental requirements.

   d.     Major objectives of the cybersecurity incident management procedures in this manual
          are to:
       (1) Mitigate risks from incidents before substantial harm occurs;

       (2) Ensure coordination of and good communication about incident management
           activities within USDA and with external stakeholders; and

       (3) Provide timely notification and reporting to appropriate entities.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This manual is effective immediately and remains in effect until it is superseded or
       expired.

  b.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their procedures with this
       manual within 6 months of the publication date.

  c.   The DM aligns with the Department’s cybersecurity incident management policy,
       Departmental Regulation (DR) 3505-005, Cybersecurity Incident Management.

  d.   Terminology in this DM will be used and interpreted as follows:

       (1) The term “misuse” broadly refers to improper usage of information or information
           resources in violation of rules, regulations, or policies;

       (2) The term “operational security” encompasses techniques and processes that protect
           less valuable information from disclosure to an adversary to protect more valuable
           information. For example, disclosing only to those with a need to know that an
           incident has occurred so that an investigation to identify the intruder, and the
           information sought by the intruder can be investigated. Operational security
           techniques focus on preventing information from being inadvertently disclosed to
           an adversary. The objective of operational security techniques and processes
           prevent an adversary, for example, of knowing where information is located, how it
           is protected, or learning about mitigation plans;

       (3) The terms “potential,” “suspected,” and “imminent” with respect to threats and
           incidents are distinct. “Potential” refers to a currently unrealized ability and is
           nearly synonymous with “possible” (e.g., a potential threat). “Suspected” implies a
           slight indication that something might be true or there is a reasonable basis for
           believing so; in other words, incidents may be suspected, as opposed to being
           confirmed (positively identified) or actual. “Imminent,” as explained by National
           Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Special Publication (SP) 800-61
           Revision 2, Computer Security Incident Handling Guide, refers to a situation in
           which there is a factual basis for believing that a specific event is about to occur;
           attacks from a zero-day exploit of a vulnerability can be imminent;

       (4) The terms “response” and “incident response” may be broad or narrow in meaning.
           The broad meaning encompasses multiple incident management activities,
           including analysis, notification, mitigation or application of countermeasures,

                                                 2
           containment, eradication, and recovery. The narrow meaning is any one of these
           activities. NIST uses the terms “incident response” and “incident handling” as
           synonyms; and

       (5) The term “US-CERT” is used in this manual as a replacement for “the Federal
           information security incident center” identified in FISMA.


3. BACKGROUND

  USDA experiences suspected and actual cybersecurity incidents daily, necessitating a
  framework for managing incidents supported by incident management plans, procedures,
  resources, testing, and training. This DM draws on Federal requirements for incident
  management found in Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130,
  Responsibilities for Protecting Federal Information Resources, July 28, 2016; FISMA; NIST
  SP 800-53 Revision 4, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and
  Organizations; NIST SP 800-61 Revision 2; and other Federal regulations.


4. SCOPE

  a.   This DM applies to:

       (1) All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, employees, appointees,
           contractors, subcontractors, and others who work for, or on behalf of, USDA;

       (2) All Federal information generated, collected, provided, transmitted, stored,
           maintained, or accessed by, or on behalf of, USDA;

       (3) Information systems or services (including cloud-based services) used or operated
           by USDA, a USDA contractor, or other organization on behalf of or funded by
           USDA, and interconnections between or among systems or services;

       (4) Cyber-based information, including electronic data, voice, and video data; and

       (5) All incidents affecting personally identifiable information (PII), which may or may
           not be cyber-related. This manual encompasses reporting both cyber-related and
           non-cyber breaches.

           (a) All breaches that must be reported within USDA to the Agriculture Security
               Operations Division (ASOD) cybersecurity incident response team (CSIRT)
               and the USDA Privacy Office;

           (b) All cyber-related breaches that are reportable to the United States Computer
               Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT); and

           (c) All major breaches that are reportable to Congress.



                                                3
  b.   Nothing in this DM will alter the requirements for the protection of information
       associated with national security systems (NSS) such as those in the Federal
       Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), policies, directives,
       instructions, and standards issued by the Committee on National Security Systems
       (CNSS), or the intelligence community.


5. PROCEDURES

  The procedures in this DM expand upon DR 3505-005, which addresses:

  a.   Appropriately managing suspected and actual incidents affecting USDA information
       resources, including specialized incident types such as breaches, criminal activity, or
       misuse, and classified national security information (CNSI) spillage;

  b.   Safeguarding sensitive incident information;

  c.   Detecting potential compromises and exploits;

  d.   Timely reporting of incidents internally to the ASOD CSIRT, externally to US-CERT,
       and notifying Congress of major incidents;

  e.   Maintaining well-tested incident management plans and procedures and providing
       appropriate resources for incident management; and

  f.   Providing awareness and training for incident management personnel and general users.


6. DEPARTMENTAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES

  This Section describes Department-level incident management activities that should be
  leveraged to produce organization-specific incident management procedures.

  The ASOD CSIRT operates as USDA’s central cybersecurity incident management group,
  coordinating incident management activities, sharing information with both internal USDA
  offices and external entities, and providing assistance to agencies and staff offices when
  requested. For certain types of incidents, the USDA Privacy Office, Core Incident Response
  Group (CIRG), OIG, Office of Homeland Security (OHS) Personnel and Document Security
  Division (PDSD), OHS Insider Threat Program, and other offices have incident management
  responsibilities.

  Notification and reporting to Congress and OMB are covered in Sections 8 and 9.

  a.   Incident Command.

       (1) The ASOD CSIRT coordinates incident management activities with other USDA
           offices. It is staffed 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.



                                                 4
     (2) The ASOD CSIRT is USDA’s designated operational liaison with US-CERT. The
         ASOD Director designates a primary and secondary point of contact in the ASOD
         CSIRT for all interactions with US-CERT.

     (3) The ASOD Director has the authority to appoint an incident commander for a major
         incident (which may be declared by USDA, Department of Homeland Security
         (DHS), or OMB) or when warranted by other circumstances. The incident
         commander is then responsible for directing and managing the incident.

     (4) The ASOD Director or the designated incident commander, during complex or
         crisis-level incidents (that is, those that require non-routine response operations),
         sets priorities based on factors such as functional impact, information impact,
         recoverability, and resource availability and communicates those priorities and
         requirements for additional assistance or resources to the USDA Chief Information
         Security Officer (CISO) or US-CERT.

b.   Coordination and Assistance.

     (1) The ASOD CSIRT coordinates with and provides, upon request, technical and non-
         technical assistance to agencies and staff offices when there are actual or suspected
         cybersecurity incidents.

     (2) The ASOD Director or authorized ASOD CSIRT personnel may request, through
         appropriate management channels, agency and staff office incident management
         personnel to provide technical or investigation assistance to other agencies or staff
         offices.

c.   Recordkeeping and Metrics. The ASOD CSIRT must produce metrics about incidents
     for reporting to the President’s Management Council, OMB, or other Federal
     organizations such as:

     (1) Whether an incident or an attack successfully resulted in unauthorized access to,
         exfiltration of, manipulation of, harm to, or impaired the integrity, confidentiality,
         or availability of an information system or information that is stored on, processed
         by, or transiting an information system; and

     (2) Any public and internal notifications about an incident and the dates of those
         notifications.

d.   Detection and Analysis.

     (1) The ASOD CSIRT deploys automated tools such as intrusion detection systems and
         network analysis software to support detection and analysis and runs them on a
         regular schedule. The tools are configured to receive updates to indicators from
         their vendors.

     (2) When US-CERT issues an alert about a suspected or actual compromise with the
         potential to affect U.S. Government systems and provides indicators of compromise

                                               5
         (IOC), the ASOD CSIRT must start IOC scans using the provided indicators within
         24 hours. If the ASOD CSIRT confirms a compromise has occurred, this
         information must be reported back to US-CERT.

     (3) The ASOD CSIRT also participates in DHS’s EINSTEIN program to detect
         security incidents and collect incident information for analysis.

e.   Reporting Cyber-Related Incidents to US-CERT.

     (1) The ASOD CSIRT reports only cyber-related incidents to US-CERT. Non-cyber
         incidents (such as exposure of printed documents containing PII) are not reported to
         US-CERT.

     (2) The ASOD CSIRT must report the following to US-CERT within 1 hour:

         (a) Suspected or actual exposure or compromise of cyber-based PII;

         (b) Suspected or actual cyber incidents related to criminal activity or misuse;

         (c) Suspected or actual incidents of CNSI spillage and compromise of classified
             systems; and

         (d) All confirmed incidents of compromise to the confidentiality, integrity, or
             availability of USDA information, information systems, or information
             services.

     (3) Reporting to US-CERT within 1 hour is mandatory and must not be delayed to
         provide or gather other details about the incident such as root cause, threat vector,
         or mitigation actions taken.

     (4) The ASOD CSIRT must report each incident separately because US-CERT does
         not accept reports of multiple incidents in a single submission. The ASOD CSIRT
         emails the reports to US-CERT from its incident ticketing system.

     (5) Required information for reporting to US-CERT can be found in the DHS, US-
         CERT Federal Incident Notification Guidelines. The ASOD CSIRT ensures that
         each reported incident is categorized, prioritized, and contains all other required
         information prior to sending it to US-CERT. As additional information is
         discovered and gathered about an incident, the ASOD CSIRT provides updates to
         US-CERT.

     (6) The ASOD Director or the incident commander may, based on the severity of an
         incident, activate the standing Federal Network Authorization, authorizing US-
         CERT to access relevant USDA networks and, if necessary, to provide on-site
         technical assistance.




                                               6
f.   General Incident Handling.

     See the following Sections for specific incident handling guidance:

         Section 6g for specific guidance about breaches;

         Section 6h for OIG related incidents; and

         Section 6i for CNSI spillage.

     (1) For incidents involving spillage of CNSI, PII, or controlled unclassified information
         (CUI), all personnel must minimize damage to or further exposure of the
         information. The ASOD CSIRT reminds personnel of the following protective
         actions when suspected or actual incidents involving these types of sensitive
         information are reported to them. Specifically, personnel reporting spillage of
         CNSI, PII, or CUI must:

         (a) Not delete or forward any spilled information in any format, whether it is an
             email, attachment, hyperlink attachment, or hardcopy document; and

         (b) Take custody of the information to safeguard it from further unauthorized
             access until it can be secured by the proper authority.

     (2) The ASOD CSIRT ensures that the correct forms are used and properly completed
         for reporting incident details: Agriculture Department (AD)-3043, ASOC Incident
         Report, or AD-3038, Cyber Security Incident Report Personally Identifiable
         Information (PII) Incident.

     (3) The ASOD CSIRT ensures that actions are immediately performed to mitigate
         incidents or threats that have or potentially will have:

         (a) High functional impacts to all critical services and system users; or

         (b) Severe impacts to the integrity of USDA information or to information deemed
             to be classified, privacy-related, or proprietary.

     (4) The ASOD CSIRT ensures that compromised devices are disconnected from the
         USDA network, appropriately analyzed, and, if appropriate, restored to service in a
         secure configuration only after malware or other types of compromise are
         eradicated.

     (5) ASOD CSIRT personnel, at the direction of the ASOD Director or the designated
         incident commander, collaborate and coordinate on a need-to-know basis with
         external entities such as Internet Service Providers (ISP), other incident response
         groups, affected external parties, or vendors of information technology (IT)
         products and services, about investigation and mitigation of incidents.




                                              7
     (6) ASOD CSIRT personnel, with the concurrence of the USDA CISO, the ASOD
         Director, or the designated incident commander, notify external organizations
         affected by an actual or suspected incident (exploit or threat) originating from
         USDA.

     (7) External Notifications about Incidents. Different agencies, offices, and the CIRG
         have different responsibilities for issuing external notifications about incidents.
         The responsibility varies depending on the type of incident and the audience for the
         notification. Examples of external communications include informing the public in
         general; notifying individuals affected by a breach; or alerting external parties
         affected by an actual or suspected incident originating from USDA. This Section
         covers general information about external notifications; subsequent Sections
         describe the responsibilities for special types of incidents.

         (a) When external notifications are to be issued, the responsible agency or office
             must inform or consult with the Director of the Office of Communications
             (OC).

         (b) The USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO) and the Director of OC are jointly
             responsible for notification about major incidents at USDA that are issued to
             general public, the media, and external entities not directly affected by the
             incident.

     (8) Incident Closure Activities.

         (a) The ASOD CSIRT:

              1    Monitors and tracks agency and staff office mitigation efforts;

              2    Validates completion of the mitigation efforts;

              3    Verifies that affected systems and devices are no longer a threat to the
                   USDA network; and

              4    Validates that all required reporting information has been provided.

         (b) The ASOD Director or the designated incident commander provides another
             level of oversight, ensuring that all incident handling activities are validated as
             complete, including additional reporting to US-CERT.

         (c) Reopening Incidents. Incidents may be reopened at the request of ASOD
             CSIRT personnel, the ASOD Director, the Senior Agency Official for Privacy
             (SAOP), the USDA Chief Privacy Officer (CPO), the Inspector General, or the
             Chief of OHS PDSD.

g.   Handling Breaches.



                                               8
(1) The ASOD CSIRT must provide notifications of suspected or actual exposure or
    compromise of PII to the following within 1 hour:

    (a) For cyber-related breaches, notify the US-CERT, the USDA Privacy Office,
        the agency or staff office CSIRT, and the OIG; and

    (b) For non-cyber breaches (e.g., hardcopy only), notify the USDA Privacy Office,
        the agency or staff office CSIRT, and the OIG.

(2) All incident management personnel receive direction and guidance regarding
    breaches, whether or not they are cyber-related, from:

    (a) The USDA CPO when the incidents are low impact;

    (b) The SAOP when the breaches are moderate and high impact; or

    (c) The CIRG when convened.

(3) The ASOD CSIRT provides email notification of breaches to the USDA CPO and
    others, as directed by the CPO. Files or emails containing PII should not be
    emailed or forwarded.

(4) Details about breaches are documented on form AD-3038; the form has Sections to
    report unauthorized access and equipment containing PII that is lost or stolen
    (including seizure by a foreign government).

(5) Care must be taken to ensure that PII related to actual or suspected incidents is
    handled properly and its use and disclosure is minimized to the greatest extent
    possible.

(6) Procedures in the USDA Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Core Incident
    Response Group (CIRG) PII Breach Notification & Incident Response Plan (IRP)
    must be followed.

(7) Actions directed by the CIRG or the USDA Privacy Office must be completed in
    the prescribed timeframe to meet notification guidance prescribed in OMB M-17-
    12, Preparing for and Responding to a Breach of Personally Identifiable
    Information.

(8) Breach Notifications.

    (a) The SAOP will be responsible for advising the Secretary of Agriculture
        whether and when to notify individuals potentially affected by a breach, in
        coordination with the:

         1    CIRG when convened; or

         2    CPO, when the CIRG is not convened.


                                          9
         (b) The Secretary of Agriculture will make a final decision regarding whether to
             provide notification to individuals affected by a breach.

         (c) The CIRG, when convened, is responsible for requiring notifications to be
             developed, and reviewing and approving the content of notifications to all
             individuals impacted by exposure of their PII by USDA employees or
             contractors.

         (d) When the CIRG has not been convened, OC is responsible for breach
             notifications. OC may delegate this responsibility to agency and staff office
             communication or public affairs offices.

         (e) Office of the General Counsel (OGC) must review and approve any
             notifications to individuals impacted by a breach in which the individuals are
             or were litigants.

         (f) Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM), in coordination with OC,
             is responsible for breach notifications to current and former USDA employees,
             retirees, and retirees’ survivors or designated dependents (e.g., spouses and
             minor or adult children).

         (g) Other types of breach notifications for which OC is responsible include:

             1    Notifications to other impacted individuals, such as customers, grant
                  recipients, or contractors; and

             2    Notifications to the general public, the media, and external entities not
                  directly affected by the incident.

     (9) Closure of Breaches.

         (a) The SAOP must certify by email that a moderate or high impact breach is
             closed.

         (b) The USDA CPO must approve closure of all other breaches.

h.   Handling OIG-Related Incidents.

     (1) ASOD CSIRT coordinates with OHS PDSD regarding all incidents involving
         foreign actors;

     (2) The ASOD CSIRT must immediately escalate to the OIG Technical Crimes
         Division (TCD), Special Agent in Charge via email or the OIG Hotline (202-690-
         1622):

         (a) All cyber investigations and incidents related to or potentially related to
             criminal activity;



                                              10
    (b) Incidents related to fraud, waste, and abuse of information resources; and

    (c) Any incidents that involve law enforcement from any level of government
        (Federal, State, local, tribal, or territorial).

(3) The ASOD CSIRT must report suspected or actual cyber incidents of criminal
    activity or misuse to US-CERT within 1 hour of notification or detection.

(4) The ASOD CSIRT must report to OIG every incident that is reported to US-CERT.

(5) The ASOD CSIRT and other incident management personnel must cooperate with
    OIG and law enforcement personnel to provide any support needed for criminal
    investigations and prosecutions.

(6) OIG and the ASOD CSIRT collaborate prior to taking possession of government
    furnished equipment (GFE) for investigations involving actual or suspected
    criminal activity or misuse.

    (a) Mission Area Assistant CISOs and Information Systems Security Program
        Managers (ISSPM) must inform the ASOD CSIRT and provide specific
        guidance for handling GFE and information on that GFE when the agency or
        staff office is operating under a law specific to its mission, such as the
        Confidential Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act of 2002
        (CIPSEA).

    (b) The ASOD CSIRT must coordinate with agency and staff office personnel
        responsible for incident management, and employee relations or adverse
        personnel actions prior to taking possession of GFE for investigations or
        confirmed incidents.

(7) Seizures of GFE. OIG and the ASOD CSIRT will coordinate with other entities as
    applicable when taking possession of GFE. Examples of applicable entities
    include:

    (a) Federal, State, local, tribal, or territorial levels of law enforcement agencies;

    (b) Other USDA agencies and staff offices affected or potentially affected by the
        incident; or

    (c) In cases that may lead to adverse personnel action, OHRM or agency or staff
        office personnel responsible for employee relations or adverse actions.

(8) Notifications about Criminal and Foreign Actor Incidents. OIG is responsible for
    notifications about suspected and actual incidents with a connection or link to
    criminal or foreign actors.

    (a) The OIG or the ASOD CSIRT, after conferring and when appropriate, will
        notify law enforcement agencies;

                                          11
         (b) The Inspector General (IG) is responsible for providing notifications, as
             appropriate:

              1   To external parties affected by the incident; and

              2   In coordination with OC and only when notification will not impact open
                  criminal investigations, the general public, the media, and external entities
                  not directly affected by the incident.

i.   Handling Classified System Incidents and CNSI Spillage.

     (1) OHS PDSD:

         (a) Coordinates incident management with the ASOD CSIRT; and

         (b) Conducts official investigations of suspected or actual CNSI spillage incidents
             and incidents affecting classified systems. Contact information is:

              1   OHS PDSD: Call 202-720-7373 or email pdsd@dm.usda.gov; the phone
                  is staffed Monday through Friday, 7 a.m. until 5 p.m. (Eastern Time); and

              2   ASOD CSIRT: Call 866-905-6890 or email cyber.incidents@usda.gov;
                  ASOD is staffed 24x7x365.

     (2) Notifications about Classified System Incidents and CNSI Spillage Incidents.

         (a) The incident is reported promptly to the ASOD CSIRT, OHS PDSD, and the
             OHS Insider Threat Program (if pertinent). The OHS Special Security Officer
             (SSO) is often the person who reports the incident and notifies the ASOD
             CSIRT. If the ASOD CSIRT learns of the incident first, it notifies OHS
             PDSD.

         (b) OHS PDSD is responsible for notifying and coordinating with the security staff
             of any external network owner if any external network may have been
             contaminated by a USDA CNSI spillage incident.

     (3) Operational security discipline must be used for all communication to minimize
         further exposure of the incident and damage to CNSI. Specifically:

         (a) Provide only the minimum amount of information to convey that there has
             been an incident, then request a face-to-face meeting or a secure call;

         (b) Avoid indicating what the information is or its classification, unless using
             approved secure methods of communication;

         (c) Only discuss the incident or potential incident with personnel who have an
             appropriate security clearance and a need to know; and



                                             12
    (d) Refrain from contacting any individuals associated with the incident, as it may
        inhibit inquiry processes into potential security violations or insider threats.

(4) Coordination of Incident Management.

    (a) OHS PDSD collaborates with the OHS National Security System Program
        (NSSP) as needed, the ASOD CSIRT, and network and system administrators
        who handle containment and cleanup activities, and consults with the OHS
        Insider Threat Program on any potential insider threat concerns.

    (b) OHS PDSD contacts the data owner of CNSI and agrees on details of steps
        needed for containment and cleanup.

    (c) OHS NSSP assists and advises in the containment and cleanup strategies and
        activities and coordination with classified network owners, as appropriate. The
        contact information is 202-720-0594 or OHSEC-NSSP-
        SupportTeam@dm.usda.gov.

    (d) The ASOD CSIRT and OHS PDSD coordinate with US-CERT on all incident
        response activities and communications related to classified systems and CNSI
        spillage, sharing information about incidents, threats, and vulnerabilities to the
        extent consistent with standards and guidelines for NSS, issued in accordance
        with law and as directed by the President.

(5) Mitigating CNSI Spills.

    (a) Identify and report the information system or system component contaminated
        by a potential or actual spillage, along with the specific information involved in
        the spillage, using operational security discipline.

    (b) Promptly isolate and secure the contaminated information system or system
        component. The ASOD CSIRT, OHS PDSD, and OHS NSSP advise network
        owners and administrators on how to contain and isolate classified or
        potentially classified information.

    (c) Safeguard the information at all times.

    (d) The Senior Agency Official for CNSI/Director of OHS and the USDA CISO
        have the authority to direct any action, including shutdown, with respect to any
        system on which CNSI is spilled.

    (e) The data owner may provide input on containment and cleanup strategies, over
        which OHS PDSD has approval authority.

    (f) The ASOD CSIRT investigates to determine if other information systems or
        system components may have been subsequently contaminated and
        communicates that information to OHS PDSD.


                                         13
         (g) If an external network may have been contaminated by the spillage, the OHS
             NSSP and the ASOD CSIRT consult with the external network provider or
             providers to contain and isolate classified or potentially classified information.

         (h) Eradicate the spilled information from all contaminated information systems
             and system components. Other cleanup activities may be also be required.
             Note that CNSI spillages involving cloud computing environments present
             unique challenges for eradication.

         (i) System, network, and database administrators document the steps taken to
             contain and clean up a CNSI spillage and provide that documentation to the
             ASOD CSIRT and OHS PDSD as proof that the actions were taken.

         (j) Certification is required to verify that the spilled information has been
             eradicated from the contaminated system(s) and device(s) and that the network
             is clean.

     (6) Closure of CNSI Spillage Incidents. The following information pertains only to the
         cybersecurity aspects of a CNSI spillage. Other investigative aspects may continue
         separately after the cybersecurity portion of the incident is closed.

         (a) The OHS SSO submits final security incident reports to the Senior Agency
             Official for CNSI, the USDA CISO, and the data owner, along with
             recommendations such as making changes to security controls or training.

         (b) The OHS SSO also submits recommendations for changes or improvements to
             the Senior Agency Official for CNSI and the USDA CISO.

         (c) OHS PDSD provides the final determination to close the CNSI spillage
             incident to the Senior Agency Official for CNSI and the USDA CISO.

         (d) For the ASOD CSIRT, the USDA CISO may deem the cybersecurity incident
             closed or identify additional steps to be taken before closure.

j.   Handling Insider Threat Incidents.

     (1) OHS’s Insider Threat Program must be involved:

         (a) As soon as an issue is identified; and

         (b) In all incidents and inquiries potentially or actually relating to an insider’s use
             of access privileges to do harm, wittingly or unwittingly, to the security of the
             United States through espionage, terrorism, unauthorized disclosure of national
             security information, or the loss or degradation of Departmental resources or
             capabilities. OHS Insider Threat Program’s contact information is 202-720-
             3487 or insider@dm.usda.gov.



                                              14
       (2) The Insider Threat Program Coordinator conducts inquiries on all potential insider
           threat incidents and coordinates with appointed stakeholders, including within the
           Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO), to obtain information, including
           electronic records and files, necessary to identify, analyze, and resolve insider threat
           matters.

       (3) The Insider Threat Program serves as the USDA liaison to the intelligence
           community for insider threat and counterintelligence activities within the
           Department, to include referrals to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).

  k.   Handling Miscellaneous Incident Types.

       (1) Incidents Affecting USDA’s Financial Systems or Records. The Office of the
           Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) is consulted when an incident affects a financial
           system or financial records. After informing OC, OCFO is responsible for issuing
           notifications to financial services institutions such as banks, credit unions, payment
           card companies, and insurance companies about incidents affecting USDA’s
           financial systems or records.

       (2) Adverse Personnel Actions; Seizure of GFE. OHRM, or agency and staff office
           personnel responsible for employee relations or adverse personnel actions must be
           notified when:

            (a) Incidents may require adverse personnel action due to actual or suspected
                misuse of information resources; or

            (b) It is necessary to take possession of GFE for investigations or confirmed
                incidents. See Section 6h, Handling OIG-Related Incidents.

       (3) Other Government Entities. OGC provides legal advice for incidents involving
           other Government entities at the Federal, State, local, tribal, or territorial levels.

       (4) Exposure of CUI. The ASOD CSIRT coordinates with the USDA CUI program
           office when CUI is exposed to an unauthorized person or persons.

  l.   Correlation and Analysis of Incident Data. The ASOD CSIRT must correlate and
       analyze current and historical incident information and responses to incidents to achieve
       a Departmentwide perspective on incident awareness and response.


7. AGENCY AND STAFF OFFICE INCIDENT MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES

  This Section describes incident management procedures from the perspective of agencies and
  staff offices. Section 6 covers incident management procedures at the Departmental level.

  Agencies and staff offices should leverage these procedures to produce their own tailored
  incident management procedures.


                                                  15
Incident preparation procedures are discussed in Section 10. Incident management activities
include incident detection; reporting incidents; investigating and analyzing incidents;
gathering evidence and protecting sensitive incident information; mitigating incidents
through activities such as containment, eradication, and recovery; documenting incidents;
incident closure; and post-incident after-action reviews and improvement planning. Many of
these activities take place concurrently (e.g., investigating, mitigating, documenting) or occur
multiple times (e.g., reporting with updates to original information).

a.   Incident Detection.

     Prompt detection can improve incident response and recovery, thereby minimizing the
     resulting damage.

     (1) Incident management personnel receive indications, warnings, alerts, and
         notifications from a variety of sources about events that may be suspected and
         actual incidents. The sources include automated tools such as intrusion detection
         systems, anti-malware software, and log analyzers and reports from the ASOD
         CSIRT, other incident response groups, or users.

     (2) Incident management personnel and other personnel such as system, network, and
         database administrators must take actions directed by the ASOD CSIRT to detect
         potential or imminent threats and exploits.

     (3) Incident management personnel must expect to deal with false positives from any
         type of source. NIST SP 800-61 Revision 2, Section 3.2, Detection and Analysis,
         provides extensive details on the challenges, differences between precursors and
         indicators as signs of potential incidents, and tools or other sources that provide
         such signs.

     (4) Incident management personnel must log into the agency or staff office incident
         tracking mechanism all suspected and actual incidents, appropriate details, and
         conclusions of their investigations.

b.   Incident Reporting.

     This Section describes reporting topics that must be incorporated into agency and staff
     office procedures. Procedures must indicate the types of suspected and actual incidents
     that must be reported immediately to the ASOD CSIRT. Details about each incident
     must also be submitted using the forms described in this Section. All required
     information on the reporting forms must be finalized before an incident may be closed;
     supporting information may also be required.

     (1) Report all suspected or actual incidents affecting USDA information resources to
         the ASOD CSIRT through the ASOD 24-Hour Hotline (866-905-6890) or the
         Cyber mailbox (cyber.incidents@ASOC.usda.gov). Either communication method
         may be used to convey additional information about the reported incident.



                                              16
(2) Report all suspected or actual incidents to the ASOD CSIRT within 1 hour of
    discovery. Examples of reportable incidents are:

    (a) Suspected or actual spillage of CNSI or suspected or actual cybersecurity
        incidents affecting classified systems, with concurrent reporting to OHS
        PDSD, the agency or staff office Information Security Coordinator (ISC), and
        agency or staff office information security support staff. See Section 7b(3) for
        guidance to protect CNSI;

    (b) Suspected or actual unauthorized release of CUI;

    (c) Suspected or actual exposure or compromise of PII (a category of CUI) in all
        forms (e.g., cyber-based, verbal discussions of PII with unauthorized persons,
        loss of hardcopy documents that contain PII), whether the exposure is
        inadvertent or intentional;

         Caution: When reporting a PII breach, do not forward the subject PII to the
         ASOD CSIRT. Do not delete emails or email attachments containing PII until
         receiving instructions on what to do.

    (d) Suspected or actual incidents related to criminal activity or misuse;

    (e) Suspected or actual insider threats where an insider is using or may be using
        access privileges to do harm, wittingly or unwittingly, to the security of the
        United States, including damage to the United States through espionage,
        terrorism, unauthorized disclosure of national security information, or the loss
        or degradation of Departmental resources or capabilities; and

    (f) Suspected or actual incidents of compromise to the confidentiality, integrity, or
        availability of USDA information, information systems, or information
        services.

(3) Protection of CNSI. When reporting a classified or potentially classified incident,
    including spillage of CNSI, use operational security discipline for all
    communication to minimize further exposure of the incident and damage to CNSI.
    Specifically:

    (a) Do not delete emails or email attachments with CNSI until receiving
        instructions on what to do;

    (b) Do not forward the CNSI to the ASOD CSIRT, or anyone else;

    (c) Provide only the minimum amount of information to convey that there has
        been an incident and request a face-to-face meeting or a secure call to follow
        up;

    (d) Avoid indicating what the information is or its classification, unless using
        approved secure methods of communication; and

                                        17
         (e) Only discuss the incident or potential incident with personnel who have an
             appropriate security clearance and a need to know.

     (4) Notify others with a need to know about the incident, based on the type of incident
         and the information resources affected. Examples include the system owner,
         network, system, or database administrators, or the Mission Area Assistant CIO or
         Privacy Officer.

     (5) As incident investigation and mitigation continue, incident management personnel
         are to provide the ASOD CSIRT with additional information such as the threat
         vector, functional and information impacts, mitigation details, or recoverability.

     (6) Incident Reporting Forms. An incident report is submitted to the ASOD CSIRT
         using these Departmental forms to close an incident:

         (a) AD-3038 for incident reports involving unauthorized access to PII or
             equipment with PII that is lost or stolen (including seizure by a foreign
             government; or

         (b) AD-3043 for all other incidents.

     (7) Reportable Information. Fill in the information using the appropriate form. If the
         investigation determines that a reported incident is a false positive, only Section 1
         of AD-3043 needs to be completed. All required information must be submitted
         before an incident may be closed.

     (8) When PII is inadvertently released to a person or organization, at the discretion of
         management in collaboration with CPO and ASOD, outside USDA, the responsible
         agency or staff office in coordination with the CPO may send the recipient or
         recipients a tailored copy of form AD-3050, PII Incident Non Disclosure
         Agreement. The form must be tailored by modifying the paragraphs:

         (a) To describe the circumstances of the incident to indicate how the control of PII
             was lost (e.g., PII being sent in an email, as an attachment to an email, or on a
             lost hardcopy document);

         (b) To describe a set of actions the recipient should take to delete or destroy the
             email, file, or document containing PII and not to discuss or disclose the PII;
             and

         (c) To provide instructions where to return the completed form.

     (9) Log this activity and any responses in the tracking mechanism of the responsible
         agency or staff office.

c.   Incident Investigation, Analysis, and Cooperation.

     (1) All suspected and actual incidents must be investigated.

                                               18
(2) Agency and staff offices must coordinate and collaborate with the ASOD CSIRT.
    They must not directly contact external entities such as US-CERT unless
    specifically requested to do so by the ASOD Director or ASOD CSIRT personnel to
    whom that authority has been delegated.

(3) Agency and staff office incident management personnel may request assistance, as
    needed, from the ASOD CSIRT; US-CERT or other support resources for incident
    handling must be requested through the ASOD CSIRT.

(4) The ASOD Director or authorized ASOD CSIRT personnel may request agency
    and staff office incident management personnel to provide technical or investigation
    assistance to other agencies or staff offices.

(5) Investigations of some incidents need the involvement or leadership of other
    entities with specialized authorities and capabilities. Agency and staff office
    personnel are expected to cooperate in these investigations. The other entities
    include:

    (a) OIG or law enforcement from any level of government (Federal, State, local,
        tribal, or territorial) for criminal activity;

    (b) OIG for instances of fraud, waste, and abuse;

    (c) OHS PDSD for actual or potential compromises of CNSI;

    (d) OHS’s Insider Threat Program for all incidents and inquiries potentially or
        actually relating to an insider’s use of access privileges to do harm, wittingly or
        unwittingly, to the security of the United States;

    (e) The OHRM and agency or staff office responsible for employee relations or
        adverse actions; and

    (f) The USDA Privacy Office and agency or staff office responsible for privacy.

(6) Perform all incident investigative actions advised by the ASOD CSIRT or other
    authorized USDA offices in a timely manner.

(7) Analysis. Incident analysis begins with detection of an incident and continues until
    the incident investigation is complete. Analysis also serves as an input to incident
    documentation and reporting. Through analysis, incident management personnel
    determine whether an event represents a suspected or actual incident and the type of
    incident. The analysis must also address questions such as these:

    (a) Information Impact. What types of information are affected, including
        classified, proprietary, or privacy? What is the extent of compromise or effect
        on information confidentiality, integrity, or availability?

    (b) Functional Impact. What are the functional impacts of the incident?

                                         19
    (c) Incident Scale. Which networks, systems, or applications are affected? What
        is the extent and magnitude of the incident?

    (d) Root Cause. How the incident is occurring? For example, what vulnerabilities
        are being exploited or what tools or attack methods are being used?

    (e) Evidence. What is the evidence (e.g., logs, files, emails, devices)? How
        should the evidence be protected and preserved?

    (f) Recoverability. What resources and strategies/potential courses of action are
        needed to respond to and recover from the incident? How long will it take to
        recover from the incident?

    For more information about Information Impact, Functional Impact, and
    Recoverability, see the US-CERT Federal Incident Notification Guidelines and
    NIST SP 800-61 Revision 2.

(8) Breaches. Incident management personnel are to follow the procedures in the
    USDA Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Core Incident Response Group
    (CIRG) PII Breach Notification & Incident Response Plan (IRP) and complete
    actions directed by the CIRG, the USDA Privacy Office, or the ASOD CSIRT in
    the prescribed timeframe.

(9) Scanning for IOCs. Either the US-CERT or another Federal agency, from time to
    time, issue alerts and provide indicators regarding suspected or actual compromises
    with the potential to affect U.S. Government systems. Agencies and staff offices
    that have scanning capabilities must perform IOC scans using the provided
    indicators within 24 hours and report the scan results to the ASOD CSIRT. If the
    ASOD CSIRT confirms a compromise has occurred, this information is reported to
    US-CERT.

(10) Investigating Incidents Identified from Various Sources. Various sources may
     identify that an agency or staff office is experiencing a suspected or actual incident
     or compromise. Sources include the ASOD CSIRT; another USDA agency or staff
     office; users (whether Federal employees, contractors, or others); system, network,
     or database administrators; US-CERT, a law enforcement agency, or another
     external entity. The procedures are as follow:

    (a) The ASOD CSIRT creates and sends an inquiry or a ticket to the agency or
        staff office incident management personnel, who must acknowledge receipt by
        responding to the ASOD CSIRT through the ASOD 24-Hour Hotline (866-
        905-6890) or the Cyber mailbox (cyber.incidents@ASOC.usda.gov).

    (b) The agency or staff office incident management personnel investigate the
        reported incident or compromise.

    (c) If the investigation confirms an incident or compromise:


                                          20
              1    Immediately notify the ASOD CSIRT (as indicated in Section 7c(10)(a))
                   with known details.

              2    Perform recommended mitigation measures in the timeframe directed by
                   the ASOD CSIRT.

              3    Continue the investigation to discover the threat vector and, when that is
                   determined, notify the ASOD CSIRT of the updated information.

         (d) If the investigation determines that the reported incident or compromise is a
             false positive, agency or staff office incident management personnel complete
             only Section 1 of AD-3043 and submit it to the ASOD CSIRT via the Cyber
             mailbox (cyber.incidents@ASOC.usda.gov).

     (11) Adverse Personnel Actions; Seizure of GFE. The agency and staff office incident
          management personnel must notify OHRM or their organization responsible for
          employee relations or adverse personnel actions when:

              1    Incidents may require adverse personnel action due to actual or suspected
                   misuse of information resources; or

              2    It is necessary to take possession of GFE for investigations or confirmed
                   incidents.

d.   Evidence Gathering and Handling.

     Incident information is considered sensitive and may be considered as evidence in
     personnel disciplinary matters or legal actions.

     (1) Protection of Sensitive Incident Information. Protect the confidentiality and
         integrity of all sensitive incident information by employing sufficient security
         controls and procedures.

         (a) Minimize damage to or further exposure of information such as PII, CUI, and
             CNSI. Also protect documentation about the incident and incident
             management activities.

         (b) Protection is to be applied to information in any form or medium, such as
             hardcopy or softcopy format, when collected, stored, processed, or transmitted.

         (c) Employ security controls such as the following:

              1    Restrict access to automated or manual incident tracking tools to
                   authorized persons. In addition, all accesses and actions to add, update, or
                   delete information should be logged.

              2    Have a secure storage container within a facility for securing incident
                   evidence and other sensitive materials.

                                              21
        3    Optionally, encrypt softcopy incident records, documents, and PII
             information by implementing encryption software that uses an algorithm
             validated to the Federal Information Processing Standards Publication
             (FIPS PUB) 140-2, Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules.

        4    Optionally, incident communications via email may be encrypted and
             digitally signed, especially if the email contains sensitive information.

(2) PII Protection Requirements. These requirements apply for both suspected and
    actual breaches:

    (a) All employees, contractors, and others who work on behalf of USDA are to
        protect and properly handle PII, until authorized personnel assume custody of
        the information; and

    (b) Incident management personnel are to ensure that PII is handled properly and
        its exposure is minimized to the greatest extent possible.

(3) Suspected or Known Criminal Activity or Misuse. All incident management
    personnel must comply with DR 1700-002, OIG Organization and Procedures.
    The evidence and supporting incident documentation may be needed for further
    investigation by law enforcement or for legal proceedings. Compromised systems
    or devices also serve as evidence and must be secured and preserved. The
    following standards should be adhered to so that evidence can be admissible in
    court:

    Note: When OIG wants to collect evidence, the OIG (most likely a Special Agent)
    will do so by initiating an Evidence Receipt (Exhibit B of Form OIG-8440-1; also
    known as a chain of custody form) in person. The Evidence Receipt should not be
    used, or issued, on behalf of the OIG.

    (a) Have documented procedures that meet all (Federal, State, local, tribal, or
        territorial) applicable laws and regulations and that are based on guidance from
        OIG.

    (b) Follow the procedures when collecting evidence and document any deviations
        from the procedures;

    (c) Forensically protect evidence, using enterprise, agency or staff office-provided
        tools and techniques to collect, examine, and analyze evidence;

    (d) Document all activities and steps taken to collect evidence, who performed
        them, how they were performed, and the date and time performed;

    (e) Keep a detailed log of all evidence collected;

    (f) Seal all devices and other collected evidence in containers and label the
        containers;

                                        22
         (g) Label all evidence, indicating who secured and validated the evidence and the
             date and time; and

         (h) Account for evidence at all times:

              1    Whenever evidence is transferred from person to person, establish a
                   formal chain of custody using form OIG-8440-1. Evidence Receipt
                   (provided by the OIG) to detail the transfer and capture each person’s
                   signature.

              2    Securely store evidence, documenting when it is stored and by whom.

     (4) OIG criminal investigators or the OIG TCD, in collaboration with the ASOD
         CSIRT, will direct incident management personnel on securing incident evidence to
         comply with the rules of preservation of evidence.

     (5) Seizure of GFE.

         (a) Mission Area Assistant CISOs and ISSPMs are to inform the ASOD CSIRT
             and provide specific guidance for handling GFE and information on that GFE
             when the agency or staff office is operating under a law specific to its mission,
             such as the CIPSEA.

         (b) Agency and staff office incident management personnel must notify their
             employee relations organization and the ASOD CSIRT prior to taking
             possession of GFE for investigations or confirmed incidents.

e.   Mitigating Incidents or Threats.

     (1) Immediately perform actions to mitigate incidents or threats that have or potentially
         will have:

         (a) High functional impacts to critical services and system users; or

         (b) Severe impacts to the integrity of USDA information or to information deemed
             to be classified, privacy-related, or proprietary.

     (2) Promptly disconnect service to devices that are reported lost, stolen, or seized by a
         foreign government.

     (3) Perform these actions for compromised devices (e.g., equipment identified or
         suspected of containing malicious code or exhibiting suspicious activity):

         (a) Report the incident to the ASOD CSIRT;

         (b) Disconnect the equipment from the network, unless otherwise instructed by the
             ASOD CSIRT; and



                                              23
    (c) Follow instructions from the ASOD CSIRT on subsequent handling of the
        equipment.

(4) Agency and staff office incident management personnel and others such as system,
    network, and database administrators are to perform, in a timely manner, all
    incident mitigation actions in advisories sent by the ASOD CSIRT or other
    authorized USDA offices. Advisories may apply to actual incidents or to potential
    or imminent threats and exploits.

(5) Mitigating Breaches.

    (a) Instruct those who report or handle a breach that they must:

         1   Not delete or forward any of the information in any format, whether an
             email, an attachment, or a hyperlink; and

         2   Properly protect the information until authorized personnel assume
             custody of the information.

    (b) When PII is inadvertently sent in the body of an email or in an email
        attachment to one or more external parties, at the discretion of management in
        collaboration with the CPO and ASOD the responsible office may send the
        recipient or recipients a tailored copy of form AD-3050. The form must be
        tailored by modifying the paragraphs:

         1   To describe the circumstances of the incident to indicate how the control
             of PII was lost (e.g., PII being sent in an email, as an attachment to an
             email, or on a lost hardcopy document);

         2   To describe a set of actions the recipient should take to delete or destroy
             the email, file, or document containing PII and not to discuss or disclose
             the PII; and

         3   To provide instructions where to return the completed form.

    (c) Log this activity and any responses in the tracking mechanism of the
        responsible agency or staff office.

(6) Mitigating Spillage of CNSI.

    (a) The Senior Agency Official for CNSI/Director of OHS and the USDA CISO
        each has the authority to direct any action, including shutdown, with respect to
        any system on which CNSI is spilled.

    (b) The contaminated information system or system component is to be promptly
        isolated.




                                        24
         (c) The spilled information must be eradicated from all contaminated information
             systems and system components. Other cleanup activities may also be
             required.

         (d) System, network, and database administrators document the steps taken to
             contain and clean up a CNSI spillage and provide that documentation to the
             ASOD CSIRT and OHS PDSD as proof that the actions were taken.

f.   Incident Information and Documentation.

     Documentation is an ongoing activity throughout an incident. It serves as an input to
     incident reporting and continues until the incident is closed. Incident documentation
     may be put to uses such as briefing personnel brought in to assist with handling the
     incident, evidence for legal proceedings, or input to an after-action review of the
     incident.

     Incident information may be recorded with a combination of manual methods (such as a
     logbook) and automated tracking mechanisms. Incident information and documentation
     are considered sensitive and must be protected appropriately during storage and
     transmission in any form or medium (i.e., electronic, hardcopy, or orally). Incident-
     related documents are Federal records and subject to records management life cycle
     processes, including retention and destruction.

     (1) General requirements for documenting incidents are:

         (a) Accurately and completely document all suspected and actual incidents and
             communicate incident information to the ASOD CSIRT;

         (b) Document all activities taken to handle the incident (i.e., each step taken and
             the outcome(s)) from the time the incident was detected to its final resolution;

         (c) Document communications, such as interviews with a user who reported a
             suspicious event, notifications to the ASOD CSIRT or senior managers, or
             requests for assistance; and

         (d) Include a date and timestamp (Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) when
             possible) for all key actions and the identity of the person making the entry.

     (2) Documenting the following incident information is strongly recommended:

         (a) A summary of the incident, including dates and times (including time zone)
             when the incident occurred and it was detected (which may be after the date of
             occurrence);

         (b) Periodic status of the incident (e.g., new, in progress, forwarded for
             investigation, resolved);



                                              25
    (c) Actions taken by all incident handlers and significant observations or
        comments by incident handlers;

    (d) A list of evidence gathered during the incident investigation;

    (e) Actions taken to protect impacted equipment or sensitive information and, if
        applicable, chain of custody for equipment and sensitive information;

    (f) Contact information for other involved stakeholders (e.g., system owners,
        system administrators) or for any impacted organizations, whether internal or
        external to USDA;

    (g) Incoming and outgoing communications with other groups or personnel, and
        the date and time of the communication;

    (h) Locations of documents related to the incident, such as log files;

    (i) Assessments of primary and secondary impacts of the incident;

    (j) Mitigating factors (e.g., full disk encryption, two-factor authentication) that
        may reduce the impacts;

    (k) Sources, methods, or tools used to identify the incident (e.g., intrusion
        detection system, audit log analysis, reported by system administrator or user).

    (l) Indicators related to the incident (e.g., host names, domain names, network
        traffic characteristics, registry keys, X.509 certificates, hashes of attack
        signatures);

    (m) Technical information about affected systems such as source and destination
        Internet Protocol (IP) addresses, port numbers, and protocols, if applicable;

    (n) Details describing any vulnerabilities involved such as Common
        Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) identifiers; and

    (o) Next steps to be taken (e.g., rebuild the host, upgrade an application, harden
        the system configuration).

(3) CNSI Spillage Documentation. System, network, and database administrators and
    agency and staff office incident management personnel are to:

    (a) Document the steps taken to contain, clean up, and mitigate a CNSI spillage;
        and

    (b) Provide that documentation as proof of actions taken to OHS PDSD, taking
        care to store, handle, and transmit the documentation using secure methods
        appropriate to the classification level of the information.



                                         26
     (4) Records Retention. Keep incident records and records of reporting incidents (both
         internal and external incidents) for 3 years after all necessary follow-up actions
         have been completed. Longer retention is authorized if the records are required for
         business use.

g.   Incident Closure.

     (1) General Incident Closure Process.

         (a) Any incident that is not a false positive remains open until:

              1   All necessary mitigation actions (e.g., containment, eradication, and
                  recovery) are complete; and

              2   AD-3043 or AD-3038 with all required information and all incident
                  documentation supporting the investigation and findings (e.g., logs, screen
                  captures, output from scans, law enforcement reports, user awareness
                  training certificates, credit monitoring offer letters for breaches) are
                  submitted to the ASOD CSIRT.

                  The completed form and supporting documentation must be submitted to
                  the ASOD CSIRT to close an incident. If additional details are required,
                  the ASOD CSIRT will contact the responsible incident management
                  personnel.

         (b) Mission Area Assistant CISOs or ISSPMs verify that criteria for containment
             and closure of incidents have been met. This verification is simply a step
             towards closure, but does not actually close the incident. Criteria for
             containment and closure for example includes the following activities:

              1   Containment. Reset of all user authentication credentials; compromised
                  systems disconnected and undergoing analysis or being held for forensic
                  analysis.

              2   Closure. Restored systems validated as compliant with required
                  configurations; systems and devices scanned and no further traces of
                  malware discovered.

         (c) The ASOD CSIRT validates completion of the mitigation efforts, verifies that
             affected systems and devices are no longer a threat to the USDA network, and
             validates that all required reporting information has been provided. Until these
             activities are completed, the incident remains open.

         (d) Reopening Incidents. Incidents may be reopened at the request of the ASOD
             CSIRT, the ASOD Director, the SAOP, the USDA CPO, or other senior
             officials from OIG or OHS.

     (2) Plans of Action and Milestones (POA&M).

                                             27
         (a) The FISMA data entry and reporting tool is used as follows for creating and
             managing PO&AMs:

              1    Create the POA&M in the information system or service, or the program
                   that was affected; or

              2    Create the POA&M in the agency or staff office information security
                   program for non-cyber breaches (e.g., loss of hardcopy) or for incidents
                   that affect devices not associated with an information system or service.

         (b) POA&Ms for classified incidents are outside the scope of this document.

         (c) Agency and staff office incident management personnel must create a POA&M
             for unclassified incidents, whether system-related or program-related, when:

              1    An incident remains open (unresolved) for more than 30 days;

              2    Remedial actions are determined to be inadequate for incident closure for
                   more than 30 days; or

              3    Required information on AD-3043 or AD-3038 has not been submitted.

     (3) Closing Breaches.

         (a) The SAOP must certify by email that a moderate- or high-impact breach is
             closed.

         (b) The USDA CPO must approve closure of all other breaches.

     (4) Closing CNSI Spillage Incidents.

         (a) OHS PDSD provides the final determination to close the CNSI spillage
             incident to the Senior Agency Official for CNSI/ Director of OHS and the
             USDA CISO.

         (b) For the ASOD CSIRT, the USDA CISO may deem the cybersecurity incident
             closed or identify additional steps to be taken before closure.

h.   Post-incident Activities.

     Post-incident activities include: producing after-action reports and improvement plans,
     particularly after major incidents; correlating and analyzing data across multiple past and
     recent incidents; and responding to requests for information about incidents.

     (1) Incident management personnel should conduct a post-incident review after each
         major incident or as instructed by the ASOD Director to produce an after-action
         report and identify lessons learned and good practices. Reviews may also be
         conducted for other actual or suspected incidents or for tests and exercises of the
         incident management plan.

                                              28
    (a) Inputs to the post-incident review include:

         1   Debriefs with incident management personnel; users who reported the
             incident; system, network, or database administrators; or other offices or
             groups who participated in the response; and

         2   Analysis of information documenting the incident, whether in an
             automated tracking system or in hardcopy form such as logbooks.

    (b) The after-action report should explain how the incident was detected and
        mitigated.

    (c) The lessons learned should discuss insights into the incident management
        processes, including reporting, detection, and mitigation.

    (d) The after-action report and lessons learned should be shared with appropriate
        stakeholders.

    (e) After-action reports from similar incidents and tests or exercises of the incident
        management plan should be compared and analyzed for patterns of both
        strengths and weaknesses in capabilities.

(2) Improvement Plans. All agencies and staff offices should develop and implement
    improvement plans for their incident management procedures, resources, and
    capabilities, based on post-incident reviews.

(3) Correlation and Analysis of Incident Data.

    (a) Agencies and staff offices responsible for one or more high impact systems are
        required to correlate current and historical incident information and responses
        to individual incidents to achieve an organizationwide perspective on incident
        awareness and response, in compliance with NIST SP 800-53 incident response
        control “IR-4,” Enhancement 4.

    (b) Examples of areas for correlation and analysis include:

         1   Indicator patterns;

         2   Similar attack actions and tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTP);

         3   Malware found; and

         4   Common vulnerabilities or misconfigurations exploited.

(4) Ad Hoc Reporting. Agency and staff office incident management personnel must
    respond in a timely manner, using information from their incident records and other
    sources, to:



                                         29
           (a) Data calls regarding actual or suspected cybersecurity incidents issued by the
               CISO or ASOD;

           (b) Requests from the USDA OIG; and

           (c) Requests from the Government Accountability Office (GAO).


8. NOTIFICATION TO CONGRESS ABOUT INCIDENTS PROCEDURES

  USDA organizations should leverage these procedures to produce their own tailored
  procedures to notify Congress of an incident.

  a.   Notification to Congress occurs on an incident-by-incident basis. This notification is
       mandated by FISMA for major incidents.

  b.   The ASOD CSIRT provides the Office of Congressional Relations (OCR), the USDA
       CIO, the USDA CISO, and the ASOD Director with initial information about the
       incident as soon as possible after notifying US-CERT. The ASOD CSIRT also helps
       OCR prepare to answer possible questions from Congressional committees and members
       of Congress.

  c.   OCR distributes the initial notification to the responsible Congressional committees not
       later than 7 days after the date on which there is a reasonable basis to conclude that the
       major incident has occurred. OCR informs the USDA CIO, the USDA CISO, and the
       ASOD Director when the notification has been sent.

  d.   After the initial notification and within a reasonable period of time after additional
       information relating to the incident is discovered, the ASOD CSIRT updates the incident
       information for OCR, the USDA CIO, the USDA CISO, and the ASOD Director, and
       OCR provides the additional information to the responsible committees of Congress.
       The information update must include:

       (1) A description of the major incident or related set of incidents;

       (2) A summary of threats and threat actors, vulnerabilities, and impacts relating to the
           incidents;

       (3) A summary of risk assessments conducted on the affected information systems
           before the date on which the incident occurred;

       (4) A summary of the status of compliance of the affected information systems with
           applicable security requirements at the time of the incident; and

       (5) A summary of the detection, response, and remediation actions.




                                                 30
9. ANNUAL AND QUARTERLY INCIDENT REPORTING PROCEDURES

  USDA organizations should leverage these procedures to produce their own tailored annual
  and quarterly reporting procedures. The Department provides additional guidance for
  organizations when issuing requests for information.

  a.   Annual FISMA Reporting. In compliance with the requirements of FISMA, an annual
       report, in unclassified form but including a classified annex if necessary, must be
       prepared and provided to the Director of OMB, the Secretary of DHS, committees of
       Congress, and the Comptroller General. The report must contain the following
       information:

       (1) A description of each major incident or related sets of incidents, including
           summaries of:

           (a) The threats and threat actors, vulnerabilities, and impacts relating to the
               incidents;

           (b) The risk assessments conducted on the affected information systems before the
               date on which the incident occurred;

           (c) The status of compliance of the affected information systems with applicable
               security requirements at the time of the incident; and

           (d) The detection, response, and remediation actions.

       (2) A description of each major incident that involved PII, including:

           (a) The number of individuals whose information was affected by the major
               incident; and

           (b) A description of the information that was breached or exposed.

       (3) The total number of cyber incidents, including a description of incidents resulting in
           significant compromise of information security, system impact levels, types of
           incidents, and locations of affected systems.

  b.   Quarterly Reporting.

       (1) Quarterly reports must be prepared and submitted to meet OMB requirements and
           the President’s Management Council’s assessment criteria. The assessment criteria
           include metrics and not all assessment criteria pertain to incident management.

       (2) Currently required incident management metrics are:

           (a) Trending of percentage of successful incidents and attacks decreasing year
               over year; and



                                                31
           (b) Number or percentage of public and internal notifications conducted within 30
               days of detection and discovery of an incident.


10. INCIDENT MANAGEMENT PREPARATION PROCEDURES

  USDA organizations should leverage these procedures to produce their own tailored incident
  management procedures.

  Substantial preparation contributes to successful incident handling. Preparation includes, at a
  minimum, well documented procedures, an incident management plan, documentation and
  resources, identified and properly trained personnel, and testing of the plan and procedures at
  least annually. While the information in this Section applies specifically to agencies and
  staff offices, much of it is also pertinent to the ASOD CSIRT’s incident management
  activities.

  a.   Incident Management Procedures.

       Each agency and staff office must develop, implement, and maintain incident
       management procedures based on the activities described in Section 7, Agency and Staff
       Office Incident Management Procedures, and supplemented with information from
       Section 6, Departmental Incident Management Procedures, as follows:

       (1) Formally document incident management procedures to contribute to effective
           responses to incidents. Good procedures:

           (a) Are tailored to reflect the organization’s size, structure, and functions, in
               addition to the types of information resources it is responsible for;

           (b) Define requirements for reporting incidents and doing so in a timely manner;

           (c) Identify incident management personnel and include current and accurate
               contact information for all personnel, group email addresses, or USDA
               organizations with incident management roles or equities;

           (d) Identify non-USDA organizations that provide or support the information
               systems and services on behalf of USDA and any incident management roles
               and responsibilities of their personnel; and

           (e) List other organizations, along with their contact information, that can provide
               support services during incident response or recovery, such as ISPs or
               hardware and software suppliers. IT vendors may, for example, provide
               support such as emergency patches for vulnerabilities in systems, devices, or
               software.

       (2) Align agency and staff office incident management procedures with the procedures
           described in this DM;


                                                32
     (3) Detail specific technical and operational processes and techniques to be used by
         incident management personnel;

     (4) Include checklists (to minimize errors) and required forms or links to those forms;

     (5) Review and update procedures annually to reflect:

         (a) Changes to the Department’s incident management policy or procedures;

         (b) Changes in the organization, its information resources, or personnel;

         (c) Lessons learned from exercises or responses to incidents; and

         (d) Must include all contact information, to ensure that the information remains
             current and accurate.

     (6) Disseminate or make available copies of the incident management procedures to
         incident management personnel within the organization; and

     (7) Ensure users and, where pertinent, service providers, contractors, subcontractors,
         and other organizations that own or operate information systems or services on
         behalf of USDA are aware of requirements for reporting all actual and suspected
         incidents to the ASOD CSIRT.

b.   Incident Management Plans.

     (1) Each agency and staff office must have an incident management plan that includes,
         at a minimum, the following information:

         (a) The information systems and services covered by the incident management
             plan and the interconnections with other information systems and services;

         (b) Business-impact criticality of the organization’s information resources and
             priorities for managing incidents and recovering information systems and
             services;

         (c) Realistic worst-case scenarios and strategies for handling them;

         (d) A PII Section if USDA PII is generated, collected, provided, transmitted,
             stored, or maintained;

         (e) The organizational structure used for incident response (including other
             organizations such as the ASOD CSIRT, the USDA Privacy Office, and OIG),
             the roles and responsibilities of the agency or staff office incident management
             personnel and support personnel such as network and system administrators,
             and contact information for all identified organizations and individuals;

         (f) Requirements for reporting incidents and the timeframes for reporting;


                                              33
         (g) Requirements for documenting and tracking incidents and protection of
             sensitive incident information;

         (h) Resources to support incident management and whether the resources are on
             hand or available by request;

         (i) Requirements for training personnel with incident management
             responsibilities; and

         (j) Requirements for testing the incident management plan.

     (2) The plan should be disseminated to the ASOD CSIRT or other offices having
         incident management equities or related responsibilities.

     (3) Review the incident management plan at least twice annually (and update if
         necessary), including after incident response testing or any major incident.

         (a) The review and update must include all contact information, to ensure that the
             information remains current and accurate.

         (b) After each update, disseminate the contact information to each person with
             incident management responsibilities, technical personnel such as network and
             system administrators, group email addresses, and hotline numbers.

c.   Inventory, System Documentation, and Technical Resources.

     Current, accurate, and complete information in documentation and other file-based
     resources facilitate incident analysis, response, and recovery. Resources, such as
     hardware and software tools, help incident management personnel analyze, respond to,
     and recover from incidents.

     (1) Inventory. USDA’s enterprise inventory system must have a current and accurate
         inventory of all agency and staff office IT devices and systems including their IP
         and Media Access Control (MAC) addresses, and high value assets (HVA).

     (2) Essential Information. Agency and staff office incident management personnel
         must have access to documentation and file-based resources including:

         (a) Network diagrams;

         (b) Inventory of all authorized hardware devices and ports and protocols for those
             devices, identified by criticality in the incident management plan;

         (c) Inventory of all software and applications, including custom-developed code,
             open-source software, and vendor-provided software, identified by criticality in
             the incident management plan;

         (d) All system installation or system administrator guides;


                                             34
    (e) Vendor documentation for operating systems, databases, applications,
        appliances, and other information resources;

    (f) Vendor documentation for cybersecurity products such as antivirus software,
        intrusion detection systems, or scanning tools;

    (g) Configuration management baselines for all systems; and

    (h) Cryptographic hashes of critical files such as operating systems and
        applications.

(3) Recommended Information. Baselines of expected network, system, and
    application activity help to detect and analyze anomalous behaviors.

(4) Resources for Incident Management. Resources, some essential and others
    desirable, are needed to effectively support incident management activities. The
    Mission Area Assistant CIO is responsible for funding the resources identified in
    the incident management plan. Examples of resources include:

    (a) Sufficient and secure system storage for logging events and tools for log
        analysis and correlation;

    (b) Tools and supplies (e.g., incident tracking database, laptops, logbooks,
        evidence bags, digital cameras, encryption software) to document, track, and
        report incidents;

    (c) Equipment, software, media, and other supplies for incident detection, analysis,
        response, and recovery (e.g., laptops for incident management personnel; spare
        workstations, servers, and networking equipment; backup devices; packet
        sniffers and protocol analyzers; cables; forensics workstations);

    (d) Images of clean operating system and application installations for restoration
        and recovery purposes; and

    (e) Any external services such as forensics expertise.

(5) Tracking Mechanisms and Metrics.

    (a) An incident tracking mechanism supports effective incident management and is
        a necessary prerequisite for documenting incidents, reporting them, and
        conducting good analyses. Tracking mechanisms may be automated (e.g., a
        database, a service desk ticketing system) or manual (e.g., an incident
        logbook). A combination of manual and automated methods is often used.

         1   An automated tracking system is mandatory for agencies and staff offices
             responsible for moderate and high impact systems.




                                        35
              2    Agencies and staff offices responsible for low impact systems may use an
                   automated or a manual tracking mechanism.

         (b) Metrics. Incident management personnel should use the incident tracking
             mechanism to generate and report on incident management metrics. The types
             and amounts of information tracked shape the metrics that can be produced.
             Missing data elements in an incident record, however, reduce the usefulness of
             the metrics. Examples of metrics include the following:

              1    Numbers of incidents by type within a defined time period;

              2    Percent of incidents reported meeting mandatory reporting requirements;

              3    Percent of incidents reported meeting the 1-hour reporting requirement;

              4    Efficiency in resolving incidents (time to resolution);

              5    Rate of successful incidents and attacks as a percentage of all incidents;

              6    Trending of percentage of successful incidents and attacks;

              7    Number or percentage of public and internal notifications about incidents
                   conducted within 30 days of detecting or discovering the incidents; and

              8    Resources expended in incident response (e.g., personnel, dollar amounts,
                   supplies).

d.   Personnel and Training.

     (1) Incident Management Personnel. Mission Area Assistant CIOs must formally
         designate members of their CSIRT, who may serve in a dual role such as the
         Mission Area Assistant CISO or ISSPM.

     (2) Personnel Qualifications. Incident management personnel, including CISOs,
         ISSPMs, and CSIRT members, must be technically qualified (meet agency or staff
         office knowledge, skill, or experience requirements for the various roles) to perform
         their responsibilities and have clearances appropriate to the categorization or
         classification of the systems they support.

     (3) CSIRT Staffing. Because incidents may occur or be discovered at any time, agency
         and staff CSIRT personnel must provide 24 hours a day, 7 days a week incident
         handling coverage for information systems and services owned or operated by the
         agency or staff office or by a contractor, subcontractor, or other organization on
         behalf of the agency or staff office. Agencies and staff offices may achieve this
         coverage by having and publicizing normal and after-hours contact information, in
         addition to information about the ASOD CSIRT hotline and mailbox.

     (4) Training and Awareness for Incident Management Personnel.

                                              36
         (a) General. All personnel with identified incident management responsibilities
             must be aware of USDA’s incident management policies and procedures and
             their organization’s plan and procedures, including those for incidents
             involving PII and criminal activity or misuse.

              1    Annual role-based training is mandatory. In addition, these personnel may
                   be required to take out-of-cycle training when changes occur in
                   responsibilities, plans or procedures, threat vectors or exploit types, or the
                   organization’s information resources.

              2    Training may be accomplished through on-the-job training, role-based
                   (formal, specialized, or functional) or certification training, participation
                   in testing and exercises, or other means.

         (b) High Impact Systems. When an agency or staff office is responsible for one or
             more high-impact systems, training must incorporate simulated events for
             crisis situations and employ automated mechanisms (e.g., videos, online
             training environments, use of online support tools).

     (5) Training and Awareness for IT Staff. Personnel such as application developers,
         systems integrators, network administrators, system administrators, and database
         administrators must be aware of how they can develop and maintain their networks,
         systems, and applications in accordance with USDA’s security standards. Properly
         developed and maintained networks, systems, and applications reduce the risk of
         vulnerabilities being exploited. Training may be accomplished through on-the-job
         training, role-based (formal, specialized, or functional) or certification training.

     (6) Awareness Training for Users. Incident management awareness training for users
         should encompass these topics:

         (a) Policies and procedures regarding appropriate use of networks, systems, and
             applications;

         (b) Incident management policies and procedures; and

         (c) Their responsibilities for detecting and reporting all types of incidents.

         Applicable lessons learned from previous incidents may also be shared with users
         so they can see how their actions could affect the organization.

e.   Testing and Exercises.

     (1) Testing and exercises are used to:

         (a) Validate the accuracy, completeness, and usefulness of plans and procedures;

         (b) Improve the skills and capabilities of incident management personnel;


                                               37
         (c) Determine the adequacy of incident management resources; and

         (d) Understand the effects on organizational operations (e.g., reduction in mission
             capabilities), organizational assets, and individuals.

     (2) Types of testing include use of checklists, walk-through or tabletop exercises,
         simulations, and functional exercises.

     (3) Requirements for Testing.

         (a) Test incident management plans and the associated procedures at least twice
             annually. This requires adequate funding and a set schedule for the testing.

         (b) The type and complexity of the testing must be commensurate with the highest
             security impact level of any information system in the agency or staff office
             inventory.

         (c) As part of the testing:

              1    Verify roles and responsibilities;

              2    Exercise a worst-case incident scenario;

              3    Exercise detection of or protection from phishing attempts, attempts to
                   access large volumes of data, or attempts to exfiltrate data; and

              4    Exercise recovery from (not just response to) a breach, a destructive
                   malware campaign, or any scenario based on recent events and available
                   threat data.

         (d) Coordinate testing for moderate and high impact systems with organizational
             elements responsible for related plans; such as business continuity plans,
             contingency plans, disaster recovery plans, continuity of operations plans,
             crisis communications plans, critical infrastructure plans, or occupant
             emergency plans.

         (e) Document the results of the testing, including the weaknesses discovered in the
             plan, procedures, resources, personnel knowledge or skills, or coordination.

         (f) Create a POA&M for any weakness discovered during the testing that is not
             mitigated within 30 days.

         (g) Develop an after-action report summarizing lessons learned and best practices
             and share this with appropriate stakeholders.

f.   Information Resources, Situational Awareness, and Information Sharing.




                                              38
       It is very important for incident management personnel to stay informed about
       cybersecurity threats and exploits, incidents, attack methods, and appropriate courses of
       action such as mitigation techniques.

       (1) Methods for obtaining information include education and training; information
           from US-CERT; participation in the Government Forum of Incident Response and
           Security Teams (GFIRST); and open source information on the web.

           (a) US-CERT provides technical information in the form of alerts about security
               issues, vulnerabilities, and exploits; a current activity report on high-impact
               types of security incidents; and bulletins summarizing vulnerabilities and any
               available patch information. The website is National Cyber Awareness
               System.

           (b) GFIRST is a peer group for information security personnel responsible for
               securing U.S. Government information systems. Through GFIRST, incident
               management personnel can stay informed on the latest technologies and
               exploits. The GFIRST Compartment in the US-CERT Portal provides a secure
               collaborative system to share sensitive cyber-related information. Additional
               information is available at Government Forum of Incident Response and
               Security Teams (GFIRST).

           (c) Examples of open source information include cybersecurity firms;
               communities of incident responders and cybersecurity experts; cybersecurity
               blogs; media reports; academic and think tank literature and reports;
               conference presentations; or reports from other government agencies.

       (2) Disseminate cyber threat and exploit warning information to appropriate personnel
           in a timely manner. For example, CISOs, ISSPMs, and CSIRT personnel are
           expected to distribute information appropriate for system owners or system,
           network, or database administrators and other information (such as about phishing
           attacks) appropriate for all users.

       (3) The ASOD Director or designees from the ASOD CSIRT disseminate:

           (a) Information derived from analysis and correlation of USDA incident
               management data to appropriate stakeholders; and

           (b) Information from US-CERT and other external sources.


11. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Secretary of Agriculture will make a final decision regarding whether to provide
       notification to individuals affected by a breach.

  b.   The USDA CIO will:


                                                39
     (1) Notify Congress about major incidents initially within 7 days and with follow-up
         information within a reasonable period of time, in collaboration with the USDA
         CISO and the Assistant Secretary for Congressional Relations; and

     (2) Determine if cybersecurity incident information may be released publicly, based on
         factors such as whether the release of information might negatively affect factors
         such as criminal investigations or CNSI or delegate this authority to the USDA
         CISO.

c.   The USDA CISO will:

     (1) Notify Congress about major incidents initially within 7 days and with follow-up
         information within a reasonable period of time, in collaboration with the USDA
         CIO and the Assistant Secretary for Congressional Relations; and

     (2) Direct any action, including shutdown, with respect to any system on which CNSI
         is spilled.

d.   The ASOD Director will:

     (1) Designate a primary and secondary point of contact in the ASOD CSIRT for all
         interactions with US-CERT;

     (2) Appoint an incident commander for a major incident or when warranted by other
         circumstances;

     (3) Set priorities based on factors such as functional impact, information impact,
         recoverability, and resource availability during complex or crisis-level incidents;

     (4) Activate the standing Federal Network Authorization so US-CERT can access
         USDA networks and provide on-site technical assistance or delegate this authority
         to the incident commander;

     (5) Authorize ASOD CSIRT personnel to collaborate and coordinate, on a need-to-
         know basis, with external entities or delegate this authority to the incident
         commander;

     (6) Request agency and staff office incident management personnel to provide
         technical or investigation assistance to other agencies or staff offices or delegate
         this authority to ASOD CSIRT personnel;

     (7) Ensure that all incident handling activities are validated as complete, including
         additional reporting to US-CERT;

     (8) Reopen closed incidents when warranted;

     (9) Ensure that the Department incident management plan and associated procedures
         are tested at least annually; and

                                               40
     (10) Disseminate analytical products about incidents and incident management to
          appropriate stakeholders.

e.   The ASOD CSIRT and ASOD CSIRT Personnel will:

     (1) Serve as USDA’s 24 hours a day, 7 days a week central cybersecurity incident
         management group, and the central contact and coordination point to US-CERT;

     (2) Promptly report incidents to:

         (a) US-CERT in accordance with US-CERT Federal Incident Notification
             Guidelines;

         (b) The USDA CIO, USDA CISO, and the OCR for all major incidents; and

         (c) Responsible USDA offices and external organizations based on the type of
             incident.

     (3) Ensure actions are immediately performed to mitigate significant incidents or
         threats;

     (4) Ensure that the correct incident reporting forms are used and properly completed;

     (5) Provide technical and non-technical assistance to agencies and staff offices upon
         request and collaborate with appropriate USDA and external entities to manage
         incidents;

     (6) Disseminate information derived from incident analysis and correlation and cyber
         threat and exploit warning, and provide direction to detect, investigate, and mitigate
         potential or imminent threats and suspected or actual exploits;

     (7) Deploy automated tools to support detection and analysis and run them on a regular
         schedule;

     (8) Coordinate IOC scanning activities with US-CERT and with agencies and staff
         offices when US-CERT issues an alert about a suspected or known compromise
         with the potential to affect U.S. Government systems;

     (9) Collaborate with the OIG TCD on securing incident evidence;

     (10) Validate completion of incident mitigation efforts, verify that affected systems and
          devices are no longer a threat to the USDA network, and validate that all required
          reporting information has been provided by agency and staff office incident
          management personnel;

     (11) Ensure that agencies and staff offices create POA&Ms for incidents when any of
          the criteria for incident-related POA&Ms are not met;



                                              41
     (12) Test the Departmental incident management plan and associated procedures at least
          annually; and

     (13) Correlate and analyze current and historical incident information and responses to
          incidents and produce metrics for internal and external reporting purposes.

f.   The SAOP will:

     (1) Provide direction and guidance to all incident management personnel responding to
         cyber and non-cyber breaches involving privacy information;

     (2) Convene the USDA CIRG to coordinate USDA responses to moderate or high
         impact breaches;

     (3) Advise the Secretary of Agriculture on whether and when to notify individuals
         potentially affected by a breach;

     (4) With concurrence of the Secretary of Agriculture, require notification be sent to
         individuals affected by a breach and review and approve the content of those
         notifications; and

     (5) Certify by email that an incident for which the CIRG has been convened is closed.

g.   The USDA CPO will:

     (1) Provide direction and guidance to all incident management personnel regarding
         cyber and non-cyber breaches;

     (2) Escalate moderate and high impact breaches to the SAOP; and

     (3) Approve closure of all major breaches or reopen closed incidents when warranted.

h.   The IG and/or the IG of the TCD will:

     (1) Investigate all suspected or actual criminal activity incidents and fraud, waste, and
         abuse of information resources;

     (2) Direct incident management personnel on securing incident evidence to comply
         with the rules of preservation of evidence; and

     (3) Coordinate taking possession of GFE.

i.   The Senior Agency Official for CNSI/Director of OHS will direct any action, including
     shutdown, with respect to any system on which CNSI is spilled.

j.   The OHS PDSD Chief will:

     (1) Coordinate incident management with the ASOD Director;


                                              42
     (2) Conduct official investigations of suspected or actual CNSI spillage incidents and
         incidents affecting classified systems, and be responsible for managing the security
         of the information;

     (3) Coordinate with the data owner during CNSI spillage incidents and approve
         containment and cleanup strategies;

     (4) Notify and coordinate with the security staff of any external network owner if an
         external network may have been contaminated by a USDA CNSI spillage incident;
         and

     (5) Provide final determination to close CNSI spillage incidents.

k.   The OHS Insider Threat Coordinator will:

     (1) Conduct inquiries on all potential insider threat incidents;

     (2) Coordinate with appointed stakeholders, including within OCIO, to obtain relevant
         electronic records, files and other information necessary to identify, analyze, and
         resolve insider threat matters; and

     (3) Serve as the USDA liaison to the intelligence community for insider threat and
         counterintelligence activities within the Department, to include referrals to the FBI.

l.   The Assistant General Counsel of OGC, General Law and Research Division will:

     (1) Review and approve any communications to individuals impacted by a breach in
         which the individuals are or were litigants; and

     (2) Provide legal advice for incidents involving other government entities at the
         Federal, State, local, tribal, and territorial levels.

m. The Director of OHRM or agency and staff office personnel responsible for employee
   relations or adverse personnel actions will:

     (1) Become involved when incidents may require adverse personnel action; and

     (2) Coordinate with OC to provide breach notifications to current and former USDA
         employees, retirees, and retirees’ survivors or designated dependents.

n.   The CFO will:

     (1) Be consulted when an incident affects a financial system or financial records; and

     (2) Issue notifications to financial institutions about incidents affecting financial
         systems at USDA.

o.   The Director of OC will:


                                               43
     (1) Coordinate public notification of cybersecurity incidents outside of USDA with the
         USDA CIO and other USDA officials, depending on the type of incident; and

     (2) Be responsible for breach notifications when the CIRG has not been convened or,
         optionally, delegate this responsibility to agency and staff office public affairs
         offices.

     OCR and the Assistant Secretary for Congressional Relations will collaborate with the
     USDA CIO, the USDA CISO, and the Director of OC when Congress must be notified
     about major incidents at USDA and forward notifications to the appropriate
     Congressional committees.

p.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs will:

     (1) Formally designate one or more technically qualified points of contact (POC) with
         appropriate clearances to function as the CSIRT for that agency or staff office. The
         POC may also serve in a dual role such as the Mission Area Assistant CISO or
         ISSPM; and

     (2) Ensure that USDA’s enterprise inventory system has a current and accurate
         inventory of all IT devices and systems in the scope of their responsibility and
         identify those that are HVAs to support incident management.

q.   Mission Area Assistant CISOs and ISSPMs will:

     (1) Ensure that detection tools are run regularly using automatically updated indicators
         and, when notified by the ASOD CSIRT, that IOC scans are conducted using
         provided indicators within 24 hours of notification;

     (2) Inform the ASOD CSIRT and provide specific guidance for handling GFE and
         information on that GFE when the agency or staff office is operating under a law
         specific to its mission; and

     (3) Verify that criteria for containment and closure of incidents have been met.

r.   Mission Area Assistant CISOs, ISSPMs, and Incident Management Personnel (CSIRT
     Members) will:

     (1) Document their organization’s incident management plan and procedures, test them
         twice annually, and review and update them whenever there are significant changes
         or identified shortcomings;

     (2) Provide 24 hours a day, 7 days a week incident handling coverage, which can
         include publicizing after-hours contact information;

     (3) Promptly report to the ASOD CSIRT in the required timeframe suspected and
         actual incidents of all types (e.g., suspected malicious code, inadvertent release of
         PII, suspected criminal activity, possible spillage of CNSI);

                                               44
     (4) Promptly respond to all inquiries and tickets issued by the ASOD CSIRT;

     (5) Disseminate procedures and requirements for reporting suspected and actual
         incidents to users and, where pertinent, to contractors, subcontractors, service
         providers, and other organizations that own or operate information systems or
         services on behalf of USDA;

     (6) Maintain complete and accurate current and historical records of actual and
         suspected incidents;

     (7) Cooperate with and perform all incident investigative actions advised by the ASOD
         CSIRT or other authorized internal or external entities in a timely manner;

     (8) Request assistance, as needed, from the ASOD CSIRT and provide technical or
         investigation assistance to other agencies and staff offices when requested by the
         ASOD CSIRT;

     (9) Refrain from directly contacting external entities, such as US-CERT, unless
         specifically requested to do so by the ASOD CSIRT;

     (10) Ensure that sensitive incident information is handled properly and appropriately
          protected to maintain confidentiality and integrity;

     (11) Disseminate cyber threat and exploit warning information to appropriate personnel
          in a timely manner;

     (12) Create POA&Ms in accordance with DR 3565-003, Plan of Action and Milestones
          Policy for any incident that is not remediated and for weaknesses discovered during
          incident management plan testing;

     (13) Be familiar with and follow Departmental incident management policies and
          procedures and their organization’s plans and procedures;

     (14) Take annual role-based training on incident management; and

     (15) Respond to data calls regarding actual or suspected security incidents in a timely
          manner.

s.   System, Network, and Database Administrators will:

     (1) Perform incident management actions as directed by the ASOD CSIRT and other
         authorized officials in a timely manner; and

     (2) Document the steps taken to contain, clean up, and mitigate a CNSI spillage and
         provide that documentation to the ASOD CSIRT and OHS PDSD.




                                              45
   t.   All employees, contractors, subcontractors, service providers, and others who work on
        behalf of USDA will:

        (1) Protect and properly handle incident information (e.g., control PII until authorized
            personnel assume custody of the information); and

        (2) Refrain from deleting or forwarding emails, attachments, or hyperlinks with
            sensitive information such as PII, CUI, or CNSI.


12. INQUIRIES

   Direct all questions concerning this DR to the OCIO, Information Security Center via email
   to the cscc@ocio.usda.gov mailbox.



                                               -END-




                                                 46
                                        APPENDIX A

                           AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


AD-3038, Cyber Security Incident Report Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Incident,
June 2016

AD-3043, ASOC Incident Report, June 2016

AD-3050, PII Incident Non Disclosure Agreement, June 2013

Confidential Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act of 2002 (CIPSEA), 44
United States Code (U.S.C.) §3501 (2017)

Critical Infrastructure Information Act of 2002, 6 U.S.C. 121, et seq.

Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Federal Information Security Modernization Act,
required reporting requirements

DHS, US-CERT Federal Incident Notification Guidelines, September 2016

DHS, US-CERT Government Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams (GFIRST)

DHS, US-CERT National Cyber Awareness System

DHS, NCCIC National Cyber Incident Scoring System

Executive Order (EO) 12958, Classified National Security Information, April 17, 1995

E.O. 13292, Further Amendment to Executive Order 12958, as Amended, Classified National
Security Information, March 25, 2003

E.O. 13556, Controlled Unclassified Information, November 4, 2010

E.O. 13587, Structural Reforms to Improve the Security of Classified Networks and the
Responsible Sharing and Safeguarding of Classified Information, October 7, 2011

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014, (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. §3551, et seq.

GAO, GAO Report 08-536, Privacy: Alternatives Exist for Enhancing Protection of
Personally Identifiable Information, May 2008

General Services Administration, President’s Management Council

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), Information Systems Security
Records, General Records Schedule (GRS) 3.2, September 2014



                                             A-1
NIST, Federal Information Processing Standard Publication, (FIPS PUB) 140-2, Security
Requirements for Cryptographic Modules, May 25, 2001

NIST, FIPS PUB 200, Minimum Security Requirements for Federal Information and
Information Systems, March 2006

NIST, Interagency Report (IR) 7298 Revision 2, Glossary of Key Information Security
Terms, May 2013

NIST, SP 800-53 Revision 4, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems
and Organizations, April 2013 with updates as of January 22, 2015

NIST, SP 800-61 Revision 2, Computer Security Incident Handling Guide, August 2012

NIST, SP 800-122, Guide to Protecting the Confidentiality of Personally Identifiable
Information (PII), April 2010

NIST, SP 800-150, Guide to Cyber Threat Information Sharing, October 2016

NIST, SP 800-171 Revision 1, Protecting Controlled Unclassified Information in Nonfederal
Information Systems and Organizations, December 2016

OIG, Form OIG-8440-1, Evidence Receipt, October 1995

Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI), National Counterintelligence and
Security Center, National Insider Threat Policy and Minimum Standards for Executive
Branch Insider Threat Programs, November 21, 2012

OMB, Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource, July 28, 2016

OMB, Memorandum M-16-04, Cybersecurity Strategy and Implementation Plan (CSIP) for
the Federal Civilian Government, October 30, 2015

OMB, Memorandum M-17-12, Preparing for and Responding to a Breach of Personally
Identifiable Information, January 3, 2017

OMB, Memorandum M-19-02, Fiscal Year 2018-2019 Guidance on Federal Information
Security and Privacy Management Requirements, October 25, 2018

Protected Critical Infrastructure Information, 6 Code of Federal Regulations Part 29, 2018

Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. 552a, December 31, 1974

USDA, DM 3300-005, Policies for Planning and Managing Wireless Technologies in USDA,
November 10, 2010

USDA, DM 3440-001, USDA Classified National Security Information Program Manual,
June 9, 2016


                                            A-2
USDA, DR 1700-002, OIG Organization and Procedures, June 17, 1997

USDA, DR 3080-001, Records Management, June 16, 2016

USDA, DR 3085-001, Vital Records Management Program, August 19, 2011

USDA, DR 3090-001, Litigation Retention Policy for Documentary Materials including
Electronically Stored Information, May 28, 2008

USDA, DR 3440-001, USDA Classified National Security Information Program Regulation,
June 9, 2016

USDA, DR 3440-002, Control and Protection of Sensitive Security Information, January 30,
2003

USDA, DR 3505-005, Cybersecurity Incident Management, November 30, 2018

USDA, DR 3545-001, Information Security Awareness and Training Policy, October 22,
2013

USDA, DR 3565-003, Plan of Action and Milestones Policy, September 25, 2013

USDA, DR 4600-003, USDA Insider Threat Program, June 30, 2014

USDA, Memorandum, Minimum Safeguards for Protecting Personally Identifiable
Information (PII), August 5, 2016

USDA, Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Core Incident Response Group (CIRG) PII
Breach Notification & Incident Response Plan (IRP), Revision 4.6, November 23, 2017




                                          A-3
                                        APPENDIX B

                                        DEFINITIONS


a.   Automated Tracking System. A software system capable of collecting, analyzing,
     monitoring, or tracking incident information.

b.   Breach. The loss of control, compromise, unauthorized disclosure, unauthorized
     acquisition, unauthorized access, or any similar occurrence where (1) a person other than
     an authorized user accesses or potentially accesses personally identifiable information or
     (2) an authorized user accesses or potentially accesses personally identifiable
     information for an other than authorized purpose. (Source: OMB M-17-12)

c.   Classified Information. See “classified national security information.”

d.   Classified National Security Information. Information that has been determined
     pursuant to Executive Order 13526 or any predecessor order to require protection
     against unauthorized disclosure and is marked to indicate its classified status when in
     documentary form. (Source: NIST IR 7298 Revision 2)

e.   Compromise. Disclosure of information to unauthorized persons, or a violation of the
     security policy of a system in which unauthorized intentional or unintentional disclosure,
     modification, destruction, or loss of an object may have occurred. (Source: NIST IR
     7298 Revision 2)

f.   Computer Security Incident. See “incident.”

g.   Controlled Unclassified Information. Information that requires safeguarding or
     dissemination controls pursuant to and consistent with applicable law, regulations, and
     government-wide policies but is not classified under Executive Order 13526 or the
     Atomic Energy Act, as amended. (Source: Executive Order 13556)

h.   Cybersecurity Incident. See “incident.”

i.   Data Breach. See “breach.”

j.   Event. Any observable occurrence in a network or system. Events with negative
     consequences are referred to as adverse events. (Source: NIST SP 800-61 Revision 2)

k.   Exploit. A technique to breach the security of a network or information system in
     violation of security policy.

l.   Federal Information. Information created, collected, processed, maintained,
     disseminated, or disposed of by or for the Federal Government, in any medium or forum.
     (Source: OMB Circular A-130)




                                               B-1
m. Federal Information System. An information system used or operated by an executive
   agency, by a contractor of an executive agency, or by another organization on behalf of
   an executive agency. (Source: NIST, SP 800-53 Revision 4)

n.   Functional Impact. Adverse impacts to business functionality provided by the affected
     systems. (Source: US-CERT Federal Incident Notification Guidelines, see related terms
     “information impact” and “recoverability.”)

o.   Harm. Any adverse effects that would be experienced by an individual (i.e., that may be
     socially, physically, or financially damaging) or an organization if the confidentiality of
     PII were breached. (Source: NIST, SP 800-122)

p.   High Value Asset. Those assets, systems, facilities, data and datasets that are of
     particular interest to potential adversaries. These assets, systems, and datasets may
     contain sensitive controls, instructions or data used in critical Federal operations, or
     house unique collections of data (by size or content) making them of particular interest
     to criminal, politically-motivated, or state-sponsored actors for either direct exploitation
     of the data or to cause a loss of confidence in the U.S. Government. (Sources: OMB M-
     16-04)

q.   Improper Usage. Any incident resulting from a violation of an organization’s acceptable
     use policies by an authorized user. (Source: NIST, SP 800-61 Revision 2)

r.   Incident. An occurrence that (1) actually or imminently jeopardizes, without lawful
     authority, the integrity, confidentiality, or availability of information or an information
     system; or (2) constitutes a violation or imminent threat of violation of law, security
     policies, security procedures, or acceptable use policies. (Source: FISMA)

     Note: An occurrence may be identified as an incident, but later identified as a breach
     once it is determined that PII is involved. Also, “incident” encompasses more specific
     terms such as “cybersecurity incident,” “information security incident,” “computer
     security incident,” spillage of CNSI, or exposure of CUI.

s.   Incident Handling. The mitigation of violations of security policies and recommended
     practices. (Source: NIST, SP 800-61 Revision 2)

t.   Incident management personnel. Personnel who are part of a CSIRT, those who manage
     CSIRT personnel, and potentially other personnel with incident handling
     responsibilities. Examples include Mission Area Assistant CISOs, ISSPMs, privacy
     office personnel at the Departmental or agency and staff office levels, and audit or
     investigations personnel from the OIG.

u.   Incident Management Plan. Provides a roadmap for implementing an incident response
     program based on the organization’s policy. The plan indicates both short- and long-
     term goals for the program, including metrics for measuring the program. The incident
     response plan should also indicate how often incident handlers should be trained and the
     requirements for incident handlers. (Source: Adapted from NIST, SP 800-61 Revision


                                               B-2
     2). See Section 3cError! Reference source not found. in this DM for additional
     information.

     Note: The term “incident management plan” is used in this DR instead of “incident
     response plan,” unless the title of a referenced source specifically uses the latter term.
     An incident management plan is different from an “incident response plan” or “cyber
     incident response plan,” which are contingency planning procedures for systems.

v.   Indicator. See “indicator of compromise.”

w. Indicator of Compromise. A sign that an incident may have occurred or may be
   currently occurring. (Source: NIST, SP 800-61 Revision 2)

x.   Information Impact. The extent of compromise or effect on information confidentiality,
     integrity, or availability, covering one or more information types (classified, proprietary,
     or privacy). (Source: US-CERT Federal Incident Notification Guidelines)

y.   Information resources. Encompasses information, information systems, and information
     services.

z.   Information Security Incident. See “Incident.”

aa. Insider Threat. The threat that an insider will use her/his authorized access, wittingly or
    unwittingly, to do harm to the security of United States. This threat can include damage
    to the United States through espionage, terrorism, unauthorized disclosure of national
    security information, or through the loss or degradation of departmental resources or
    capabilities. (Source: NIST, SP 800-53 Revision 4)

bb. Major Incident. Is either:

     (1) Any incident that is likely to result in demonstrable harm to the national security
         interests, foreign relations, or the economy of the United States or to the public
         confidence, civil liberties, or public health and safety of the American people.
         Using the DHS NCCIC National Cyber Incident Scoring System this includes Level
         3 events (orange), defined as those that are “likely to result in a demonstrable
         impact to public health or safety, national security, economic security, foreign
         relations, civil liberties, or public confidence”; Level 4 events (red), defined as
         those that are “likely to result in a significant impact to public health or safety,
         national security, economic security, foreign relations, or civil liberties”; and Level
         5 events (black), defined as those that “pose an imminent threat to the provision of
         wide-scale critical infrastructure services, national government stability, or the lives
         of US persons”. Agencies should determine the level of impact of the incident by
         using the existing incident management process established in NIST SP 800-61
         Revision 2; or

     (2) A breach that involves personally identifiable information (PII) that, if exfiltrated,
         modified, deleted, or otherwise compromised, is likely to result in demonstrable
         harm to the national security interests, foreign relations, or the economy of the

                                               B-3
         United States, or to the public confidence, civil liberties, or public health and safety
         of the American people. (Source: OMB M-19-02)

    (3) Note: A major incident determination is required for any unauthorized
        modification of, unauthorized deletion of, unauthorized exfiltration of, or
        unauthorized access to the PII of 100,000 or more people. (Source: OMB M-19-
        02)

cc. National Security System. Any information system (including any telecommunications
    system) used or operated by an agency or by a contractor of an agency, or other
    organization on behalf of an agency (1) the function, operation, or use of which involves
    intelligence activities; involves cryptologic activities related to national security;
    involves command and control of military forces; involves equipment that is an integral
    part of a weapon or weapons system; or is critical to the direct fulfillment of military or
    intelligence missions; or (2) is protected at all times by procedures established for
    information that have been specifically authorized under criteria established by an
    Executive Order or an Act of Congress to be kept classified in the interest of national
    defense or foreign policy. (Source: NIST IR 7298 Revision 2)

dd. Personally Identifiable Information. Any information about an individual maintained by
    an agency, including (1) any information that can be used to distinguish or trace an
    individual’s identity, such as name, social security number, date and place of birth,
    mother‘s maiden name, or biometric records; and (2) any other information that is linked
    or linkable to an individual, such as medical, educational, financial, and employment
    information. (Source: NIST, SP 800-122)

ee. Protected Critical Infrastructure Information. Information not customarily in the public
    domain and related to the security of critical infrastructure or protected systems that has
    been validated and voluntarily submitted, directly or indirectly, to DHS for its use
    regarding the security of critical infrastructure and protected systems, analysis, warning,
    interdependency study, recovery, reconstitution, or other appropriate purpose, and any
    information, statements, compilations or other materials reasonably necessary to explain
    the critical infrastructure information (CII), put the CII in context, describe the
    importance or use of the CII, when accompanied by an express statement indicating an
    expectation of protection from disclosure as provided by the provisions of the Critical
    Infrastructure Information Act of 2002. (Source: Adapted from Protected Critical
    Infrastructure Information)

ff. Recoverability. The amount of time and resources needed to recover from the incident,
    factoring in the size of the incident and the types of information and information systems
    and services affected. (Source: US-CERT Federal Incident Notification Guidelines, See
    related terms “functional impact” and “information impact.”)

gg. Sensitive Information; also, Sensitive Incident Information. Information where the loss,
    misuse, or unauthorized access or modification could adversely affect the national
    interest or the conduct of Federal programs, or the privacy to which individuals are
    entitled under the Privacy Act of 1974; that has not been specifically authorized under

                                              B-4
      criteria established by an Executive Order or an Act of Congress to be kept classified in
      the interest of national defense or foreign policy. (Source: NIST, SP 800-53 Revision
      4)

hh. Spillage. Security incident that results in the transfer of classified or controlled
    unclassified information onto an information system not authorized for the appropriate
    security level. (Source: NIST, IR 7298 Revision 2)

ii.   Threat. The potential source of an adverse event. (Source: NIST, SP 800-61 Revision
      2)

jj.   Unauthorized Access. The act or process of logical or physical access without
      permission to a Federal agency information, information system, application, or other
      resource. (Source: OMB M-19-02)

kk. Unauthorized Deletion. The act or process of removing information from an
    information system without authorization or in excess of authorized access. (Source:
    OMB M-19-02)

ll.   Unauthorized Exfiltration. The act or process of obtaining, without authorization or in
      excess of authorized access, information from an information system without modifying
      or deleting it. (Source: OMB M-19-02)

mm. Unauthorized Modification. The act or process of changing components of information
    and/or information systems without authorization or in excess of authorized access.
    (Source: OMB M-19-02)

nn. Vulnerability. A weakness in a system, application, or network that is subject to
    exploitation or misuse. (Source: NIST, SP 800-61 Revision 2)

oo. X.509 Certificate. The X.509 public-key certificate or the X.509 attribute certificate, as
    defined by the ISO/ITU-T X.509 standard. Most commonly (including in this
    document), an X.509 certificate refers to the X.509 public-key certificate. (Source:
    NIST IR 7298 Revision 2)




                                              B-5
                                     APPENDIX C

                        ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AD         Agriculture Department
ASOD       Agriculture Security Operations Division
CII        Critical Infrastructure Information
CIO        Chief Information Officer
CIPSEA     Confidential Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act
CIRG       Core Incident Response Group
CISO       Chief Information Security Officer
CNSI       Classified National Security Information
CNSS       Committee on National Security Systems
CPO        Chief Privacy Officer
CSIP       Cybersecurity Strategy and Implementation Plan
CSIRT      Cyber Security Incident Response Team
CUI        Controlled Unclassified Information
CVE        Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures
DHS        Department of Homeland Security
DM         Departmental Manual
DR         Departmental Regulation
E.O.       Executive Order
FBI        Federal Bureau of Investigation
FIPS PUB   Federal Information Processing Standards Publication
FISMA      Federal Information Security Modernization Act
GAO        Government Accountability Office
GFE        Government Furnished Equipment
GFIRST     Government Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams
GRS        General Records Schedule
HVA        High Value Asset
IOC        Indicator of Compromise
IG         Inspector General
IP         Internet Protocol
IR         Interagency Report
IRP        Incident Response Plan
ISC        Information Security Coordinator
ISP        Internet Service Provider
ISSPM      Information Systems Security Program Manager
IT         Information Technology
MAC        Media Access Control
NARA       National Archives and Records Administration
NCCIC      National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center
NIST       National Institute of Standards and Technology
NSS        National Security System
NSSP       National Security System Program
OC         Office of Communications

                                          C-1
OCFO      Office of the Chief Financial Officer
OCIO      Office of the Chief Information Officer
OCR       Office of Congressional Relations
ODNI      Office of the Director of National Intelligence
OGC       Office of the General Counsel
OHRM      Office of Human Resources Management
OHS       Office of Homeland Security
OIG       Office of the Inspector General
OMB       Office of Management and Budget
PDSD      Personnel and Document Security Division
PII       Personally Identifiable Information
POA&M     Plan of Action and Milestones
POC       Point of Contact
SAOP      Senior Agency Official for Privacy
SP        Special Publication
SSO       Special Security Officer
TCD       Technical Crimes Division
TTP       Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures
U.S.C.    United States Code
US-CERT   United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team
USDA      United States Department of Agriculture
UTC       Coordinated Universal Time




                                      C-2
