                         U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                               WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                           NUMBER:
DEPARTMENTAL MANUAL                                        DM 4030-001
                                                           DATE:
SUBJECT: Section 508 Procedures                             July 1, 2026
                                                           EXPIRATION DATE:
OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer
                                                           July 1, 2029



Section                                                                              Page

1. Purpose                                                                              1
2. Scope                                                                                2
3. Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                   2
4. Roles and Responsibilities                                                           2
5. Procedures                                                                           3
6. Legal Requirements                                                                   3
7. Managing a Section 508 Program                                                       3
8. Section 508 Awareness Training                                                       7
9. Accessible Documentation                                                             8
10. Accessible Web Design and Development                                               9
11. Accessibility Testing                                                               9
12. Market Research                                                                    11
13. How to Purchase ICT                                                                18
14. How to File for an Exception                                                       20
15. How to File a Complaint                                                            24
16. Inquiries                                                                          25

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                              A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                             B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                              C-1
Appendix D – Complaint Decision Table                                                D-1



1. PURPOSE

    a) This Departmental Manual (DM) identifies the processes to be used by the United States
       Department of Agriculture (USDA) for implementing Section 508 of the Rehabilitation
       Act of 1973, 29 United States Code (U.S.C.) § 794d, as amended by the Workforce
       Investment Act of 1998, Public Law (P.L.) 105-220.
  b) USDA is committed to maintaining its conformance to the Section 508 regulation for all
     information and communications technology (ICT). USDA is also committed to ensuring
     that its services are accessible to persons with disabilities.


2. SCOPE

  This DM applies to all USDA Mission Area, agency, and staff office employees, appointees,
  and others working for, or on behalf of, USDA.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a) This DM must be used along with Departmental Regulation (DR) 4030-001, Section 508
     Program. The DR establishes USDA’s requirements to develop, maintain, procure, and
     use ICT that meet the Section 508 requirements as determined by the United States
     Access Board (Access Board) and the General Services Administration (GSA). The DR
     also details USDA’s requirements to establish and support the USDA Section 508
     Program Office.

  b) This DM will not be interpreted to conflict with the rights of an employee under the law,
     including:

     1) The Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute (5 U.S.C. 7101-7135);

     2) Applicable collective bargaining agreements;

     3) Those provisions of Chapter 75 of Title 5 of U.S.C. relating to disciplinary action of
        employees;

     4) The Whistleblower Protection Act of 1989 (WPA); and

     5) The Whistleblower Protection Enhancement Act of 2012 (WPEA).

  c) Additionally, this DM will not be interpreted to conflict with any rights accorded to a
     union representative under the Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute
     when communicating as a union representative. Further, it is recognized that the
     implementation of this DM may be subject to collective bargaining, the results of which
     may modify the policy and/or procedures stated or implied herein, as permitted by law.

4. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  The roles and responsibilities outlined in DR 4030-001, Section 11, apply to this DM.




                                              2
5. PROCEDURES

  A) USDA is committed to ensuring that all ICT is accessible to individuals with disabilities.
     Pursuant to Section 508, conformance to these standards is mandatory for all Federal
     agencies.

  B) The processes in this document must be used to provide both employees and members of
     the public with equivalent access to and use of USDA information and services.

  C) See Section 12 for information on how to perform market research.

  D) See Section 13 for information on how to purchase ICT.

  E) See Section 14 for information on how to file for an exception.

  F) See Section 15 for information on how to file a complaint.


6. LEGAL REQUIREMENTS

  Conformance to the Information and Communication Technology Revised 508 Standards and
  255 Guidelines for ICT products and services is mandatory for Executive Branch Federal
  agencies subject to Section 508. For assistance interpreting the Section 508 requirements,
  contact the USDA Section 508 Program Office at Section508-OCIO@usda.gov.


7. MANAGING A SECTION 508 PROGRAM

  This section provides instruction to Section 508 Coordinators on how to manage the Section
  508 Program within their Mission Area, agency, or staff office.

  a) Section 508 Coordinators work to improve the Section 508 compliance level of their
     Mission Area, agency, or staff office. They are also responsible for developing a mature
     Section 508 Program to manage the accessibility of ICT. For details on the roles and
     responsibilities of Section 508 Coordinators, see DR 4030-001, Section 10n.

  b) Mature programs monitor conformance to accessibility policies and report accurate
     compliance levels using conformance data. Section 508 Coordinators use conformance
     data to drive decision making and improve the effectiveness of the program across five
     Program Maturity Domains:

     1) Acquisition

           Ensure that ICT procurement solicitations include Section 508 solicitation language
           in all contract vehicles and an accessibility report detailing the relevant
           requirements. This information is available in the Office of the Chief Information



                                              3
        Officer’s (OCIO) internal procurement system, AgMAX. For more information on
        ICT solicitations, see DM Section 13, How to Purchase ICT.

   2) Technology Lifecycles

        Ensure that Section 508 requirements are included in all lifecycle activities to
        maximize effectiveness and reduce costs. This includes, but is not limited to,
        enterprise architecture, design, development, testing, deployment, and ongoing
        maintenance activities.

   3) Quality Assurance Testing

        Collect a representative sample of websites and documents. The sample should
        consist of a variety of intranet sites, internet sites, and documents from each agency
        component or function. The sample size should be proportionate to the number of
        websites and documents in active use, as to be determined by the Section 508
        Coordinator. Perform a compliance evaluation. Determine the percentage of ICT
        found to be compliant to the revised Section 508 standards.

   4) Complaint Management

        Create a clear procedure for receiving, tracking, and resolving accessibility
        complaints. The procedure must facilitate effective communication methods to
        support end users and minimize costs. Once a complaint arrives, accessibility
        professionals validate accessibility defects. Then they manage resource planning
        decisions.

   5) Training

        Provide role-based training for employees to understand their responsibilities
        towards accessibility. Relevant roles include, but are not limited to, web and
        software developers, acquisition professionals, forms managers, human resource
        employees, and communications specialists.

c) Program Maturity Domains each receive a Program Maturity Level as determined by the
   conformance data. Each Program Maturity Level has an associated Maturity Measure
   used to calculate the overall conformance of USDA.

d) Calculating Program Maturity

   1) Step One, Assign Program Maturity Levels

        The Section 508 Coordinator must assign a Program Maturity Level and
        corresponding Maturity Measure to each Program Maturity Domain for the Mission
        Area, agency, or staff office. They do this using the criteria in Table 1, Program




                                           4
        Maturity Levels. The objective is to have a “Measured” Program Maturity Level
        across all Program Maturity Domains.


                              Table 1: Program Maturity Levels

     Program Maturity                          Description                    Maturity
           Level                                                              Measure
                 Ad Hoc   No established framework exists for the                1
                          consistent management of Section 508
                          compliance requirements.
                 Planned There are established policies, processes, and            2
                         procedures for Section 508 compliance defined
                         and communicated.
               Resourced There are committed resources or staff trained            3
                         to implement policies, processes, and
                         procedures for Section 508 compliance.
                         Executive Leadership understands, supports,
                         and effectively implements the Section 508
                         policies and procedures.
               Measured Section 508 compliance metrics are monitored.              4
                         USDA validates its digital services and ICT
                         solutions to ensure that they conform to the
                         revised Section 508 standards. Measured
                         program effectiveness helps to reduce risk and
                         prioritizes program improvement.


   2) Step Two, Determine Section 508 Compliance

        The Section 508 Coordinator must collect a representative sample of internet and
        intranet USDA sites within their Mission Area, agency, or staff office. Determine
        the Section 508 compliance of each category. Automated accessibility tools are
        permitted. Calculate the following metrics:

        (a) The number of internet sites evaluated and the percentage that conform to the
            revised Section 508 standards.

        (b) The number of intranet sites evaluated and the percentage that conform to the
            revised Section 508 standards.

        (c) The total number of internet and intranet sites evaluated and the percentage
            that conform to the revised Section 508 standards.

e) Reporting Requirements




                                           5
   1) Section 508 Coordinators must complete a Program Maturity report for their Mission
      Area, agency, or staff office. The Section 508 Program Manager collects these
      reports and calculates USDA’s overall compliance score. The score and supporting
      documentation are sent to the CIO for review prior to submission. Submit this
      information to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) twice annually. Submit
      it to the Department of Justice (DOJ) upon request every 2 years.

   2) To receive assistance with compliance determination or submission, email
      Section508-OCIO@usda.gov.

f) Managing Technology Lifecycles

    Section 508 Coordinators must incorporate the revised Section 508 standards into
    Mission Area, agency, and staff office lifecycle activities to maximize effectiveness and
    reduce cost. The Project Manager (PM) will perform activities during each phase as
    follows:

   1) Project Planning

        (a) Consider accessibility needs during investment decisions;

        (b) Determine whether the ICT creates accessibility barriers; and

        (c) Allocate time and funding to address accessibility issues.

   2) Requirements Gathering and Design

        (a) Identify the needs of disabled users and ensure human-centric design;

        (b) Identify the applicable standards for the ICT and associated electronic content;

        (c) Include accessibility when considering alternative solutions;

        (d) Address pre-existing accessibility issues when prioritizing technology
            enhancements;

        (e) Validate solution designs and prototypes with disabled users; and

        (f) Include accessibility requirements during each sprint when performing the
            agile development methodology to promote early discovery of accessibility
            issues.

   3) Development

        (a) Train developers to understand the rationale and importance of Section 508;




                                            6
           (b) Provide access to testing tools to allow developers to test their ICT in-house;

           (c) Encourage the use of accessible code libraries; and

           (d) Ensure that agreements on open-source software address compliance
               responsibilities.

     4) Testing and Quality Assurance

           (a) Select accessibility testing methods consistent with the Section 508
               requirements outlined by the Access Board;

           (b) Ensure that accessibility requirements are met in unit tests;

           (c) Identify where accessibility issues are located and troubleshoot potential root
               causes; and

           (d) Track accessibility bug fixes and their resolution status.

     5) Deployment, Operations, and Maintenance

           (a) Ensure that configuration and integration activities do not introduce new
               accessibility barriers;

           (b) Perform accessibility testing prior to publishing updates; and

           (c) Consistently monitor the ICT environment for accessibility issues.


8. SECTION 508 AWARENESS TRAINING

  a) All USDA employees and contractors must complete the Section 508 Awareness
     Training in AgLearn+ unless otherwise specified. Employees and contractors receive an
     email notification 45 calendar days before their training is due.

  b) The USDA Section 508 Program provides monthly training to USDA’s Federal
     employees and contractors. Training opportunities are announced via OCIO’s internal
     broadcasts. In addition, Section 508 Coordinators provide role-based training to groups
     and individuals on Section 508 and its related subject matters. Section 508 training
     topics include but are not limited to:

     1) Coordinator Orientation Training;

     2) Section 508 Governance and Policy;

     3) Performing Market Research for Accessible ICT;



                                              7
     4) Accessible Document Creation and Remediation;

     5) Accessibility Testing Methodologies; and

     6) Disability Awareness for Service Desks.

  c) USDA employees and contractors may contact their designated Section 508 Coordinator
     to schedule individual and group training.


9. ACCESSIBLE DOCUMENTATION

  a) In accordance with Access Board’s Chapter 6: Support Documentation and Services of
     the revised Section 508 standards, USDA employees and contractors must provide
     accessible information and services.

  b) Electronic documents must include built-in accessibility features. They must be
     compatible with assistive technology (AT). They must conform to the most current Level
     A and Level AA Success Criteria under the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines
     (WCAG) where applicable.

  c) Federal employees and contractors must create and remediate accessible documentation.
     Asking other Federal employees (including the Section 508 Coordinator) to remediate
     documentation is prohibited. However, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may
     purchase contract support services to assist with remediation.

  d) Archived and print documents must be made compliant prior to electronic distribution.

  e) The Accessible Electronic Documentation Community of Practice (AED CoP) provides
     document remediation training videos demonstrating accessibility remediation across
     various document types. This information appears on GSA’s Create Accessible Digital
     Products web page. See Figure 1, Screenshot of the Create Accessible Digital Products
     web page.




                                             8
              Figure 1: Screenshot of the Create Accessible Digital Products web page




  f) The Section 508 Program Manager provides detailed document remediation checklists to
     guide content creators. To view and download the checklists, visit the OCIO’s Section
     508 Checklists website.


10. ACCESSIBLE WEB DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT

  a) The USDA Style Guide includes best practices to help employees and contractors produce
     effective and consistent communication materials across all USDA sites. For more
     information, visit the USDA’s Accessibility web page.

  b) In addition to the USDA Style Guide, USDA follows the guidance provided by the GSA
     Section 508 Program on accessible web design and development. The GSA Federal
     Section 508 website provides a Guide to Accessible Web Design and Development. This
     guide summarizes critical WCAG requirements, highlights best practices, and provides
     code examples.


11. ACCESSIBILITY TESTING

  a) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must dedicate resources for accessibility
     testing and ICT remediation. Section 508 Coordinators and their staff may perform
     accessibility testing upon request. They may request support from another Mission Area,
     agency, or staff office. They may procure support services.

  b) Project and Program Managers may request accessibility testing services for their ICT.
     They must include the name and version of the ICT, access information, test credentials,




                                             9
   test scripts, and any other relevant information. Send service requests to the Mission
   Area, agency, or staff office Section 508 Coordinator.

c) Automated, Manual, and Hybrid Testing

   1) Automated testing involves the use of high-volume Section 508 conformance tools to
      scan and test electronic content. In addition to installation and configuration, the tool
      must allow customizable accessibility rulesets, scans, and reporting or monitoring
      capabilities.

   2) Automated tools must be purchased with support services. Support services should
      include online self-paced training for its users, tool integration with testing
      environments, and ongoing maintenance activities.

        (a) At a minimum, automated tools should provide:

             1    The ability to scan high volumes of electronic content in all formats;

             2    Both standard and customizable ruleset parameters for test administrators;

             3    Early detection and remediation of false positives;

             4    Categorization issues by type, frequency, and severity;

             5    Exportable and customizable reports;

             6    Trend analysis by website and Mission Area, agency, or staff office;

             7    Directions to specific code locations where errors are generated; and

             8    Contextually relevant remediation guidance.

        (b) Visit GSA’s Automated Testing web page for more technical criteria.

   3) Before using automated tools, be aware of their limitations:

        (a) Automated tools may either produce excessive false positives or test for only a
            small portion of the requirements. The vendor must define and quantify the
            method and accuracy of its rulesets regarding their alignment with your
            standards;

        (b) Server-based tools may not be able to access content secured behind firewalls
            or otherwise protected content;




                                            10
           (c) Automated tools often convert documents into Hypertext Markup Language
               (HTML) files prior to testing. An automated tool should be capable of testing
               documents in their native format;

           (d) Multiple types of automated tools are often necessary to cover multiple content
               types; and

           (e) Automated tools provide outputs relevant to developers, but typically do not
               integrate test results into dashboard reporting for other organizational uses.

     4) Key Success Factor: To effectively improve accessibility for the Mission Area,
        agency, or staff office and support the highest level of accessibility improvement, the
        tools must be useful across multiple applicable roles. These include User Experience
        (UX) designers, developers, quality assurance testers, etc.

     5) Manual testing involves the use of several assistive technologies to validate
        accessibility. This method allows for human subjectivity. It is ideal for software and
        web-based solutions.

     6) Manual testing procedures must align with the Access Board’s Section 508 ICT
        Testing Baseline. The baseline covers critical accessibility requirements, how to test
        each criterion, and the rationale behind the testing methodology or tool. The
        Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Section 508 Trusted Tester Conformance
        Test Process Version 5 establishes manual test approach used within USDA.

     7) Hybrid testing requires the use of both manual and automated testing methods.
        Developers integrate hybrid testing into ICT development lifecycles. Automated
        tools identify common accessibility errors. Manual testing occurs with each major
        development milestone and prior to deployment.

     8) For more information on the testing methodologies used within your Mission Area,
        agency, or staff office, contact your Section 508 Coordinator.


12. MARKET RESEARCH

  a) Market research is the process to determine the feasibility of potential ICT products and
     services based on the purchaser’s requirements.

  b) All ICT solutions and services within USDA must adhere to their respective accessibility
     requirements. When purchasing or developing an ICT solution, these accessibility
     requirements must be included within a well-defined business needs statement.

  c) When only inaccessible solutions meet the business need, USDA and its components
     must procure the ICT solution that best meets the accessibility standards and the business
     need, as determined by the PM. This requirement is detailed in the Access Board’s



                                             11
   Section E202.7: Best Meets in the Information and Communication Technology Revised
   508 Standards and 255 Guidelines.

d) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must also provide an alternate means of
   accessing the information or functions supported by the ICT to mitigate any accessibility
   gaps.

   1) Failure to include the applicable Section 508 technical requirements may result in:

         (a) An increased risk of schedule and cost overruns for the project;

         (b) Additional remediation costs post-delivery; and

         (c) An increased risk of litigation against the USDA.

   2) Section 508 procurement is enforced through the Federal Acquisition Regulation
      (FAR), 48 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). The FAR governs each of the
      procurement phases: Pre-Award, Award, and Post-Award.

e) Step One, Pre-Award Phase

    The PM determines the applicable accessibility requirements.

   1) Use GSA’s Accessibility Requirements Tool (ART) to determine the applicable
      Section 508 requirements for the ICT solution.

   2) Determine the applicable Section 508 requirements. Determine whether a potential
      ICT solution qualifies for an exception. Approved exception requests typically do not
      cover the entirety of the ICT. Include the applicable accessibility criteria for
      components unqualified for an exception. See Section 14, How to File for an
      Exception of this DM for more details.

f) Step Two, Pre-Award Phase

    Perform market research for accessible ICT solutions or services.

   1) To procure accessible ICT products and solutions that meet the business need, the PM
      must perform market research. Collect and analyze the Accessibility Conformance
      Reports (ACR) of all potential solutions from their respective vendors.

   2) ACRs must, at a minimum, provide the following compliance information for all
      applicable standards:

         (a) The compliance level for each applicable criterion;




                                           12
     (b) The testing methodologies and tools used to determine the compliance level;
         and

     (c) The identification of critical accessibility defects, also known as “show-stopper
         issues.” “Show-stopper issues” are accessibility deficiencies that make the ICT
         unusable for people with disabilities.

3) To procure contractor support and accessibility services, PMs must collect and
   analyze Contractor Capability Statements (CCS). Contractors must demonstrate their
   Section 508 expertise across several risk factors. The PM must determine a
   contractor’s risk of noncompliance. These risk factors appear in Table 2, CCS Risk
   Factor Analysis.


                           Table 1: CCS Risk Factor Analysis

        Risk Factor     Low Risk                  Medium Risk            High Risk
             Policy Provides                  Provides basic          No accessibility
                    comprehensive             statement               commitment
                    policy statement.         acknowledging           provided.
                                              Section 508.
   Testing Methods Mentions use of            Mentions that they      No mention of
                     DHS Test Process         test for Section 508,   accessibility testing.
                     (e.g., Trusted           but no details.
                     Tester).
     Subject Matter Mentions access to        Mentions Section        No mention of
           Expertise a large team of          508 expertise, but      Section 508
                     accessibility            no details.             expertise.
                     experts.
           Processes Mentions Section         Mentions that           No mention of
                     508 planning,            Section 508 testing     Section 508
                     development, and         is performed, but no    processes.
                     testing activities.      details.
   Past Performance Mentions extensive        Mentions some           No mention of
                     relative Section 508     Section 508 past        Section 508 past
                     past performance.        performance.            performance.


4) The PM must determine which contractors are most capable of adhering to the
   applicable standards and providing support services.

5) PMs are required to complete a justification statement pertaining to the selected ICT.
   Justification statements detail why an ICT solution was accepted. They also detail
   why the other potential solutions were not accepted.




                                        13
   6) Whenever an accessible ICT solution is unavailable in the current commercial
      marketplace, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices can procure development
      services. PMs must perform market research for vendors or contractors with
      experience developing accessible solutions.

g) Step Three, Pre-Award Phase

    Develop solicitation language for acquisition packages.

   1) The USDA Section 508 Program Manager provides pre-approved solicitation
      language for acquisition packages. The Section 508 solicitation language must
      appear in all requirements documents and contract vehicles.

   2) For more information on solicitation language, see Section 13 of this DM.

h) Step Four, Pre-Award Phase

    Request accessibility information from vendors.

   1) Based on the conformance level determined by the ACR, vendors must provide a
      remediation plan for commercial or Government off-the-shelf (COTS or GOTS)
      products and services.

   2) Conduct these activities prior to receipt by the Mission Area, agency, or staff office.

i) Step Five, Award Phase

    Evaluate vendor proposals.

    Prior to contract award, the PM must validate vendor claims against the relevant Section
    508 and WCAG requirements. The ICT must meet the compliance standards prior to
    deployment. Vendors must remediate accessibility defects as they are discovered.

j) Step Six, Post-Award Phase

    Validate Section 508 compliance.

   1) Perform accessibility testing to determine the current compliance level. PMs may
      perform accessibility testing in-house, or request services from their Section 508
      Coordinator. The accessibility testing protocol must align with Access Boards’s
      Section 508 ICT Testing Baseline;

   2) PMs must retest the ICT throughout the operations and maintenance phase; and

   3) For more information on accessibility testing, see Section 11 of this DM.




                                           14
k) Market Research Instructions for Section 508 Coordinators

   1) Step One, Determine ACR Completeness

        Determine whether the ACR is complete.

        Section 508 Coordinators assisting PMs to evaluate product ACRs should consider
        the following guidelines:

        (a) Ensure that the ACR was developed by either the vendor or an approved third
            party;

        (b) Ensure that the ACR covers the correct product, version, and substantive
            release;

        (c) Ensure that the ACR includes all applicable requirements, their respective
            accessibility ratings, and the justification;

        (d) Ensure that the ACR includes the methods and tools used to evaluate the ICT;

        (e) Ensure that the ACR includes configuration guidelines, accessibility
            workarounds, and how to request accessibility services;

        (f) Determine whether the compliance level meets or exceeds the requirements
            defined in the solicitation language;

        (g) Document insufficient responses to send to the vendor. Remove the vendor’s
            solution from consideration when a sufficient response is not provided; and

        (h) Ensure that incomplete ACRs are not used to make an award decision.

   2) Step Two, Identify Showstopper Issues

        Determine whether there are any “showstopper issues.”

        (a) The presence of showstopper issues makes ACRs unsatisfactory.

        (b) Some examples of showstopper issues include:

             1   Software that disrupts AT or accessibility features;

             2   Software that requires the use of a mouse;

             3   Hardware with flashing lights faster than the light sensitivity threshold
                 allows; and




                                          15
         4    Product manuals that are unreadable by AT.

3) Step Three, Assess Accuracy of Conformance Claims

     Assess the accuracy of the conformance claims.

     (a) When evaluating conformance claims, use the guidelines in Table 3,
         Conformance Claim Legend.


                     Table 2: Conformance Claim Legend

                             Conformance Claim Requirement

                                        Supports The functionality of the product
                                                  has at least one method that meets
                                                  the criterion without known
                                                  defects or meets the equivalent
                                                  facilitation.
              Partially Supports or Supports with Some of the functionality of the
                                      Exceptions product does not fully comply to
                                                  the criterion.
                               Does Not Support Most of the functionality does not
                                                  meet the criterion.
                                  Not Applicable The criterion is not relevant to the
                                                  product.
                                   Not Evaluated The product has not been
                                                  evaluated.


     (b) Section 508 Coordinators are required to adjust a conformance claim
         downwards in the following cases:

         1    If it was determined that the conformance claim is inaccurate in its current
              state; or

         2    If there is an inadequate, missing, or irrelevant explanation found in the
              Remarks and Explanations section within the ACR.

4) Step Four, Compliance Score and Rating

     Calculate the ACR’s Compliance Score and assign a Compliance Rating.

     (a) Using the following equation, calculate the Compliance Score to the ACR:




                                       16
               (# of criterion rated “Partially Supports” × 0.5) + (# of criterion
               rated “Does not Support” or “Not Evaluated”) = Compliance Score

          (b) Determine the Compliance Rating using Table 4, Compliance Rating Legend.


                             Table 3: Compliance Rating Legend

               Compliance Compliance Rating
                      Score
                Less than 5 Superior. The ICT substantially meets all
                            applicable standards.
                 Between 5 Satisfactory. Requires minimal remediation.
                    and 9.5
               Between 10 Marginal. Meets few of the applicable standards.
                  and 14.5 Remediation or an alternative access solution is
                            required.
                    Greater Unsatisfactory. Fails to meet the applicable
                    than 15 standards. Remediation or an alternative ICT
                            solution is required.


          (c) Incomplete ACRs automatically receive an Unsatisfactory compliance rating.
              For USDA and its components, only ACRs that receive a Superior or
              Satisfactory Compliance Rating can be accepted to justify the purchase of ICT.



13. HOW TO PURCHASE ICT

  This section details the ICT procurement procedure through OCIO’s Capital Planning and
  Investment Control (CPIC) Acquisition Approval Request (AAR) process referenced in DR
  3130-013, Information Technology Capital Planning and Investment Control, and in
  AgMAX.

  a) Legal Requirements

      The revised Section 508 standards apply to all ICT contract vehicles and procurement
      actions, including micro-purchases. Section 508 has been incorporated into 48 CFR
      Chapter 1, Federal Acquisition Regulation, and the Agriculture Acquisition Regulation
      (AGAR).

  b) Building an Acquisition Package

      This section only covers the Section 508 requirements for acquisition packages. Contact
      the CPIC Service Desk at CapitalPlanningDivision@usda.gov for the full list of



                                            17
requirements. Follow the steps below to receive approval for ICT purchase requests
under Section 508:

1) Step One, Ensure All ICT Included

     Ensure that all ICT in the acquisition package is included in a contract vehicle. The
     contract vehicle must also include the Section 508 solicitation language provided by
     USDA. When purchasing from a Blanket Purchase Agreement (BPA), Interagency
     Agreement (IAA), or National Aeronautics and Space Administration Solutions for
     Enterprise-Wide Procurement (NASA SEWP) contracting vehicle, ensure that the
     pre-approved solicitation language appears as an addendum.

2) Step Two, Provide ACR or VPAT

     Provide an ACR or Information Technology Industry (ITI) Voluntary Product
     Assessment Template (VPAT) for each product or service. Like the ACR, VPATs
     detail the results of in-house accessibility testing by the vendor.

3) Step Three, Generate Accessibility Requirements

     Using the ART, generate an Accessibility Requirements document that covers the
     applicable Section 508 provisions and exceptions for all ICT. Contact your Mission
     Area, agency, or staff office Section 508 Coordinator for assistance. If a single
     report cannot cover all ICT items, multiple reports can be generated and attached to
     the acquisition package. See Figure 2, Screenshot of the ART.


                        Figure 2: Screenshot of the ART




4) Step Four, Provide Additional Artifacts




                                       18
        Where applicable, provide these additional artifacts:

        (a) An approved Exception Request covering at least one ICT product or service;
            and

        (b) A Remediation Plan.

   5) Step Five, Submit Acquisition Package

        Submit the acquisition package to the agency liaison in OCIO’s Capital Planning
        and Information Technology Governance Division (CPITGD).

        (a) CPITGD will perform a preliminary review before the Section 508 Coordinator
            performs their review. The review period is 5 business days.

        (b) Each AAR has a trackable review status in AgMAX that consists of one of the
            following:

            1    Pending Subject Matter Expert (SME) Acknowledgement: The Section
                 508 SME has yet to acknowledge receipt of the AAR package;

            2    Review Under Way: The Section 508 SME is currently in the process of
                 reviewing the AAR package;

            3    Awaiting Agency Feedback: The Section 508 SME has found an issue
                 with one or more of the artifacts and is requesting a correction;

                 a    Approved: The Section 508 SME approves the AAR package.
                      Packages that receive Approval from each SME are submitted to an
                      Approving Official; or

                 b    Disapproved: The Section 508 SME disapproves the AAR package.
                      Disapproval of the AAR requires the acquisition package to be
                      resubmitted to CPIC.

   6) Step Six, Maintain Procurement Package Documentation

        Maintain your procurement package documentation in accordance with Federal
        recordkeeping requirements to use during renewals and option years.

c) Frequently Asked Questions

   1) Question: Are emergency AARs exempt from Section 508?

        Answer: No, all AARs must comply to the revised Section 508 standards.




                                          19
       2) Question: How do I address Section 508 for ICT license renewals and option years?

             Answer: Incorporate updated documentation within your acquisition package to
             receive approval for ICT license renewals and option years.

       3) Question: What if the ICT acquisition package does not include a contract vehicle?

             Answer: A requirements document must be developed for the acquisition and
             include the Section 508 solicitation language.

       4) Question: When purchasing from another Mission Area, agency, or staff office’s
          contract vehicle, who is responsible for ensuring Section 508 compliance?

             Answer: The purchasing Mission Area, agency, or staff office is responsible for
             submitting the appropriate Section 508 artifacts in addition to the ICT solution’s
             Section 508 compliance.


14. HOW TO FILE FOR AN EXCEPTION

Section 508 exceptions cover specific circumstances where the acquisition or use of inaccessible
ICT is necessary. These circumstances are covered in the Access Board’s 508 Chapter 2:
Scoping Requirements in the Information and Communication Technology Revised 508
Standards and 255 Guidelines.


   a) Exception Types

       1) Back Office Equipment Exception

             ICT will not be required to conform to the revised Section 508 standards when
             status indicators and operable parts for ICT functions are in spaces frequented only
             by the service provider for maintenance, repair, or occasional monitoring of
             equipment.

       2) Commercial Non-Availability Exception

             When ICT conforming to one or more requirements in the revised Section 508
             standards is not commercially available, the Mission Area, agency, or staff office
             will procure the ICT that best meets the revised Section 508 standards consistent
             with the business need.

       3) Federal Contracts Exception




                                                20
     ICT acquired by a contractor incidental to a contract will not be required to conform
     to the revised Section 508 standards. This exception may only be claimed by
     Federal agencies and their components.

4) Fundamental Alteration Exception

     This exception applies if bringing an existing ICT into compliance with the revised
     Section 508 standards would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of the
     ICT.

5) Legacy ICT Exception

     If the existing ICT conforms to the previous Section 508 standards and has not been
     altered on or after January 18, 2018, the ICT is not required to conform to the
     revised Section 508 standards.

6) National Security Systems Exception

     The revised Section 508 standards do not apply to ICT operated by Federal agencies
     as part of a national security system, as defined by 40 U.S.C. § 11103(a).

7) Undue Burden Exception

     This exception applies if bringing an existing ICT into compliance with the revised
     Section 508 standards would impose an undue burden on the USDA as a whole and
     its functions.




                                       21
b) How to Qualify

   1) Each exception type comes with requirements that can be used in exception
      determination. Table 5, Exceptions, describes the requirements to qualify for each
      exception type.


                                   Table 4: Exceptions

           Exception     How to Qualify                            Examples of
                Type                                               Qualifying ICT
          Back Office    ICT must require human interaction        Routers, mainframes,
           Equipment     for maintenance, repair, or occasional    server equipment, etc.
            Exception    monitoring of equipment.
          Commercial     When ICT meeting the business need        Highly specialized or
                Non-     does not currently exist in the           unique software
          Availability   commercial marketplace, the PM must       systems.
            Exception    provide evidence through market
                         research.
               Federal   The ICT was purchased by a vendor or      A contractor’s laptop
             Contracts   contractor for their use, and they will   acquired prior to
             Exception   maintain ownership upon completion        contracting with the
                         of the contract.                          Federal government.
          Fundamental    The PM must demonstrate that              Geospatial software that
            Alteration   remediating the ICT would result in a     tracks wildfires with live
            Exception    fundamental alteration in the nature of   data feeds.
                         the ICT.
           Legacy ICT    The ICT was deemed compliant by a         Websites whose user
            Exception    Federal testing center to the Section     interface and
                         508 standards prior to January 18,        information has not been
                         2018. Additionally, the ICT was not       altered since the Revised
                         maintained, upgraded, or modified         Section 508 standards
                         since.                                    were mandated.

                       Modifications include but are not
                       limited to interoperability and user
                       interface changes, data and
                       information access changes, etc.
              National The ICT is operated by USDA as part         Cybersecurity systems
              Security of a national security system.              within the military.
              Systems
             Exception




                                          22
             Exception   How to Qualify                            Examples of
                 Type                                              Qualifying ICT
                Undue    The PM must demonstrate that              USDA’s back-end
               Burden    bringing the ICT into conformance         payroll system.
             Exception   imposes significant difficulty or         Remediation would
                         expense considering USDA’s                require halting USDA
                         available resources to the program or     and its functions.
                         component for which the ICT is to be
                         procured.


   2) If you are unsure whether one of these exceptions applies to your ICT, utilize the
      ART.

c) Required Documentation

   1) Exceptions may require supplemental documentation, such as remediation plans and
      proof of market research.

   2) The Commercial Non-Availability, Fundamental Alteration, and Undue Burden
      Exceptions always require remediation plans and proof of market research. The
      remediation period cannot exceed 60 calendar days from the evaluation date for web-
      based applications, multimedia, websites, and training materials. Installable software
      has a remediation period of 1 calendar year.

   3) PMs can request an exception determination and the appropriate forms from their
      Section 508 Coordinator. All exception requests must be submitted via the internal
      ticketing system.

d) Exception Renewal

   1) Excluding the Back Office Equipment and Federal Contracts Exceptions, approved
      exception requests have an acceptance period of up to 1 calendar year and require
      annual renewal. PMs must demonstrate that the ICT has been corrected for Section
      508 compliance during the acceptance period. If Section 508 compliance is not
      achieved, the Section 508 Official may deny the renewal.

   2) To request a renewal, submit the newly completed exception request form and
      updated documentation via the internal ticketing system.

e) Risk Management for Mission Critical ICT

   1) PMs may accept the legal risk of non-compliance and request an extension to the
      remediation period using a Risk Acceptance Memo (RAM) under the following
      conditions:




                                           23
           (a) The ICT is mission critical to the agency. ICT is considered mission critical
               when its absence causes a work stoppage to the agency.

           (b) The vendor has a signed agreement with the agency to bring the ICT into
               compliance within a 1-year period.

           (c) The Section 508 Official or designee has approved the vendor’s remediation
               plan.

     2) RAMs must be submitted to the Section 508 Official or designee for review and
        approval prior to use.


15. HOW TO FILE A COMPLAINT

  a) The revised Section 508 standards require all Federal agencies to ensure that the ICT it
     develops, procures, maintains, or uses is accessible to individuals with disabilities.
     Section 508 authorizes individuals to file administrative complaints without alleged
     discrimination against the USDA through the Mission Area, agency’s or staff office’s
     Section 508 coordinator.

  b) If you believe the denial of an administrative remedy or lack of accommodation via the
     administrative process is based on a protected basis (such as disability), you have the
     right to file a discrimination complaint. Members of the public, employees, and
     applicants for employment with the USDA who wish to file a complaint of discrimination
     regarding Section 508 accessibility may file a complaint online via the Program
     Discrimination Complaint Portal Complaint Form Portal; by completing the USDA
     Program Discrimination Complaint Form (English), at any USDA office by calling (866)
     632-9992, or sending an email/letter to program.intake@usda.gov. Employees and
     applicants for employment with USDA who wish to file an Equal Employment
     Opportunity (EEO) complaint where noncompliance with Section 508 applies must
     contact an EEO Counselor that services the Mission Area, agency, or staff office that they
     believe discriminated against them to start the informal EEO complaint process. Follow
     the instructions on OASCR’s web page, Equal Employment Opportunity Complaint
     Filing.

  c) Section 508 Complaint Use Cases

     1) Use Case 1, Program Discrimination Complaints

           Members of the public, employees, and applicants for employment with the USDA
           who wish to file a USDA program discrimination complaint where noncompliance
           with Section 508 applies must follow the instructions on OASCR’s web page,
           Filing a Program Discrimination Complaint as a USDA Customer. Complainants
           should use the Agriculture Department (AD) 3027, USDA Program Discrimination




                                             24
            Complaint Form, and submit the form via email to program.intake@usda.gov.
            OASCR tracks and reports all complaints with alleged discrimination.

      2) Use Case 2, EEO Discrimination Complaints

            (a) Employees and applicants for employment with USDA who wish to file an
                Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) complaint where noncompliance with
                Section 508 applies must contact an EEO Counselor that services the Mission
                Area, agency, or staff office that they believe discriminated against them to
                start the informal EEO complaint process. Follow the instructions on
                OASCR’s web page, Equal Employment Opportunity Complaint Filing.

            (b) If the informal EEO complaint is not resolved to the satisfaction of all parties
                with the concurrence of the EEO Counselor, the employee or applicant may
                file a formal EEO complaint with OASCR. Formal complaints may be
                submitted via the ETK/EEO portal.

            (c) OASCR tracks and reports all complaints with alleged discrimination.

      3) Use Cases 3 and 4, Section 508 Noncompliance Without Alleged Discrimination

      4) Members of the public, employees, and applicants for employment with USDA that
         wish to report Section 508 noncompliance without alleged discrimination must
         contact the managing Mission Area’s, agency’s, or staff office’s Section 508
         Coordinator, or email the USDA Section 508 Program Office at Section508-
         OCIO@usda.gov. Each Mission Area, agency, and Staff Office’s Section 508
         Coordinator manages and tracks complaints where no alleged discrimination occurred
         with regard to its webpages, forms, documents, links, systems, applications, or other
         ICT.

   d) For more information, see Appendix D, Complaint Decision Table.


16. INQUIRIES

   Questions pertaining to this directive should be directed to the OCIO Information Resource
   Management Center (IRMC) USDA Section 508 Program Office via email at Section508-
   OCIO@usda.gov.


                                             -END-




                                               25
                                 APPENDIX A

                     ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

AAR         Acquisition Approval Request
ACR         Accessibility Conformance Report
AD          Agriculture Department (Departmental Form number prefix)
AED CoP     Accessible Electronic Documentation Community of Practice
AGAR        Agriculture Acquisition Regulation
ART         Accessibility Requirements Tool
AT          Assistive Technology
BPA         Blanket Purchase Agreement
CCS         Contractor Capability Statement
CFR         Code of Federal Regulations
COTS        Commercial Off-The-Shelf
CPIC        Capital Planning and Investment Control
DG          Departmental Guidebook
DHS         Department of Homeland Security
DM          Departmental Manual
DOJ         Department of Justice
DR          Departmental Regulation
EEO         Equal Employment Opportunity
FAR         Federal Acquisition Regulation
GOTS        Government Off-The-Shelf
GSA         General Services Administration
HTML        Hypertext Markup Language
IA          Interagency Agreement
ICT         Information and Communications Technology
IDIQ        Indefinite Delivery Indefinite Quantity
IRMC        Information Resource Management Center (OCIO component)
IT          Information Technology
ITI         Information Technology Industry
NASA        National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NASA-SEWP   National Aeronautics and Space Administration Solutions for Enterprise-Wide
            Procurement
OASCR       Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
OCIO        Office of the Chief Information Officer
OMB         Office of Management and Budget
P.L.        Public Law
PM          Project Manager
PWS         Performance Work Schedule
RAM         Risk Acceptance Memo
SME         Subject Matter Expert
U.S.C.      United States Code
USDA        United States Department of Agriculture
UX          User Experience



                                      A-1
VPAT   Voluntary Product Assessment Template
W3C    World Wide Web Consortium
WAI    Web Accessibility Initiative
WCAG   Web Content Accessibility Guidelines




                                A-2
                                         APPENDIX B

                                         DEFINITIONS


Access Board. The U.S. Access Board is an independent Federal agency that promotes equality
for people with disabilities through leadership in accessible design and the development of
accessibility guidelines and standards. (Source: Access Board)

Accessibility Conformance Report (ACR). A document completed by a vendor or contractor
that provides detailed compliance information to all applicable standards. This includes the use
of an acceptable testing methodology (e.g., manual testing, DHS Trusted Tester) and the
identification of critical accessibility defects (show-stopper issues). Also referred to as a
Voluntary Product Assessment Template (VPAT). (Source: ITI, VPAT)

Accessibility Requirements Tool (ART). A step-by-step guide to help easily identify relevant
accessibility requirements from the revised Section 508 standards, and incorporate them into
procurement and contracting documentation, as well as in-house information technology (IT)
development. GSA’s IT Accessibility Program developed ART as part of its mission to provide
technical assistance to Federal agencies, to improve compliance with Section 508 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973.

Agency. Organizational units of the Department, other than staff offices, whose heads report to
officials within the Office of the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Under Secretaries, Assistant
Secretaries, and Assistant to the Secretary. (Source: USDA, Departmental Guidebook (DG)
0100-002, USDA Departmental Directives Definitions Glossary)

Assistive Technology (AT). Any item, piece of equipment, or product system, whether acquired
commercially, modified, or customized, used to increase, maintain, or improve the functional
capabilities of individuals with disabilities. (Source: Access Board)

Contractor Capability Statement (CCS). A document provided by a contractor or collected when
performing market research for contract support and services. The document details the
contractor’s knowledge on Section 508 governance and policy, accessibility testing
methodologies, ICT lifecycle processes, and general subject matter expertise. Contractors must
also demonstrate prior performance information for Section 508 related activities.

Commercial Off-The-Shelf (COTS). A product or service offered by a vendor with minimal
customization and support services offered to the purchaser.

Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR). A set of principles that govern the Government
procurement process. It regulates purchasing of goods and services by the Government.
(Source: Federal Acquisition Regulation)

Final Rule. A document issued by the U.S. Access Board detailing updated requirements for
information and communication technology covered by Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act



                                               B-1
and Section 255 of the Communications Act (47 U.S.C. § 255, Access by Persons with
Disabilities). These updates to the Section 508 standards and Section 255 guidelines are in
response to market trends and innovations, such as the convergence of technologies. (Source:
Access Board)

Government Off-The-Shelf (GOTS). A product or service offered by a Federal agency with
minimal customization and support services offered to the purchaser.

Information and Communication Technology (ICT). A term for IT that stresses the role of
unified communications and the integration of telecommunications (telephone lines and wireless
signals) and computers, as well as necessary enterprise software, middleware, storage, and all
electronic and information technology. (Source: Access Board)

Micro-purchases. As defined in the FAR 2.101, a micro-purchase is an acquisition of supplies or
services using simplified acquisition procedures, the aggregate amount of which does not exceed
the micro-purchase threshold. (Source: FAR 2.101).

Mission Area. A group of agencies with related functions that report to the same Under or
Assistant Secretary. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

NASA-SEWP. A multi-award Indefinite Delivery Indefinite Quantity (IDIQ) Governmentwide
acquisition contract managed by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) for
Federal agencies to purchase the latest commercial IT products, solutions, and services. (Source:
NASA, SEWP V)

Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. As amended in 1998, this law requires Federal
agencies to provide individuals with disabilities equal access to electronic information and data
comparable to those who do not have disabilities, unless an undue burden would be imposed on
the agency. (Source: Access Board)

Section 508 Refresh. The Refresh harmonizes requirements with other guidelines and standards
both in the U.S. and abroad. This includes standards issued by the European Commission and
with the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG), a globally recognized voluntary
consensus standard for web content and ICT. (Source: Access Board)

Staff Office. Departmental administrative offices whose heads report to officials within the
Office of the Secretary. (Source: DG 0100-002)

Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG). A detailed list of web accessibility
requirements created by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) that improves web
accessibility for people with disabilities. (Source: W3C, Web Accessibility Initiative [WAI])




                                               B-2
                                          APPENDIX C

                             AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


7 CFR § 2.25, Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights

7 CFR § 2.32, Chief Information Officer

7 CFR § 15e, Enforcement of Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Handicap in Programs or
Activities Conducted by the United States Department of Agriculture

40 U.S.C. § 11103(a), Definition

47 U.S.C. § 255, Access by Persons with Disabilities

48 CFR 1, Federal Acquisition Regulation

DHS, Section 508 Trusted Tester Conformance Test Process Version 5

Federal Acquisition Regulation, Acquisition.gov website

GSA, Accessibility Requirements Tool (ART) website

GSA, Automated Testing website

GSA, Create Accessible Digital Products website

GSA, Guide to Accessible Web Design and Development website

ITI, VPAT website

NASA, SEWP V website

OMB, Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource, November 30, 2020

Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. § 794, as amended, January 3, 2022

Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. § 794d, Electronic and Information
Technology, September 26, 1973, as amended in 2017, January 13, 2021

U.S. Access Board, 255 Chapter 1: Application and Administration website

U.S. Access Board, 508 Chapter 2: Scoping Requirements website

U.S. Access Board, Access Board website



                                              C-1
U.S. Access Board, Chapter 6: Support Documentation and Services website

U.S. Access Board, Information and Communication Technology Revised 508 Standards and
255 Guidelines website

U.S. Access Board, Section 508 ICT Testing Baseline website

U.S. Access Board, Section E202.7: Best Meets website

USDA, Accessibility website

USDA, AD-3027, USDA Program Discrimination Complaint Form, expires May 31, 2024

USDA, Agriculture Acquisition Regulation (AGAR), Acquisition.gov website

USDA, AgLearn+ portal

USDA, AgMAX portal

USDA, DG 0100-002, USDA Departmental Directives Definitions Glossary, September 26,
2018

USDA, DM 4300-001, EEO Complaint Processing Procedures, July 20, 2001

USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System, January 4, 2018

USDA, DR 3130-013, Departmental Directives System, May 24, 2021

USDA, DR 4030-001, Section 508 Program, September 8, 2014

USDA, DR 4300-007, Processing Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Complaints of
Discrimination, August 4, 2021

USDA, DR 4330-002, Nondiscrimination in Programs and Activities Receiving Federal
Financial Assistance from USDA, July 27, 2021

USDA, DR 4330-003, Nondiscrimination in USDA-Conducted Programs and Activities, October
3, 2022

USDA, OASCR, ETK/EEO portal

USDA, OASCR, Equal Employment Opportunity Complaint Filing website

USDA, OASCR, Filing a Program Discrimination Complaint as a USDA Customer website




                                            C-2
USDA, OASCR, Program Discrimination Complaint Electronic Submission portal

USDA, OCIO, CEC Digital Workplace portal

USDA, OCIO, Section 508 Checklists web page

USDA, USDA Style Guide website

W3C, Making the Web Accessible website

W3C, WCAG 2 Overview website

W3C, Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0, December 11, 2008

W3C, Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.1, revised September 21, 2023

W3C, Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.2, October 5, 2023

Workforce Investment Act of 1998, P.L. 105-220, August 7, 1998




                                            C-3
                                                             APPENDIX D

                                                 COMPLAINT DECISION TABLE


Use Cases                      Next Steps                     How to Submit                  Point of Contact
Use Case 1: A member of        Submit a complaint to the      Follow the steps provided on   Mail:
the public reports a Program   OASCR for processing           OASCR’s Filing a Program       USDA Office of the Assistant Secretary
discrimination complaint to    alleging discrimination.       Discrimination Complaint as    for Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Ave,
OASCR where Section 508                                       a USDA Customer page.          SW, Stop 9410, Washington, D.C.
applies.                                                                                     20250-9410

                                                                                             Email: program.intake@usda.gov

                                                                                             Phone:
                                                                                             Local area: 202-260-1026
                                                                                             Toll-free: 866-632-9992
                                                                                             Local or Federal relay: 800-877-8339
                                                                                             Spanish relay: 800-845-6136
                                                                                             Fax: 202-690-7442
Use Case 2: An employee        1. Contact the Mission         1. For informal complaints:    1. For informal complaints: The EEO
or applicant reports an EEO       Area, agency, or staff         All required information        Counselor.
discrimination complaint          office EEO Counselor           will be submitted directly
where Section 508 applies.        to initiate the informal       to the assigned EEO        2. For formal complaints mail:
                                  EEO complaint                  Counselor unless
                                  process.                       otherwise specified.          USDA Center for Civil Rights
                                                                                               Enforcement, Chief, Employment
                               2. Submit a formal EEO         2. For formal complaints:        Complaints Division, 1400
                                  complaint to OASCR             Submit via the ETK/EEO        Independence Avenue, SW,
                                  only if the informal           portal.                       Washington, DC 20250-9440
                                  process does not
                                  resolve the complaint.                                        Email: SM.OASCR.Info@usda.gov
                                                                                                Electronic: ETK/EEO portal


                                                                 D-1
Use Cases                   Next Steps                  How to Submit                  Point of Contact
Use Case 3: A member of     Contact the managing        Email: Section508-             USDA Section 508 Program Office
the public reports          Mission Area’s, agency’s,   OCIO@usda.gov.
nonconformant ICT without   or staff office’s Section                                  Email: Section508-OCIO@usda.gov
alleged discrimination.     508 Coordinator or the                                     Phone: 202-260-8777
                            USDA Section 508
                            Program Office.
Use Case 4: An employee     Contact the managing        Submit a Section 508           USDA Section 508 Program Office
reports nonconformant ICT   Mission Area’s, agency’s,   Program Request in the CEC
without alleged             or staff office’s Section   Digital Workplace portal and   Electronic: CEC Digital Workplace
discrimination.             508 Coordinator or the      email Section508-              portal
                            USDA Section 508            OCIO@usda.gov.                 Email: Section508-OCIO@usda.gov
                            Program Office. .                                          Phone: 202-260-8777




                                                           D-2
