                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                               NUMBER:
        DEPARTMENTAL MANUAL                                    DM 4200-003
                                                               DATE:
SUBJECT: Anti-Harassment Procedure Manual                      February 24, 2026
                                                               EXPIRATION DATE:
OPI: Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
                                                               February 24, 2031



Section                                                                                   Page

1. Purpose                                                                                  1
2. Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                       2
3. Scope                                                                                    3
4. Policy                                                                                   3
5. Procedures                                                                               3
6. Contract Employees                                                                      11
7. Anonymous Allegations                                                                   11
8. Investigations and Corrective Action                                                    12
9. Record Keeping                                                                          12
10. Training                                                                               12
11. Roles and Responsibilities                                                             13
12. Inquiries                                                                              16

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                   A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                  B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                   C-1
Appendix D – Examples of Harassing and Non-Harassing Behaviors                            D-1



1. PURPOSE

   a.     This Departmental Manual (DM) establishes the processes and procedures for
          administering the Anti-Harassment Program for the United States Department of
          Agriculture (USDA).

   b.     The goal of the Anti-Harassment Program is to prevent and promptly review allegations
          of workplace harassment, defined as any form of unwelcome, persistent, and unsolicited
          verbal, non-verbal, written, or physical conduct that is offensive and could alter the
          affected individual’s terms and conditions of employment.
  c.   The goal of this program is also to mitigate harm to any employee who has been
       subjected to conduct that is or could develop into harassment. The USDA is committed
       to fostering a model workplace free of conduct that negatively affects employees,
       morale, engagement, and productivity.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This DM addresses processes and procedures in accordance with the policy outlined in
       Departmental Regulation (DR) 4200-003, Anti-Harassment Program, dated April 18,
       2023.

  b.   This DM is effective immediately and remains in effect until it is either superseded or
       expires.

  c.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may not issue policies or directives that
       conflict with or limit this DM.

  d.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices have up to 1 year from the date of issuance to
       update their procedures to align with this DM.

  e.   This DM will not be interpreted to conflict with the rights of an employee under the law,
       including:

       (1) Labor-Management Relations Statute (5 United States Code (U.S.C.) §§ 7101-
           7135);

       (2) Applicable collective bargaining agreements;

       (3) Those provisions of 5 U.S.C. Chapter 75, Adverse Actions, relating to disciplinary
           action of employees;

       (4) The Whistleblower Protection Act of 1989 (WPA), Public Law (P.L.) 101-12; and

       (5) The Whistleblower Protection Enhancement Act of 2012 (WPEA), P.L. 112-199.

  f.   This DM will not be interpreted to conflict with any rights accorded a union
       representative under the Labor-Management Relations Statute when communicating as a
       union representative. Further, it is recognized that the implementation of this DM may
       be subject to collective bargaining, the results of which may modify the policy and
       procedures stated or implied herein, as appropriate.




                                               2
3. SCOPE

  a.   This DM applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices as well as all
       employees, contractors, volunteers, and those under formal partnership agreements
       performing work for or on behalf of USDA.

  b.   This DM does not apply to allegations against recipients, sub-recipients, or beneficiaries
       of USDA Federal financial assistance programs.


4. POLICY

  a.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will establish an Anti-Harassment
       Program consistent with DR 4200-003, with each program administered by an Anti-
       Harassment Coordinator (AHC) or equivalent designee.

  b.   The AHC or designee will receive, assess, and address reports or allegations of
       harassing conduct in collaboration with the appropriate level of management and
       respective servicing Mission Area, agency, and staff office Human Resources (HR)
       Offices consistent with the terms and requirements outlined in DR 4200-003.


5. PROCEDURES

  a.   Intake Process

       Mission Area, agency, and staff office AHCs or designees will review, assess, and
       evaluate reports of alleged harassment per DR 4200-003 and the guidance identified in
       this DM. The AHC or designee will utilize the following process and procedures.

       (1) Receipt of Complaint

            (a) Each USDA Mission Area, agency, and staff office must adopt a
                comprehensive protocol for receiving complaints from employees who witness
                or are subjected to intimidating, threatening, or harassing behavior within the
                workplace.

            (b) All allegations against a member of the Senior Executive Service (SES) or
                political appointee must be immediately referred to the Inspector General (IG)
                Representative, and no further action taken except for mitigating steps outlined
                below in Section 5c, Mitigating Steps, until and unless the IG Representative
                refers the matter back to the Mission Area, agency, or staff office.

            (c) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should use one or more of the
                following methods to ensure receipt of the reports of harassment:




                                              3
        1    A standardized intake form, containing information outlined in Section
             5a(2)(f)2 below, to obtain necessary information for the AHC or designee
             to begin the process;

        2    A mechanism to receive complaints (e.g., mail, telephonic hotline, email
             address, online reporting system) for forwarding to the AHC or designee;

        3    A reporting protocol for managers and supervisors to receive complaints
             of harassment; or

        4    An electronic reporting system to monitor and track complaints.

(2) Tracking of Complaint Allegations

    Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will ensure a designated tracking system
    is maintained to collect and analyze data on allegations of harassment. Specifically:

    (a) Data collected is allowed by applicable law and per DR 4200-003.

    (b) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices have a legal obligation to protect the
        privacy and due process rights of all participants in the process, e.g., the
        reporting party, the affected employee, those employees who are accused of
        harassment.

    (c) Reports of harassment will be disseminated only to those who have a need-to-
        know, including officials designated or authorized to investigate allegations, to
        determine whether harassment occurred, to develop recommendations, or to
        implement corrective measures.

    (d) Personnel who have oversight, supervisory, or case management responsibility
        over the Anti-Harassment Program (e.g., AHC or designee, Mission Area,
        agency, or staff office HR Representative) will have access to the designated
        tracking system which will track harassment allegations as they move through
        the complaint process.

    (e) The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights (OASCR) Anti-
        harassment Representative will have access to reports extracted from the
        designated tracking system which will track harassment allegations as they
        move through the complaint process.

    (f) The Mission Area, agency, and staff office HR Representative will track all
        allegations in collaboration with the AHCs or designees, and the OASCR
        Representative. The tracking systems must meet the following requirements:

        1    Within 1 business day of receiving the allegation, a tracking number will
             be assigned by the AHCs, designees, or designated tracking system (such



                                       4
             as Labor and Employee Relations Information System (LERIS)) for all
             allegations received.

        2    The data tracked (if available) will include:

             a   Affected individual and reporting individual’s name, phone number,
                 email, work unit, work address;

             b   Alleged offender names;

             c   Witness names;

             d   Elements of the alleged offense (e.g., sexual, physical (

             e

             f    or non- sexual), verbal, non-verbal, electronic);

             g   Where the alleged offense was committed (e.g., exact location,
                 address, room number);

             h   When the alleged offense was committed (times and dates);

             i   The allegation(s) referred, if any, for further investigation (e.g.,
                 Personnel Misconduct Investigation (PMI), Management Inquiry
                 (MI), or to the IG for investigation consideration);

             j   The date and time the AHC or designee referred the allegation(s) for
                 further investigation, if applicable; and

             k   The date the affected individual and reporting individual are notified
                 of the tracking number and the mode of examination. (The affected
                 individual and the reporting individual (if a different person) will be
                 notified of the tracking number and the mode of examination (e.g.,
                 MI, PMI, referral to the IG) of their allegation per DR 4200-003).

(3) Gathering Required Information

    (a) A complete allegation must contain the following preliminary information, no
        matter the reporting source:

        1    A detailed description of the workplace incidents that led the affected or
             reporting individual to bring forth the complaint, to include the dates,
             times, and locations where the alleged incidents occurred, individuals
             involved, and the nature of their involvement;

        2    The names and contact information for the alleged offending individual(s)
             or subjects;
                                       5
        3    The names and contact information for any witnesses who may have
             potential information regarding the claim;

        4    Whether the affected individual feels threatened or afraid; and

        5    Should the affected individual express they feel threatened and afraid, the
             AHC or designee will collect the following information:

             a    The exact nature and context of the threat or threatening behavior;
                  and

             b    The target of the threat or threatening behavior (general or specific).

    (b) In the absence of information regarding allegations of harassment, the AHC or
        designee must conduct an initial inquiry to make a preliminary determination if
        the alleged conduct comes within the definition of harassment as defined in the
        DR 4200-003, and the Secretary’s USDA Anti-Harassment Policy Statement.

    (c) If the allegation does not meet the definition of harassment, the AHC or
        designee will close out the report and notify all appropriate parties of the
        disposition of the allegations raised after all required actions have been
        completed per this DM and DR 4200-003.

    (d) If the allegation meets the definition of harassment as defined in DR 4200-003
        and the USDA Anti-Harassment Policy Statement, the allegation will move to
        the reviewing, assessing, and possibly the triage stage of the process.

(4) Reviewing Harassment Allegations

    Utilizing the information obtained from the intake form and from information
    gathered in Section 5a(3)(a), Gathering Required Information, the AHC or
    designee, in collaboration with the Employee Relations (ER) Representative, the
    management official, or any other applicable officials, will:

    (a) Assess the harassing behavior to decide if immediate remedial action is
        warranted and feasible;

    (b) Determine whether the facts and evidence discovered in the initial inquiry
        indicate a need for a MI or PMI in conjunction with the Mission Area, agency,
        or staff office HR and ER Representatives;

    (c) Determine if the matter must be referred to the IG per DR 1700-002, Office of
        Inspector General Organization and Procedures and Departmental Personnel
        Manual (DPM) Chapter 751, Subchapter 3, Agency Investigations of Employee
        Misconduct; and




                                       6
    (d) At a minimum, take into account the following when reviewing information to
        determine if the allegation rises to the definition of harassment:

        1    The origin of the case (e.g., Office of Inspector General (OIG),
             management official);

        2    The date the allegation occurred;

        3    Name of the affected individual;

        4    Name of individual who reported the allegation;

        5    Whether the allegation identifies who committed the alleged violation or
             who has knowledge of the alleged violation;

        6    The employment status of the alleged offender (e.g., Presidential
             appointee, SES, General Schedule (GS) -16 and above or equivalent
             employees under pay systems, Schedule C, or GS-15 and below);

        7    Witnesses identified;

        8    Contact information for the witnesses, if available; and

        9    An assessment of the harassing behavior as identified in Section 5a(5).

(5) Assessing the harassing behaviors

    (a) Table 1, Examples of Harassing and Non-Harassing Behaviors, in DR 4200-
        003, and the USDA Anti-Harassment Policy Statement must be used as a guide
        to assess whether the behavior should be categorized as harassment, with the
        understanding that harassing conduct in violation of USDA’s Anti-Harassment
        Policy need not be based on an Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO)
        protected classification. (See also Appendix D, Examples of Harassing and
        Non-Harassing Behaviors).

    (b) Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, and AHCs or designees will identify:

        1    The type of harassment identified by the reporting individual; and

        2    The level of specificity in the allegation (behaviors identified rather than
             perceptions).




                                        7
     (6) Triaging the Allegation

         (a) The following steps must be taken by the AHC or designee per timeframes
             established in DR 4200-003:

              1   Notify the appropriate offices, such as a Mission Area, agency, or staff
                  office HR or ER Offices for triage of reported conduct for potential
                  immediate remedial action.

              2   Meet with the Mission Area, agency, or staff office HR or ER
                  Representative to collaborate and jointly assess the allegation for the
                  appropriate course of action.

              3   Conduct an initial inquiry of all harassment allegations reported, and in
                  consultation with the Mission Area, agency, or staff office HR or ER
                  Representative, determine if an initial inquiry is sufficient to determine
                  whether the allegations are substantiated and, if appropriate, issue a
                  recommended course of corrective action to management.

              4   Ensure the appropriate management is informed of the allegation, the
                  initial determination, and whether existing facts and circumstances require
                  immediate remedial action.

              5   Based on the severity of the allegation, collaborate with the Mission Area,
                  agency, or staff office HR or ER Representative if they initiate an MI or
                  PMI. All investigations will be conducted in accordance with the DPM.

              6   Once the Mission Area, agency, or staff office HR or ER Representative
                  reviews the results of any MI or PMI and have determined corrective
                  action is supported, the AHC or designee will advise the applicable
                  managers and supervisors on initiating appropriate action in a timely
                  manner.

         (b) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should take appropriate
             administrative or disciplinary action for violations of the USDA Anti-
             Harassment Policy Statement, even if the harassment is not severe, pervasive,
             or otherwise does not meet a legal definition of harassment.

b.   Specific Procedures for Certain Type of Allegations

     After triage has been performed, preliminary complaint information collected, and a
     determination made that there is enough evidence to proceed with an assessment, the
     AHC or designee will determine if the allegations fall into one of the following
     categories: sexual assault; sexual harassment; unlawful non-sexual harassment based on
     a protected EEO classification (EEO harassment); non-sexual harassment that is not
     based on a protected EEO classification, including bullying (non-EEO harassment).



                                            8
AHCs or designees will determine the next steps based on the following categories and
associated criteria:

(1) Assault

    (a) If sexual or non-sexual assault is alleged, the allegation must be referred to
        local law enforcement by Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices
        immediately in conjunction with notifying ER Representative and the Office of
        the General Counsel. When sexual assault is alluded to, but not actually stated,
        a review will be held by the Mission Area’s, agency’s, or staff office’s AHC,
        the ER Representative and the OGC to decide the appropriate course of action.
        Management will also need to be notified to protect the affected individual.
        The AHC or designee will work with the Mission Area, agency, and staff
        office Head to ensure action has been taken by the Mission Area, agency, or
        staff office.

    (b) Alleged assault complaints may need to be reclassified as workplace violence
        if the allegation is not pursued by local law enforcement.

    (c) If the alleged assault was preceded by sexual harassment, Mission Areas,
        agencies, and staff offices will await a decision from local law enforcement
        before determining the next course of action, other than immediate remedial
        action to protect the affected individual(s).

    (d) The AHC or designee must take immediate steps to assess the need for
        remedial action to remove the alleged victim from the alleged offender in
        consultation with the Mission Area, agency, or staff office HR or ER office,
        and contact the Violence in the Workplace Coordinator for the alleged
        offender’s assigned Mission Area, agency, or staff office who in turn will
        determine the next steps for the safety of the work environment and employees
        involved.

    (e) The AHC or designee must report assault allegations to the Mission Area,
        agency, and staff office HR or ER Representative and to the IG Representative.

(2) Sexual Harassment

    Sexual harassment cases will be routed to the appropriate management official, who
    will consult with the servicing HR or ER office to determine the appropriate next
    steps to initiate a request for a formal MI, PMI, or harassment assessment and to
    review the inquiry when appropriate based on the following:

    (a) The harassment was conducted through sexual advances or favors; or

    (b) The incident or behavior was sexual in nature.




                                      9
     (3) EEO Harassment

         (a) Employees have the right to file complaints of discrimination or harassment in
             other forums, including the EEO Office. There is no prohibition against filing
             an EEO complaint of harassment concurrently with a report through the Anti-
             Harassment Program. Reporting harassment in accordance with the procedures
             in this DM does not replace or satisfy the requirements for filing an EEO
             complaint.

         (b) If an affected individual alleges they have experienced harassment based on
             their membership in a protected EEO class, the employee may file an EEO
             complaint through their servicing EEO Office. The AHC or designee will
             provide them with the contact information for the EEO Office and inform the
             affected individual an EEO complaint must be filed within 45 calendar days of
             the alleged incident or when the employee knew or should have known of the
             discriminatory or harassing conduct. (See DR 4300-007, Processing Equal
             Employment Opportunity (EEO) Complaints of Discrimination.)

c.   Mitigating Steps

     (1) Management officials have an obligation to take immediate remedial action, if
         appropriate, in consultation with the AHC or designee and the HR or ER
         Representative to prevent or mitigate harassing conduct during an inquiry or
         investigation into the allegations.

     (2) Depending on the situation, remedial action may include instructing employees to
         stop the behavior, temporarily separating employees, temporarily changing
         supervisor, details, etc. The remedial actions taken will depend on the severity and
         the circumstances of the alleged conduct.

d.   Notification of Appropriate Level of Management

     (1) Notification to the appropriate level of management (i.e., the supervisory chain)
         regarding harassment allegations and recommended remedial actions is dependent
         upon the employment status of the affected individual and the alleged offender.

     (2) Based on the information assessed, the AHC or designee will determine if the
         alleged conduct meets the definition of harassment as defined in DR 4200-003 and
         the USDA Anti-Harassment Policy Statement. If the AHC or designee determines
         immediate remedial action is warranted and feasible, they will take the steps below
         in accordance with timeframes established by the DR:

         (a) Provide the remedial action recommendations to the Mission Area, agency, and
             staff office HR or ER Representative where the alleged offender is assigned
             and collaborate on the next appropriate remedial steps.




                                            10
           (b) Once the appropriate remedial steps are identified, the AHC or designee will
               notify the alleged offender's Mission Area, agency, or staff office management
               official on any recommended remedial steps.

           (c) If the reporting party alleges sexual assault, the AHC or designee will contact
               the appropriate management official within the alleged offender’s Mission
               Area, agency, or staff office.


6. CONTRACT EMPLOYEES

  The AHC or designee, in consultation with the HR or ER Representative, will refer all
  allegations of harassment that involve contract workers to the appropriate Contracting
  Officer (CO).


7. ANONYMOUS ALLEGATIONS

  a.   Actions taken in response to anonymous allegations submitted into the anti-harassment
       processes will depend upon the extent of information provided. If an anonymous
       allegation contains sufficient information, as identified in Section 5a(3), Gathering
       Required Information above, to permit the initiation of an investigation, the appropriate
       level of investigation will be initiated in accordance with this DM. If an anonymous
       allegation does not contain sufficient information to permit the initiation of an
       investigation, the information should be documented in the Mission Area, agency, or
       staff office designated tracking system by the person receiving the report and maintained
       on file by the AHC or designee in accordance with the Mission Area’s, agency’s, or staff
       office’s disposition instructions.

  b.   The AHC or designee will prepare a Memorandum for Record for all anonymous
       allegations which will document for the record the following information, if available:

       (1) The date and time the information was received and by whom;

       (2) A detailed description of the facts and circumstances surrounding the allegation;

       (3) The date and time the allegation was closed and by whom, if applicable; and

       (4) Any other pertinent information received. Information collected and retained by the
           AHC or designee will be protected in accordance with the Privacy Act of 1974, 5
           U.S.C. § 552a.




                                              11
8. INVESTIGATIONS AND CORRECTIVE ACTION

  a.   If further investigation beyond the AHC’s or designee’s initial inquiry is deemed
       necessary, the AHC or designee will refer the complaint to the appropriate investigator.
       All investigations will be conducted in accordance with the DPM.

  b.   Within 10 business days of completion of the inquiry or investigation, the Mission Area,
       agency, or staff office HR or ER Representatives will review the results and, if
       corrective action is supported, advise managers and supervisors involved on initiating
       appropriate action in a timely manner. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should
       take appropriate administrative or disciplinary action for violations of the USDA Anti-
       Harassment Policy Statement, even if the harassment does not rise to the level of severe
       or pervasive harassment, to ensure a workplace free from harassing conduct.


9. RECORD KEEPING

  a.   The AHC or designee will track all harassment and bullying allegations and submit
       quarterly reports to Civil Rights Directors, and the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
       (ASCR) on the number of complaints and type of harassment alleged, whether MIs or
       PMIs were warranted, corrective or disciplinary actions recommended and taken, the
       source of complaints, and other identified metrics.

  b.   The AHC or designee will track recommendations for corrective and disciplinary action
       and notify senior management if management fails to implement recommendations for
       corrective or disciplinary action.

  c.   The AHC or designee will, after the disposition of a case is provided, close out all
       complaints of harassment or bullying, per the requirements within the Privacy Act of
       1974 guidelines. The AHC or designee will provide notification to the appropriate
       parties of the disposition of the allegations of harassment or bullying raised after all
       required actions have been completed.


10. TRAINING

  a.   The AHC or designee, HR or ER Representative, and Mission Area, agency, and staff
       office management officials will ensure harassment prevention and response training
       and education is provided to all employees and management per the requirements
       established in DR 4200-003.

  b.   Harassment prevention and response training will include, at a minimum:

       (1) Accurate and consistent training that ensures appropriate skills and competencies
           across the USDA workforce;




                                               12
       (2) Education that focuses on prevention with examples of inappropriate conduct in the
           workplace and how to report perceived or observed harassment;

       (3) Information on how to identify harassment, definitions, and types of harassment as
           outlined in this DM;

       (4) Options and procedures for submitting allegations, and anonymous harassment
           allegations;

       (5) Information regarding how to identify and report retaliation and reprisal in
           accordance with applicable regulations and directives; and

       (6) Information regarding any administrative or disciplinary action that could be taken
           as a result of a finding of harassment.


11. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  The roles and responsibilities identified below are in accordance with DR 4200-003.

  a.   The Secretary or their designee will:

       (1) Provide leadership, direction, and establish policy for USDA enforcement of civil
           rights laws and compliance with the requirements for the USDA Anti-Harassment
           Program; and

       (2) Ensure the availability of adequate resources to support and carry out a broad range
           of civil rights compliance and enforcement activities throughout USDA.

  b.   The ASCR or their designee will:

       (1) Direct, coordinate, and provide oversight over USDA’s enforcement of civil rights
           laws and compliance with the Anti-Harassment Program through rules, regulations,
           policy, allegation processing, compliance reviews, and other actions;

       (2) Ensure USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices inform employees of their
           civil rights compliance responsibilities through training, dissemination of
           information, and technical assistance;

       (3) Review, supplement, or modify quarterly reports provided by the Mission Area,
           agency, and staff office management officials for submission to the Office of the
           Secretary; and

       (4) Collaborate with Mission Area, agency, and staff office HR Directors on anti-
           harassment allegations, investigations, and corrective actions when needed, to
           ensure compliance with Federal civil rights requirements.



                                               13
c.   The Assistant Secretary for Administration or their designee will assist in implementing
     the requirements established for the Anti-Harassment Program.

d.   Under and Assistant Secretaries will:

     (1) Ensure adequate funding is available to implement and carry out the policies,
         processes, and procedures of the Anti-Harassment Program;

     (2) Enforce compliance with anti-harassment laws and guidance;

     (3) Issue Mission Area, agency, and staff office directives and policy consistent with
         DR 4200-003 and the USDA Anti-Harassment Policy Statement;

     (4) Ensure disciplinary actions recommended by the Mission Area, agency, or staff
         office HR Office against employees or management are enforced and in accordance
         with USDA rules, regulations, and procedures; and

     (5) Develop annual compliance review schedules and conduct reviews of their Mission
         Area, agency, and staff office Anti-Harassment Programs.

e.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Heads will:

     (1) Assist and cooperate with the ASCR, Assistant Secretary for Administration, and
         AHCs or designees in implementing the requirements established for the Anti-
         Harassment Program; and

     (2) Collect and analyze data and information to evaluate success in ensuring
         compliance with civil rights laws.

f.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office HR and ER Representatives will:

     (1) Collaborate with the AHC or designee on harassment cases to determine
         appropriate next steps;

     (2) Provide recommendations for corrective actions upon completion of factfinding, if
         warranted;

     (3) Collaborate with management to address inappropriate behavior; and

     (4) Communicate with the AHC or designee to ensure all actions pertaining to
         misconduct recommendations are documented in the designated tracking system.

g.   The General Counsel will provide legal advice and guidance to support USDA’s
     programs and ensure compliance with civil rights laws.




                                             14
h.   The IG Representative will:

     (1) Investigate criminal violations; and

     (2) Conduct their own or joint investigations with other law enforcement agencies and
         report criminal violations to the U.S. Department of Justice.

i.   Management Officials will:

     (1) Report known harassment complaint(s) to the AHC or designee;

     (2) Take immediate remedial action(s);

     (3) Separate the affected individual from the alleged offender, if determined that
         immediate action is needed;

     (4) Contact law enforcement, if needed;

     (5) Provide the AHC or designee with details of the incident(s), if known;

     (6) Disqualify themselves if there is a conflict of interest;

     (7) Consult with the employee’s servicing HR or ER Representative;

     (8) Conduct a MI, when appropriate; and

     (9) Take prompt corrective action(s) as appropriate.

j.   Violence in the Workplace Coordinators will ensure actions are taken per DR 4200-001,
     Workplace Violence Prevention and Response Program.

k.   Reporting Individuals will provide information pertaining the incident to the best of their
     knowledge to the AHC or designee.

l.   COs will:

     (1) Notify contractors working on behalf of the Mission Area, agency, or staff office
         that they are expected to avoid behaviors prohibited by the Anti-Harassment Policy;

     (2) Ensure the business owner of the contract and their employees comply with
         USDA’s Anti-Harassment Policy; and

     (3) Contact the business owner under contract, upon notification of a contractor
         violating the Anti-Harassment Policy, to determine the appropriate immediate
         action.




                                             15
12. INQUIRIES

   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should direct questions and inquiries
   regarding this DM to the Center for Civil Rights Operations (CCRO), Compliance Division
   via email at CCROCompliance@usda.gov or via telephone at 1-800-845-6136.


                                           -END-




                                             16
                              APPENDIX A

                  ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ADR      Alternative Dispute Resolution
AHC      Anti-Harassment Coordinator
ASCR     Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
CCRO     Center for Civil Rights Operations
CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
CO       Contracting Officer
DG       Departmental Guidebook
DM       Department Manual
DPM      Departmental Personnel Manual
DR       Departmental Regulation
EEO      Equal Employment Opportunity
EEOC     Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
E.O.     Executive Order
ER       Employee Relations
GS       General Schedule
HR       Human Resources
IG       Inspector General
LERIS    Labor and Employee Relations Information System
MI       Management Inquiry
MD       Management Directive
OASCR    Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
OHRM     Office of Human Resources Management
OIG      Office of Inspector General
PMI      Personnel Misconduct Investigation
P.L.     Public Law
SES      Senior Executive Service
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture
WPA      Whistleblower Protection Act of 1989
WPEA     Whistleblower Protection Enhancement Act of 2012




                                   A-1
                                          APPENDIX B

                                          DEFINITIONS


Accountability. The obligation of holding agency officials, managers, supervisors, and other
employees responsible for complying with the requirements contained in this DR. (Source:
USDA, Departmental Guidebook (DG) 0100-002, USDA Departmental Directives Definitions
Glossary)

Administrative Misconduct. Non-criminal misconduct, behavior, or actions of an employee,
including those that violate policies, procedures, and standards on employee responsibilities and
conduct per DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct.

Adverse Action. Adverse actions are defined by law at 5 U.S.C. Chapter 75, Adverse Actions,
and include suspensions without pay, reductions in grade or pay, furloughs of 30 calendar days
or less, and removal.

Agency. Organizational units of the Department, other than staff offices, whose heads report to
officials within the Office of the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Under Secretaries, Assistant
Secretaries, and Assistant to the Secretary. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental
Directives System)

Agency Head. The administrator, chief, or director of an agency who is the official named or
designated to have primary responsibility for the management of the agency as delegated under 7
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 2, Delegations of Authority by the Secretary of
Agriculture and General Officers of the Department.

Allegation. An assertion, declaration or statement made in a complaint that sets out or identifies
what the alleging party expects to be proved. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR). ADR includes an array of techniques used to achieve
consensual resolution of disputes, generally with the assistance of a neutral third party. (Source:
USDA, DG 0100-002)

Anti-Harassment Coordinator (AHC). Responsible for serving as the point of contact for the
AHC process. Their role includes, but is not limited to, receiving harassment allegations on
behalf of the Mission Area, agency, or staff office, assessing allegations of harassment, assisting
managers and supervisors in addressing allegations of harassment, conducting training, and
compiling records of harassment incidents with the objective of eliminating harassment within
the Mission Area, agency, or staff office.

Assault. Any willful attempt or threat to inflict injury upon the person of another, when coupled
with an apparent ability to do so, and any intentional display of force, such as would give the
victim reason to fear or expect immediate bodily harm. (Source: USDA DR 4200-001,
Workplace Violence Prevention and Response Program)



                                                B-1
Compliance. Systematically evaluating whether and the extent to which USDA conducts its
programs and activities in a manner consistent with applicable Federal and USDA civil rights
requirements.

Conflict of Interest. Circumstances creating sufficient doubt about a management official’s
impartiality (including a perception of impartiality) that should disqualify them from
participating in or influencing any material aspect of the handling of a claim of harassment other
than reporting harassment and providing information in response to an official inquiry or
investigation.

Corrective Actions. Measures taken toward enhancing civil rights goals of USDA, which may
be disciplinary or adverse actions and may include training or other similar actions. (Source:
USDA, DR 4300-010, Civil Rights Accountability Policy and Procedures)

Decision. A determination issued by an entity with authority to issue legal or administrative
opinions, arrived at after consideration of the facts and applicable law. (Source: USDA, DR
4300-010)

Disciplinary Action. An action taken with the intent to correct the conduct of an employee,
which includes, among other actions, a letter of reprimand, suspension, reduction in grade or
pay, or removal from the Federal Service. (Source: USDA, DR 4300-010)

Employee. For the purpose of this directive, an individual employed in or under a USDA agency
consistent with 5 U.S.C. § 2105, Employee, or a non-employee over whom an agency has
control, which may include independent contractors or contract employees under a USDA
agency.

Firewall. A procedure preventing the EEO Director from involvement in the day-to-day
functions of the Anti-Harassment Program or to avoid a perceived or actual conflict of interest in
specific cases or in general; clear separation between the Mission Areas and agency’s EEO
complaint program and the Mission Area’s and agency's defensive function which is essential to
fair and impartial investigations; maintaining the appropriate separation between the two or more
processes to ensure the integrity of both processes, including providing clarity for employees on
the distinction between the two.

Harassment (including Bullying). Any form of unwelcome, persistent, and unsolicited verbal,
non-verbal, written, or physical conduct that is offensive and could alter the affected individual’s
terms and conditions of employment. It includes conduct intended to torment or cause fear for
one’s personal safety. This includes but is not limited to any unwelcome or unwanted conduct
that denigrates or shows hostility or an aversion toward another person on the basis of any
characteristic protected by law, which includes an individual’s race, color, sex, ethnic or national
origin, age, religion, disability, marital status, pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical
conditions, retaliation for previous EEO activity, genetic information or other personal
characteristic protected by law.




                                                B-2
Impartial. Fair manner; unbiased, neutral, and non-discriminatory; no vested interest.

Inquiry. An initial or basic informal review of an issue, inquiry, or allegation of harassment
(whether illegal harassment or lower-level harassment) to identify the need for further
assessment such as an investigation, EEO investigation, safety investigation, referral to OIG, etc.

Management Inquiry (MI). The allegation is verified by management as to the validity of the
information reported.

Management Official. A management official as defined as an employee having authority to
hire, transfer, suspend, furlough, recall, promote, discharge, assign, reward, or discipline other
employees; or having responsibility to direct them, adjust their grievances, or effectively
recommend such action if, in connection with the foregoing, the exercise of authority is not of a
merely routine or clerical nature but requires the use of independent judgment. (Source: USDA,
DR 4300-010).

Misconduct. Inappropriate conduct-based action(s) that include prohibited activities, even if the
conduct does not rise to the level of unlawful harassment, prohibited harassment, or bullying.
When an inquiry or investigative findings result in a determination that employee misconduct
has occurred, management is responsible for taking prompt corrective action(s), as appropriate.
(5 U.S.C. Chapter 75)

Mission Area. A group of agencies with related functions that report to the same Under or
Assistant Secretary. Research, Education, and Economics is an example of a Mission Area.
(Source: USDA, DR 0100-001)

Personnel Misconduct Investigation (PMI). The employing Mission Area, agency and staff
office conducts investigations of certain employee misconduct in accordance with the standards
set forth in the Department’s Personnel Investigation Manual. Mission Area, agency, and staff
office investigators may take written statements under oath or affirmation from Federal
employees and non-federal employees for use in administrative or other proceedings. Agency
investigators may require employees of USDA to provide such statements. (USDA, Chapter
751, Discipline, Subchapter 3, Agency Investigations of Employee Misconduct)

Retaliation. Retaliation is imposing any administrative action, failing to take action, or engaging
in any form of harassment or bullying, against any employee for reporting matters covered under
this policy, for involvement in an inquiry related to such a report, or for exercising any other
rights granted them by statute or policy.

Sexual Harassment. Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or
physical conduct of a sexual nature when:

   a.   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of
        an individual's employment;




                                                B-3
   b.   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as a basis for
        employment decisions affecting such individual; or

   c.   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual's
        work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working
        environment.

Staff Office. Departmental administrative offices whose heads report to officials within the
Office of the Secretary. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-001)




                                               B-4
                                         APPENDIX C

                               AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Adverse Actions, 5 CFR Part 752

Adverse Actions, 5 U.S.C. Chapter 75

Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621

Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.

Basis for Determining Federal Awards Expended, 2 CFR § 200.502

Civil Service Reform Act of 1978, P.L. 95-454, October 13, 1978

Definitions, 7 CFR § 15.2(g)

Delegations of Authority by the Secretary of Agriculture and General Officers of the
Department, 7 CFR Part 2

Departmental Regulations, 5 U.S.C. § 301

Employee, 5 U.S.C. § 2105

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), Notice 915.002, Enforcement Guidance:
Vicarious Employer Liability for Unlawful Harassment by Supervisors, June 18, 1999

EEOC, EEO Management Directive (MD) - 715, Federal responsibilities under Section 717 of
Title VII and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act, October 1, 2003

EEOC, Model EEO Programs Must Have An Effective Anti-Harassment Program website

EEOC, Overview web page

Executive Order (E.O.) 11478, Equal Employment Opportunity in the Federal Government,
August 8, 1969

E.O. 13087, Further Amendment to EO 11478, Equal Employment Opportunity in the Federal
Government, May 28, 1998

Federal Financial Assistance, 2 CFR § 200.40

Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute, 5 U.S.C. §§ 7101-7135




                                               C-1
Federal Sector Equal Employment Opportunity, 29 CFR Part 1614

Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008, P.L. 110-233, May 21, 2008

Labor-Management Relations Statute, 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71

Pregnant Workers Fairness Act, 42 U.S.C. § 2000gg et seq., December 29, 2022

Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. § 552a, December 31, 1974, as amended

Prohibited Personnel Practices, 5 U.S.C. § 2302(b)(10)

Rehabilitation Act of 1973, P.L. 93-112, September 26, 1973

Representation Rights and Duties, 5 U.S.C. § 7114(a)(2)(B)

Requirement to provide public notice of Federal financial assistance programs, 2 CFR §
200.202

Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, 29 U.S.C. §§ 791 et seq.

Title II of the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008, as amended, 42 U.S.C §
2000ff(2)(B)(v)

Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e

USDA, DG 0100-002, USDA Departmental Directives Definitions Glossary, September 26,
2018

USDA, Directives by Category website

USDA, DPM Chapter 751, Subchapter 3, Agency Investigations of Employee Misconduct

USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System, January 4, 2018

USDA, DR 1700-002, OIG Organization and Procedures, January 13, 2023

USDA, DR 3450-002, Freedom of Information Act Implementing Regulations, February 7, 2003

USDA, DR 4030-001, Section 508 Program, September 8, 2014

USDA, DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007

USDA, DR 4070-771-001, Administrative Grievance System, November 27, 2020




                                                C-2
USDA, DR 4200-001, Workplace Violence Prevention and Response Program, April 17, 2013

USDA, DR 4200-003, Anti-Harassment Program, April 18, 2023

USDA, DR 4300-007, Processing Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Complaints of
Discrimination, August 4, 2021

USDA, DR 4300-010, Civil Rights Accountability Policy and Procedures, December 28, 2016

USDA, DR 4330-002, Nondiscrimination in Programs and Activities Receiving Federal
Financial Assistance from USDA, July 27, 2021

USDA, DR 4710-001, Alternative Dispute Resolution Program, April 5, 2006

Whistleblower Protection Act of 1989 (WPA), P.L. 101-12, April 10, 1989

Whistleblower Protection Enhancement Act of 2012 (WPEA), P.L. 112–199, November 27, 2012




                                            C-3
                                    APPENDIX D

      EXAMPLES OF HARASSING AND NON-HARASSING BEHAVIORS


             Harassing Behaviors                     Non-Harassing Behaviors
Threatening that rejection of sexual           Minor slights or annoyances
overtures will affect appointments,
promotions, transfers, or evaluations or
affect any other employment-related
actions
Making sexually suggestive comments or         Normal stress associated with work
gestures, including offensive comments,
jokes, or suggestions about an employee’s
sex or displaying nude or sexually
suggestive objects, pictures, images, or
cartoons
Belittling persons based on protected          Minor disagreements with coworkers
characteristics, including repeated jokes,
teasing, mimicking, or commenting on an
individual’s protected characteristic
Retaliating against an employee who            Disagreement with a supervisor’s
raises a harassment allegation                 instruction or policy
Bullying, intimidating, or threatening         Objective and constructive feedback
behavior                                       about work performance
                                               Changes in work assignments or work
                                               schedules made for a legitimate, non-
                                               discriminatory reason
                                               Discipline for misconduct,
                                               performance-based actions, or other
                                               administrative action taken for a
                                               legitimate, non-discriminatory reason
                                               Being required to cooperate in an
                                               official inquiry or investigation
                                               Being accused of harassment or
                                               misconduct by another employee




                                         D-1
