U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE 

WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250 

 

 

DEPARTMENTAL MANUAL 

 
Number: 

 4300-1 

SUBJECT: 

EEO Complaint Processing Procedures 

 
DATE: 

July 20, 2001 

OPI: 

 Office of Civil Rights 



 

 

CHAPTER I - INTRODUCTION 

 

 

1 PURPOSE AND SCOPE 


 

As part of its commitment to provide a work environment free from 
employment actions and/or employment decisions based on race, color, 
religion, sex, national origin, age, disabilities, retaliation for prior equal 
employment activity, sexual orientation, genetic information, political 
beliefs, parental status, and marital status, the USDA herein establishes a 
system to process employment discrimination complaints, including 
procedures for offering and conducting Alternative Dispute Resolution 
(ADR) in employment discrimination complaints (Departmental Regulation 
4710-1, USDA Alternative Dispute Resolution). It is USDA’s objective 
and policy to resolve complaints, when possible, via informal or formal 
settlement negotiations with complainants. Agencies are primarily 
responsible for carrying out this policy. USDA may, at its election, provide 
assistance to agencies at any stage of the complaint process to facilitate an 
amicable resolution to all complaints. The resolution strategy of USDA and 
its use is explained in Sections 11 and 12 below. 

 

2 SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS 


 

This manual superceeds and replaces DM 4300-1 dated October 18, 2000, 
which is hereby cancelled. The changes implemented in this manual 
concern the use of Alternative Dispute Resolution in the EEO complaint 
process. In addition, a number of minor style and typographic corrections 
have been made that do not affect the substantive processing of a complaint. 

 

3 STATEMENT OF POLICY 


 

Any employee who believes he/she has suffered in the terms and/or 
conditions of employment, due to an action and/or decision (including a 
failure to act or decide) by an official or employee of USDA, and believes 


that this action and/or decision was motivated by a discriminatory animus 
based on his/her race, color, sex, religion, age (40 years of age or over), 
national origin, physical or mental disability, retaliation for prior equal 
employment activities, sexual orientation, genetic information, political 
beliefs, parental status, or marital status may file an individual complaint of 
employment discrimination in accordance with the USDA Equal 
Employment Opportunity (EEO) Employment Complaint Processing 
Procedures. Moreover, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. 1614.204, class complaints1 
of discrimination may be filed on the behalf of a group of employees, 
former employees, or applicants for employment who are alleged to have 
been adversely affected by an agency personnel policy or practice which 
discriminates against the group on the basis of their common race, color, 
religion, sex, national origin, age, or disability. 

 

4 AUTHORITIES 


 

There are eleven bases of discrimination which are cognizable under the following 
statutes and Executive Orders: 

 

a Statutory 
(1) Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, prohibits 
employment discrimination against individuals based on race, 
color, sex, national origin, religion, and reprisal. 
(2) The Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) of 1967, as 
amended, prohibits employment discrimination against individuals 
who are 40 years of age or older. 
(3) The Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, prohibits employment 
discrimination against qualified individuals with physical or mental 
disabilities. 
(4) The Equal Pay Act, an amendment to the Fair Labor Standards Act, 
protects men and women who perform substantially equal work in 
the same establishment from sex-based wage discrimination. 


 

 

 

 

 

b Executive Orders 

1(Note: Further discussion relating to the regulatory requirements for class 
complaints will be addressed in Chapter XIII B Class Action Complaint.) A class complaint 
is a written complaint of discrimination filed on behalf of the class by the class agent. 
A class agent may file a class complaint on the bases of discrimination specifically 
identified herein, with the exception of sexual orientation, genetic information, marital 
status, political beliefs, parental status and reprisal. Complaints of marital status 
discrimination relating to a probationary separation may only be processed as an appeal 
to the Merit Systems Protection Board and may not be processed as a complaint within the 
USDA. 


 

(1) Executive Order 13087 provides that, as a matter of Federal policy, 
an individual’s sexual orientation should not be the basis for the 
denial of an employment or promotional opportunity. 
(2) Executive Order 13145 (February 8, 2000) prohibits discrimination 
in Federal employment based on genetic information. 
(3) Executive Order 13152 (May 12, 2000) provides for a uniform 
policy within the Federal Government to prohibit discrimination 
based on an individual’s status as a parent. 


 

 

 

In addition to the above-noted eleven bases of discrimination, the internal 
policies within the United States Department of Agriculture (hereinafter 
referred to as the USDA) also prohibit employment discrimination based 
on marital status and political beliefs. 


CHAPTER II – GLOSSARY OF TERMS 

 

1 GENERAL 

 

The following words or acronyms have particular meanings when used in the context of the 
USDA Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Complaint System: 

 

2 TERMS 

 

 a Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) - Any of a number of conflict resolution 
techniques listed in DR 4710-1 which use a neutral third party to assist the 
complainant and agency in resolving EEO complaints, including, but not limited to, 
mediation, facilitation, and arbitration 

 

 b Administrative Judge (AJ) - An individual assigned by the Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission (EEOC) to conduct a hearing on the complaint if requested 
by the complainant. 

 

 c Agency - One of the primary components (Administration, Office, Service, or Staff) 
of USDA. 

 

 d Basis - The prohibited factors of discrimination (i.e., race, color, sex, age [over 
40], religion, national origin, disability, parental or marital status, political beliefs, 
sexual orientation, genetics, or reprisal). 

 

 e Complaint - An allegation, formal or informal, that an action or decision in USDA 
(if an individual complaint) or a policy or practice of USDA (if a class action 
complaint), which has personally affected an employee was discriminatory on a 
prohibited basis. 

 

 f Complaint Process or System - The entire set of actions possible on an EEO 
complaint, including counseling, acceptance, rejection, dismissal, investigation, 
resolution, hearing, decision, appeal, and civil action. 

 

 g EEO Counselor - An individual assigned to discuss and attempt to resolve 
informal EEO complaints within USDA. 

 

 h Days – all timeframes referenced in days in this manual are calendar days. 

 

 i Director of Equal Employment Opportunity (DEEO) - The DEEO is the designee 
of the Secretary of Agriculture responsible for USDA’s EEO Complaint Program. 

 

 j Equal Employment Opportunity Officer (EEOO) - The official, usually the 
agency head, responsible for the EEO program in each agency of USDA. 

 

 k Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) - The EEOC is the Federal 


agency with the overall responsibility for implementing Title VII (Employment) 
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and other laws prohibiting discrimination in 
Federal employment. 

 

 l Employee - An individual employed, previously employed, or seeking 
employment (applicant) in any position within USDA. 

 

 m Formal Complaint - An allegation that was not resolved in counseling and which 
has been filed with the USDA for investigation and additional processing. 

 

 n Informal Complaint - An allegation concerning any issue that is presented to an 
EEO counselor. 

 

 o Issues - The action or decision (including a failure to act or decide) or a policy or 
practice of USDA that has affected an employee which is alleged to have been 
discriminatory. 

 

 p Mixed Cases - An allegation of discrimination in a matter that is appealable to the 
Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB); i.e., an adverse action, reduction in 
force, denial of a within-grade increase, alleged coerced separation of a nonprobationary 
employee, or performance-based demotions and removals. Mixed 
cases may be either a mixed case complaint (processed initially within the USDA) 
or a mixed case appeal (processed initially at MSPB). 

 

 q Resolving Official - The Agency Official designated to represent the agency at an 
ADR session, and who has been delegated full authority to settle the EEO 
complaint, including execution of a binding settlement agreement. 

 

 r Responsible Management Official - The person named by the complainant or 
indicated by the record as responsible, in whole or in part, for taking or 
recommending (or failing to make or recommend) the action or decision that is 
the issue of the complaint. 

 

 s United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) - The collection of all the 
primary components of the USDA and the individual component agencies 
themselves. 

 


CHAPTER III – GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR PROCESSING EEO COMPLAINTS 

 

 

1 GENERAL 

 

Any employee who believes he/she has suffered in the terms and/or conditions of 
employment, due to an action and/or decision, or failure to act or decide, by an 
official or employee of USDA, and believes that this action and/or decision was 
motivated by a discriminatory animus based on his/her race, color, sex, religion, 
age (40 years of age or over), national origin, physical or mental disability, 
retaliation for prior equal employment activities, sexual orientation, genetic 
information, political beliefs, parental status, or marital status may file an 
individual complaint of employment discrimination in accordance with the USDA 
Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Employment Complaint Processing 
Procedures. Moreover, pursuant to 29 C.F.R. 1614.204, class complaints2 of 
discrimination may be filed on the behalf of a group of employees, former 
employees, or applicants for employment who are alleged to have been adversely 
affected by an agency personnel policy or practice which discriminates against 
the group on the basis of their common race, color, religion, sex, national origin, 
age, or disability. 

 

2 COMPLAINANT RESPONSIBILITY 

 

A individual who files a complaint must fully cooperate in the processing of the 
complaint, which includes providing specific responses to offers of resolution and 
providing requested information in a timely manner, if available. In addition, all 
individuals must provide his/her current addresses and telephone numbers and 
pertinent information relating to his/her representative. This includes 
communicating with the EEO counselor, the investigator, and any agency 
representative or caseworker. Complainants shall not delegate these 
responsibilities to a representative. 

 

3 PROCESSING 

 

USDA will process all complaints of employment discrimination as expeditiously 
as possible. All complaints of employment discrimination will be handled in a fair 
and impartial manner. [Relevant laws, regulations, and precedent decisions will 
be utilized where reasonable in context of the complaint administrative process.] 

2(Note: Further discussion relating to the regulatory requirements for class 
complaints will be addressed in Chapter XIII B Class Action Complaint.) A class complaint 
is a written complaint of discrimination filed on behalf of the class by the class agent. 
A class agent may file a class complaint on the bases of discrimination specifically 
identified herein, with the exception of sexual orientation, genetic information, marital 
status, political beliefs, parental status and reprisal. Complaints of marital status 
discrimination relating to a probationary separation may only be processed as an appeal 
to the Merit Systems Protection Board and may not be processed as a complaint within the 
USDA. 


USDA will develop an evidence file upon which an individual formal complaint 
can be fully adjudicated on the merits. When a complaint is filed, all personnel 
and other records relating to the issues will be maintained in a confidential 
manner by the agency (irrespective of any other retention or destruction 
timetable) until the complaint is closed and no further avenue of appeal is 
available. In the event an agency claims pertinent records are lost or destroyed, an 
adverse inference may be drawn against the agency, unless the evidence of record 
clearly demonstrates that such action is unwarranted. 

 

4 ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION 

 

ADR refers to a variety of dispute resolution techniques that involve the introduction of a 
neutral third party into a dispute. The "Neutral" can play a variety of roles, including 
facilitating discussions, fact-finding, providing parties with a "reality check" on the 
merits and value of their claims, and assisting with creative problem-solving. The 
ultimate goal of the Neutral is to help the parties reach a resolution of their dispute. 

 

Based on the circumstances of the individual’s case, one or more of the following ADR 
techniques may be made available: mediation, fact finding, facilitation, Early Neutral 
Evaluation, non-binding arbitration, settlement conferences, ombuds, and med-arb. ADR 
in the EEO complaint process will adhere to the USDA ADR policy (DR 4710-1). 

 

USDA will provide ADR programs for aggrieved individuals or complainants in both the 
informal and formal stages of the Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) complaint 
process. Each agency that has complied with departmental regulations (DR 4710-1) 
requiring an ADR program will ensure that employees can raise issues of discrimination 
in those systems, if they choose to do so, at the informal, formal, or both stages of 
complaint processing. Agencies may limit the types of issues to be handled in the ADR 
program at either stage, but Agencies are encouraged to use ADR to resolve as many 
types of cases as possible. Employees who elect to use any USDA ADR program are not 
absolved from meeting any time frames of the EEO complaint process, unless an 
extension of time is granted in writing pursuant to a written request received before 
expiration of any time frame. 

 

Election of ADR does not require a person to waive his or her right to an investigation or 
a hearing, or to appeal the final decision to the EEOC. While management must 
determine whether a given dispute is appropriate for ADR, it may not decline to offer 
ADR because of the complaint basis (race, color, etc.). The earlier ADR is offered, the 
more likely it will be successful. 

 

ADR is voluntary for the aggrieved party or complainant. A complainant may request 
ADR efforts at any time during complaint processing, but the Agency may elect not to 
participate. If an Agency offers ADR to a complainant in writing and the complainant 
elects to participate in ADR, management’s participation is required. 

 

The Resolving Official designated by the Agency will have full authority to bind the 


agency in a written agreement to resolve the complaint. A Responsible Management 
Official may not be the designated Resolving Official in the ADR session. Responsible 
Management Officials are encouraged to participate in the ADR session, where 
appropriate. Each situation should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Agencies 
should assess what outcomes they wish to achieve in ADR, especially in regard to future 
relationships, when deciding whether or not the Responsible Management Official 
participates. 

 

5 FREEDOM FROM REPRISAL 

 

An individual who files a complaint of employment discrimination or otherwise 
participates in any manner in the complaint process, including counselors, witnesses, 
representatives, investigators, and adjudicators, shall be free from restraint, interference, 
coercion, discrimination, and reprisal at any stage of the processing of the complaint or 
thereafter. Alleging discrimination to an agency manager, an EEO counselor, or the 
Office of the Special Counsel; filing a formal complaint or negotiated grievance alleging 
discrimination; serving as a counselor, witness, representative, neutral or adjudicator on 
complaints or negotiated grievances involving discrimination allegations, or acting in a 
capacity that fosters EEO activity, such as an Affirmative/Employment Program Manager 
are examples of protected EEO activities. Employees or applicants shall be free from any 
form of reprisal for engaging in protected equal employment activities. Allegations of 
harassment, restraint, interference, intimidation, coercion, or retaliation for these 
activities are considered allegations of reprisal. An individual identified in any manner as 
responsible, in whole or part, for the employment decision and/or employment action that 
is challenged in the complaint, or who recommended such action, shall not be subject to 
disciplinary or other action solely because a complaint has been initiated. 

 

6 TIME LIMIT 

 

An aggrieved individual must initiate contact with an EEO counselor within 45 
days of the date of the matter alleged to be discriminatory, or, in the case of a 
personnel action, within 45 days of the effective date of the action. 

 

USDA shall extend the 45-day time limit when: 

 

a the complainant shows that: (1) he/she was not notified of the time limit, 
was otherwise unaware of the applicable time limit, and exercised due 
diligence in pursuing rights to challenge the action; (2) he/she did not 
know and reasonably should not have been known that the discriminatory 
matter or personnel action occurred and pursued the issue with due 
diligence upon learning of the action; (3) despite due diligence he/she was 
prevented by circumstances beyond his/her control from contacting the 
EEO counselor within the prescribed time limit, or, (4) for other reasons 
provided by the complainant, the USDA deems explanation sufficient; or. 

 

b the complainant submits a reasonable request, in writing, prior to the 


expiration of the time limit, and to do so will not severely prejudice 
USDA or the rights of employees. 

 

An aggrieved individual must file a formal complaint with the Office of Civil 
Rights within 15 calendar days of receipt of the Notice of Right to File. The 
formal complaint filing period may also be extended for equitable reasons (i.e., 
where agency officials intentionally mislead the complainant into inaction and 
untimely filing). 

 

7 REPRESENTATION AND OFFICIAL TIME 

 

a The complainant is entitled to be accompanied, represented, and/or 
advised at any stage of the process by another individual. The complainant 
is expected to answer personally all questions from the counselors and 
investigators and is responsible for compliance with the requirements of 
this part whether or not represented. Where complainant has a 
representative, all correspondence should be addressed to both the 
complainant and the designated representative, and documents given to 
the complainant will also be given to the representative. Oral discussion 
with a represented complainant may be undertaken without first contacting 
the representative, but the complainant must be given the opportunity to 
contact the representative and/or make the representative a party to the 
discussion before it proceeds. Where the representative is an attorney and 
the Office Of General Counsel (OGC) is representing the agency, the 
OGC representative will only contact the complainant through the 
representative. The complainant is not required to involve the 
representative in any communication with USDA. Where the 
representative is an attorney, service on the complainant of any document 
will be made by service on the representative. Agencies may prohibit a 
particular employee from acting as a representative on a particular 
complaint if: 

 

(1) there is a conflict of interest, or 

 

(2) the priority requirements of the agency would be harmed. 

 

b The complainant, representative, and any witness or Responsible 
Management Official in active duty status, shall be granted reasonable 
official time to prepare and present a complaint or a response to inquiries 
involved in processing the complaint. The term “reasonable amount of 
official time” depends on the individual circumstances of each complaint. 

 

Reasonable is defined as whatever is appropriate, under the factual 
circumstances presented in the complaint, in order to allow a complete 
presentation of the relevant information associated with the complaint 
and to respond to an agency’s request for information. The actual 


number of hours to which the complainant and his/her representative are 
entitled will vary, depending on the nature and complexity of the 
complaint and considering the mission of the agency, as well as the 
agency’s need to have its employees available to perform their normal 
duties on a regular basis. The complainant and the agency should arrive 
at a mutual understanding as to the amount of official time to be used, 
prior to the complainant’s use of such time. Ultimate authority for 
determining official time rests with the Agency. 

 

The complainant and the representative, if employed by the agency and otherwise 
in a pay status, shall be on official time, regardless of the tour of duty, when their 
presence is authorized or required by the agency or the EEOC during the 
investigation, informal adjustment, or hearing on the complaint. Whatever time is 
spent in the (official EEO) meetings or hearings is automatically deemed 
reasonable. If a complainant or representative has already worked a full week and 
must attend a hearing or meeting on an off duty day, the complainant or 
representative is entitled to official time, which may require that the agency pay 
overtime. In the alternative, the supervisor can, in advance and in accordance 
with Agency leave policy and practices, adjust the tour of duty when appropriate 
or necessary. 

 

Preparation does not include conducting independent inquiries or gathering data 
or testimony, but does include activities reasonably related to and anticipated in 
regard to responding to official requests for information during any complaint 
processing stage. Since USDA conducts the required investigation, official time is 
not necessary or reasonable for the purpose of independently obtaining evidence 
or statements on the complaint issue. Responsible Management Officials, 
witnesses and their representatives are subject to the same rules on official time as 
the complainant. 

 

8 ACCESS TO RECORDS 

 

EEO counselors, EEO investigators and the Office of Civil Rights are to be 
allowed access to any agency records requested, and are considered routine users 
of the Privacy Act information. EEO counselors, EEO investigators and CR are 
obligated by the Privacy Act not to improperly release protected information. 
Questions concerning the release of information should be directed to the 
agency’s Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)-Privacy Act Officer or the Office 
of Civil Rights FOIA-Privacy Act Officer. EEO counselors and investigators 
experiencing difficulty in obtaining requested information should immediately 
report the matter to the agency’s EEO Manager or the Employment Complaints 
Division, Office of Civil Rights. Refusal to grant an EEO counselor, EEO 
investigator, or CR access to requested records will establish a rebuttable 
presumption of interference in the complaint process. The EEO Director may 
require appropriate corrective actions in cases of interference in the complaint, 
including the consideration by authorized individuals of disciplinary action 


against the offending individual. 

 

9 SHARING INFORMATION 

 

Any request for information from the complainant’s file, or request for use of 
such information, that is not already authorized in this chapter, must be forwarded 
to the Office of Civil Rights for processing as a FOIA request. However, in 
complaints that are open and not yet decided, release of documents under FOIA is 
not deemed appropriate because it would have an adverse impact on the decision 
process of the complaint. 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(5) further excludes interagency or 
intra-agency predecisional documents, and section (b)(7) excludes documents that 
would interfere with law proceedings. 

 

10 RESOLUTION STRATEGY 

 

In considering the resolution of complaints, a reasonable analysis is necessary to 
determine what offer of settlement is appropriate in each individual case. To make 
this determination, agencies and complainants must use the factors of this resolution 
strategy and apply them in accordance with the concepts involved. The factors of this 
resolution strategy are: (1) the underlying interest involved, (2) cost, (3) impact on 
relationships, and (4) risks. Application concepts are: application of the resolution 
strategy to each available option, disregard for the merits of the case, no set formula 
to weigh factors, and justifying adjudication through remaining resolution options. 

 

11 FACTORS OF THE RESOLUTION STRATEGY 

 

a Identification of the underlying interests. The first step in deciding whether and 
how to resolve a dispute is usually the recognition of the important interest 
involved in the case. For management, this may be hiring/promoting the best 
qualified, correcting/preventing inappropriate behavior/performance, achieving 
program objectives, encouraging/rewarding good performance, or minimizing 
workflow disruption. For complainants, this may be career advancement, 
remaining competitive with others, keeping a good reputation, or achieving more 
job satisfaction. The objective for both management and complainant in 
resolution becomes retaining as much control over these important interests as 
possible. Adjudication removes all control from both parties in the dispute and 
hands it to a third party. Settlement is the method that allows both parties to keep 
control of their own interests and fate. 

 

b Cost. USDA managers should strive to minimize costs, especially those that are 
not directly tied to program objectives, such as complaint processing costs. In 
situations in which two viable options to resolve the complaint are deemed 
acceptable to management, the lower cost option is generally preferable. Longterm 
total average costs should be fully considered. For example, if a complete 
remedy is estimated to be $6,000, settlement is possible at $4,800, and 
adjudication will cost only $3,000 it may appear that adjudication is favored. 


However, it is only a prudent decision when one prevails on 70 percent of the 
complaints adjudicated. Thus, settling 10 complaints may cost $48,000. In 
contrast, adjudicating 10 complaints ($30,000) and losing 30 percent of the 
complaints ($18,000) would also cost approximately $48,000. Therefore, the 
following cost elements should be carefully considered: 

 

(1) determine the amount at risk; 

(2) determine the average amount lost (% risk times amount at risk); 

(3) determine the cost of processing the complaint, and 

(4) determine the cost of resolution, 

 

c Impact on relationships. Maximizing positive relationships and minimizing 
adverse impacts on relationships are important considerations. How management 
views the complaint, how peers view management or the complainant, the impact 
of resolution on others in the work site, and the impact of processing on 
coworkers, friends, and family are all valid considerations. 

 

d Risk analysis. In balancing the first three factors, the strengths and 
weaknesses of the case facts, theory of discrimination involved, pattern of 
actions taken, and level of documentation available must be assessed to 
determine the risk of loss. Risk may be stated mathematically (30 out of 
100, 30 percent, 30/70) or generically (low, moderate, average, high, 
excessive). High risk may make settlement imperative for either party. 
Low risk means settlement would be on favorable terms. Settlement is 
always preferred, on the right terms. There is no guaranteed winner or 
loser. 

 

e Application of the strategy factors. 

 

(1) Applying the strategy to options. In each case, there are many potential 
resolutions, ranging from no relief (very rare) to full relief (very rare). 
Each option has a different impact on the underlying interests and 
relationships, cost a different amount, and affects risk differently. In every 
case, there is a resolution that is reasonable for both parties. The strategy is 
used to identify it, determine the bargaining parameters, and justify the 
resolution. 
(2) The merits of the claim are not a factor. Whether one is right or wrong is 
not a factor in managing resolution. If one goes to litigation it is important 
that one have a high probability of success, maximizing control over 
interest. Costs, relationships, and risk are what is important in resolution. 
Every case has strengths and weaknesses on both sides. For those 
managers who wish to litigate for a moral principle, the overriding 
principle is what is best for the organization as a whole, not the personal 
feelings of the individual. If one is absolutely right in the decision being 
challenged, and one can achieve the interests involved by agreement, it is 


 


generally against principles to risk those interests in the hands of a third 
party adjudicator solely to be declared right. 
(3) There is no formula to weigh the factors. Normally, the underlying interest 
is the most important factor in the case. However, sometimes relationships 
or risks predominate. In no case is the cost to be the only factor or the most 
important factor. Parties should work to minimize the cost, but not at the 
expense of risks, interests, or relationships. 
(4) Use the strategy to justify litigation. Once an acceptable resolution is 
identified and bargaining parameters established, the key is obtaining the 
agreement of the other party. If this is not possible, the demands of the 
other side need to be analyzed under the strategy to ascertain their impact 
on interests, costs, relationships, and risk. Where significant drawbacks 
exist, the resolution strategy then justifies going forward to adjudication. 
Where benefits outweigh drawbacks, then resolution on those terms is still 
preferable to adjudication. 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


CHAPTER IV - INFORMAL EEO COMPLAINT PROCESS 

 

 

1 PARTICIPATION IN INFORMAL PROCESS REQUIRED 

 

As a precondition to filing a formal complaint, all complainants MUST make contact 
with a USDA EEO counselor and participate in the informal EEO process, including 
providing specific details on the issues presented, responding to offers, and identifying 
relief sought. USDA has established a full-time EEO Counselor Program. EEO 
counselors may not have any assignments other than counseling or dispute resolution 
activities. Training assignments concerning the EEO complaint process or dispute 
resolution activities are acceptable. EEO Counselors may also serve as ADR neutrals on 
cases other than any case on which they have been an EEO counselor. Only issues raised 
with an EEO counselor may be filed as a formal complaint. 

 

2 A COMPLAINANT MAY AMEND A PENDING COMPLAINT 

 

The complainant may add or bring up additional issues with the EEO counselor once 
counseling has been initiated. 

 

3 AUTHORITY TO RESOLVE 


 

Agencies are authorized to resolve complaints raised with an EEO counselor to the same 
extent and with the same relief, as appropriate, as in the formal complaint process 
(Appendix A of 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, EEOC Management directive 110, and Chapters X, 
Remedial Actions, and IX, Resolution below, apply). Maximum relief at any stage of the 
process is the relief that could be provided by any adjudicator of a formal complaint, 
including the maximum possible relief. 

 

4 THE INFORMAL EEO COUNSELING PROCESS 

 

a Initiation of Process. The complainant must contact an EEO counselor within 45 
days of the occurrence of an alleged discriminatory event or personnel action to 
initiate the informal EEO complaint process. In the case of a class action, the 
class agent must initiate the informal EEO complaint process. In the case of a 
class action, the class agent must initiate contact with the EEO counselor within 
45 days of the date the specific policy or practice affected the proposed agent. 

 

b Coverage of the informal EEO counseling process. The informal complaint 
system covers individual and class complaints of discrimination based on race, 
color, religion, sex, national origin, age, (40 years of age or older), physical or 
mental disability, sexual orientation, genetic information, marital or parental 
status, political beliefs and reprisal for previous EEO activity. Only USDA 
employees but not applicants for USDA employment may initiate a complaint 
under this manual based on sexual orientation, genetic information, marital or 
parental status, and/or political beliefs. Claims of discrimination due to political 


beliefs are only applicable to competitive service positions, and are not applicable 
to excepted service or non-career positions. 

 

5 ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITY OF THE EEO COUNSELOR 


 

The EEO counselor has six specific defined duties that must be performed for each 
completed counseling action where an informal resolution is not achieved (see Informal 
Checklist in the Appendix). The duties are: 

 

a Advise complainant (orally and in writing) about the EEO complaint process 
under 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, ADR options pursuant to Chapter V, and the 
procedures for requesting ADR, and, where applicable, the various options 
and/or election requirements for mixed cases, negotiated grievances processes, 
and ADEA procedures; 
b Assist the complainant in identifying and clarifying the issue(s) and basis(es) of 
the potential complaint; 
c Conduct a limited inquiry for the purposes of furnishing information for 
counseling and resolution efforts, and determining jurisdictional questions if a 
formal complaint is filed; 
d Seek resolution of the complaint at the lowest possible level. If EEO counseling 
proceeds past the initial contact and record review stage, EEO counselors must 
contact Responsible Management Officials and orally inform them of the issues 
of the complaint, the basis of discrimination alleged, the processing steps of a 
complaint, and their rights at each stage of processing. After this briefing, the 
EEO counselor is to ascertain any and all reasons for the decision being 
questioned, and any change to those decisions that the Responsible Management 
Official will consider. The Responsible Management Officials may offer any 
additional information they consider appropriate to the EEO counselor. If the 
complainant does not accept the explanation or record information in resolution 
of the complainant, the EEO counselor will obtain an offer from the lowest level 
of management possible, using the resolution strategy, to present to the 
complainant. 
e Document all closures of the counseling contact in writing, with a copy to the 
complainant, whether the closure is a resolution by withdrawal or settlement, or a 
right to file a formal complaint if resolution efforts fail, and, 


 

 

 

 

 

 f Prepare a report sufficient to determine that required counseling actions have 
been taken and resolve any jurisdictional questions that may arise if a notice of a 
right to file a complaint is issued (see EEO Counseling Checklist in the 
Appendix). 

 

 


6 RIGHTS OF COMPLAINANT 

 

a At the initial counseling session, the EEO counselor will provide complainant 
with a written notice of the complainant’s rights under the EEO processing 
system (See Counseling Checklist in the Appendix). 
b The counselor will explain the complainant’s right to anonymity and ascertain 
whether the complainant wishes to remain anonymous. 


 

 

7 APPROACH/ACTIVITIES DURING EEO COUNSELING PERIOD 

 

a Discussion with Complainant. 
(1) Help the complainant sort out the issues and the exact circumstances 
surrounding the problem or the alleged discrimination. Gather any 
information on the relationship and/or history between the complainant 
and the official or agency alleged to have discriminated. 
(2) Find out what specific relief the complainant desires. 
(3) Identify any mitigating issues, witnesses, or other factors that can allow a 
thorough understanding of the situation. 
b Discussion with agency officials. 




 

 

 

 

 

(1) Explain complainant’s allegations and summarize the reasons or facts 
complainant gave for believing there has been discrimination. (Note: The 
complainant’s name can be used only if anonymity has been waved in 
writing.) 

 

(2) Explain counselor’s role and the complaint process. 

 

(3) Explain various resolution techniques and options and assist the parties, if 
they are willing, to select one. 

 

(4) Obtain articulated reasons for the actions or decisions about which the 
complainant has raised. 

 

(5) If counseling proceeds past the exchange of information between the 
complainant and the agency, obtain an offer from management officials to 
present to the complainant. 
(6) Present any counter offers to management for consideration. 


 

 

 

8 ELECTION OF ADR 


 

a Agencies shall offer ADR, with limited exceptions, as an alternative to traditional 
counseling in the informal EEO complaint process. There are cases where ADR 
need not be offered, but decisions not to offer ADR must be fair, equitable, and 
consistent with Departmental ADR policy. When ADR is offered, the 
complainant has the option of choosing any available ADR program in USDA 
that uses neutrals qualified to provide ADR services in EEO complaints. 
However, if the complainant chooses an ADR program other than the one that 
normally services employees in the complainant’s Agency, the selected program 
is not required to provide the ADR service. The complainant has 7 days to 
exercise an option, in writing to the EEO counselor, after the EEO Counselor has 
offered the option of ADR or traditional counseling. If the complainant does not 
respond to the EEO counselor within 7 days from the initial notice of the 
availability of ADR, traditional counseling is automatically elected. The precomplaint 
processing period is automatically extended to 90 days (see 29 C.F.R. 
1614.105(f)) to accommodate the ADR process if the complainant selects ADR. 

 

 The ADR effort will be conducted under the policies and procedures outlined in 
the USDA ADR policy (DR 4710-1) and any applicable Agency policy or 
procedure. If the complainant elects ADR and it is provided, the EEO counselor 
on the case is precluded from serving as the ADR neutral on the case, and may 
make no further efforts to counsel the complainant. 

 

b If the ADR session is successful, a written agreement will be prepared. This 
agreement will be signed by the management official having authority to agree to 
the terms, and the complainant. The neutral ADR provider will forward the 
agreement to the ADR Program office for appropriate distribution. The EEO 
Counselor must be informed of the resolution. The settlement agreement will be 
forwarded to the Office of Civil Rights (CR), where it will be recorded and 
monitored. 

 

c If no agreement is reached within the remaining time frame for EEO counseling, 
the ADR session is concluded. The ADR Program staff will notify the EEO 
Counselor of the non-resolution, and the Counselor, in turn, will issue the Notice 
of Right to File a discrimination complaint required by C.F.R. 1614.105(d). The 
entire process must be completed within the 90 day extended counseling period. 

 

9 PROBLEM RESOLUTION 

 

a Problem resolution in the informal EEO process means that the complainant and 
the agency have come to terms with a problem and agree on a solution. 


 

b Any resolution reached by the parties must be reduced to writing and signed. 

 

10 EEO COUNSELOR’S REPORT 

 

 If counseling does not resolve the complainant’s issues within the 30-day time period, or 
any extension arranged with the complainant (up to a total of 90 days), the EEO 
counselor will issue the Notice of Right to File a Formal Complaint (NRF) as described 
in 29 C.F.R. 1614.105(c). When the complainant files a formal complaint, the Office of 
Civil Rights will notify the Agency and the EEO counselor must complete and furnish to 
the Office of Civil Rights and the complainant the counseling report (as described in the 
Counselor Report Review Checklist in the Appendix) within 15 days of the notice to the 
Agency of the filing of the complaint. Because the narrative report will become a central 
document in the complaint file, it is vital for this report to completely, accurately, and 
clearly describe the complaint and the nature of counseling provided. The narrative 
report form is divided into sections, each of which describes a specific piece of 
information about the complaint and the counseling effort. The narrative report should 
contain only relevant information. As the narrative report is a concrete reflection of the 
quality of the counseling provided, counselors should take care to ensure that the report 
submitted is correct, complete, and legible. 

 

The Counselor’s Report should include the following: 

 

a Complainant contact information; 

 

b Chronology of EEO counseling; 

 

(1) Date of alleged discriminatory event; 

(2) 45th day after the event; 

(3) Date of initial contact; 

(4) Date of initial interview; 

(5) Reason for delay contact, if appropriate; 

(6) Date of NRF, and (if known) 

(7) Date NRF received. 

 

c Basis(es) for alleged discrimination; 

 

d Specific issues alleged to have been discriminatory; 

 

e Remedy requested; 

f EEO Counselor’s Checklist Advising of Rights and Responsibilities (see Forms 
section); 

 

g Substance of EEO counselor’s inquiry; 

 

(1) Information from documents reviewed, 


 

(2) Explanation and comments from personal interviews and contacts. 

 

h Summary of informal resolution attempt, including information given to the 
parties; 

 

i The EEO counselor’s name, date, and signature). 

 

11 NOTICE OF RIGHT TO FILE 

 

The EEO counselor must conduct the final interview with the complainant and issue the 
written notice of a right to file a formal complaint (with the 15 day time limit and the 
address of ECD) within 30 days of the date the complainant brought the matter to the 
attention of the EEO counselor, unless the complainant agrees in writing to extend the 
counseling period for up to an additional 60 days. 

 

12 TRAINING 

 

The EEO counselor will receive annual training designed to maintain and improve their 
knowledge of EEO and Federal personnel laws, regulations, and practices, and their skill 
in mediation and resolution. The Office of Civil Rights may require particular training for 
the EEO counselors from time to time. 

 

13 REPORTING CONTACTS 

 

Each counseling contact must be immediately reported to the Office of Civil Rights as 
soon as it is initiated, and be updated when significant events occur, either by the EEO 
counselor or through the agency Counseling Program Manager. A contact involves any 
question about a decision or action that has affected the individual raising the question. 
Multiple questions or decisions may be raised in a single contact. The contact report will 
identify the issues presented, bases or factors of discrimination alleged, the agency 
involved, and date of contact. When ADR is offered or approved after the Complainant’s 
request, the contact report will also identify the date of the offer or approval of the 
request, and the date of any election or request of ADR. The EEO counselor will also 
report, with a copy of the written closure, all closing actions, including the amounts of 
any monetary payments made by any agency officials to resolve complaints in the 
informal stage. 

 

14 COOPERATION 

 

Employees of USDA are required to cooperate with the EEO counselor assigned to an 
EEO complaint. This includes answering all questions asked and providing all documents 
requested. Employees will deal directly with the EEO counselor when requested, whether 
or not represented. Failure of complainants to cooperate with the EEO counselor will be 
documented as a withdrawal from EEO counseling. Failure of any other employee to 
cooperate with the EEO counselor may be grounds for disciplinary action, up to and 


including removal from service. In addition, an adverse inference may be drawn in any 
adjudication of the matter. All witnesses will be free from any interference, restraint, 
coercion, or reprisal for their cooperation. 

 


CHAPTER V - FILING AN INDIVIDUAL COMPLAINT 

 

 

a Time limits. A formal complaint must be signed by the complainant and filed in 
writing within 15 days of receipt of the Notice of Final Interview with the EEO 
counselor. A complaint is deemed filed on the date postmarked, if addressed to 
the official designated to receive complaints; or, if not postmarked, on the date 
received by the office of such a designated official. For purposes of timeliness, in 
the absence of a returned receipt, the USDA will presume that the Notice of Final 
Interview was received by the complainant within 5 calendar days of mailing. 

 

b Location. All formal complaints must be submitted to the Director of the Office 
of Civil Rights. No other office is authorized to receive formal complaints, and 
filing with any other office does not toll the necessary time frames. A complaint 
is filed on the date complete information, as required by regulations, is actually 
received by the Office of Civil Rights (CR), and all time frames for processing 
begin from that date. 

 

CR prepares an acknowledgment letter and mails it to the complainant and the 
representative. A copy of the acknowledgment letter, including the complaint, is 
also forwarded to the agency’s EEO complaint processing office. The letter of 
acceptance (see d) may serve as the acknowledgment letter if mailed within 30 
days from the filing of the complaint. 

 

c Complaint content. A complaint must include: 

 

(1) The complainant’s name, address, and telephone numbers; 
(2) The name, address, and telephone number of any representative; 
(3) A specific description, including the dates, of the decision involved in any 
individual complaint or the policy or practice and incident of application 
in any class complaint; 
(4) The agency that made the decision or applied the policy; 
(5) The basis on which discrimination is alleged, and 


 

 

 

 

 

The name of the EEO counselor contacted. The Office of Civil Rights may 
prescribe a form for use in filing an EEO complaint with USDA. 

 

d Acceptance. The Director, Office of Civil Rights, or a designee, shall accept 
complaints that are timely submitted and covered by this chapter (see Acceptance/ 
Dismissal Checklist in the Appendix). The assigned staff member identifies the 
accepted issues, the appropriate statement of work for the investigation, and any 
background issues. Complainants will be notified of the acceptance and all 


administrative and legal rights to which they are entitled as well as the 
opportunity to request ADR (see Chapter VI, ADR) as a means of resolution, 
and include a detailed explanation of available ADR options. The agency will 
be furnished a copy of the letter of acceptance. If the initial material submitted as 
a complaint is not complete, CR will request that the complainant clarify the 
complaint and/or provide the missing material and allow 15 days for its 
submission. 

 

e Dismissal. A complaint that is not properly filed will be dismissed by the 
Director, Office of Civil Rights (see Dismissal Checklists in the Appendix). A 
complaint will be dismissed if: 

 

(1) the issue was not brought to the attention of an EEO counselor or 
submitted formally within the prescribed time limits, unless the time limits 
are extended and the issue is not remanded for counseling; 
(2) the action or decision, or the factor or basis alleged, is not within the 
control of USDA or the scope of this appendix; 
(3) the action or decision involved in the complaint is moot and there is no 
further potential relief available through the complaint process (when two 
conditions are satisfied): There is no reasonable expectation that the 
alleged violation(s) will recur; and interim relief or events have completely 
and irrevocably eradicated the effects of the alleged violation. 
(4) it sets forth an issue identical to a complaint that is pending or that has 
already been decided (such as in a complaint within USDA, or under a 
negotiated grievance procedure that covers discrimination allegations, or as 
an appeal to the MSPB, or as a civil action in a Federal Court). 
(5) the issues deal with a proposed action that is nonspecific to the 
complainant; 
(6) the complainant fails to prosecute the complaint after being provided 15 
days notice of the requirement to proceed and the potential dismissal; 
(7) the allegation concerns the processing of a previous complaint (unless the 
allegation is consolidated with the previous complaint), or 
(8) there is a clear pattern of abuse of the EEO complaint system. A dismissal 
is a final decision and will comply with the appropriate requirements (see 
Chapter VIII, Final Decisions). 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

f Amendments. A complainant may amend a formal complaint, either before or 
after acceptance, to add additional factors or bases. Complainants may request to 
add additional issues to complaints, but only if each additional issue has been 


presented properly to an EEO counselor. An additional incident cited as evidence 
in support of previously accepted issues does not need to be discussed with an 
EEO counselor to be reviewed in the complaint. USDA may, in its discretion, join 
individual complaints from the same complainant or from different complainants 
on the same issue for processing. CR will notify complainants and agencies of 
such 

actions. When a complainant wishes to amend a complaint after the initial 
complaint is filed, USDA will determine, on a case-by-case basis, how any 
additional issues will be processed and notify complainants and agencies. 

 

At anytime prior to the conclusion of the investigation, a complainant may amend a 
pending EEO complaint to add claims that are like or related to those claim(s) raised in 
the pending complaint. The complainant is not required to seek EEO counseling on these 
new claims. After the complainant has requested a hearing, he or she may file a motion 
with the EEOC AJ to amend the complaint to include claims that are like or related to 
those raised in the pending complaint. 

 

a When a complainant raises a new incident of alleged discrimination during the 
processing of an EEO complaint, it must be determined whether this new incident: 

 

(1) provides additional evidence offered to support the existing claim, but does 
not raise a new claim in and of itself; 
(2) raises a new claim that is like or related to the claim(s) raised in the pending 
complaint, or 
(3) raises a new claim that is not like or related to the claim(s) raised in the 
pending complaint. 
b In order to facilitate such a determination, the complainant must submit a letter to the 
Employment Complaints Division, Office of Civil Rights (ECD) specifically 
describing the new incident. 


d If the ECD concludes that the new incident(s) raises a new claim, but that the new 
claim is like or related to the claim(s) raised in the pending complaint, the pending 
complaint will be amended to include the new claim. The ECD will also send a copy 
of the letter to the EEO investigator with instructions to include the new incident(s) 
in the investigation. 
e If ECD concludes that the new claim raised by the complainant is not like or related 
to the claim(s) raised in the pending complaint, the complainant will be advised in 
writing that he/she must seek EEO counseling on the new claim and the applicable 
time limit. The postmark date of the letter from the complainant would be considered 
the actual date for the time computation purposes used to determine if the initial 
EEO counselor contact was timely in accordance with the EEOC regulations. Actual 
contact with a counselor will initiate the counseling time frames in EEOC 


 

 

 

 

 


regulations. 


 

g Immediate agency responsibilities once an EEO complaint is accepted. The 
agency is responsible for ensuring that all Responsible Management Officials are 
notified of any accepted issues and the procedures involved in processing the 
complaint. The agency is required to retain records relating to the action 
involved, irrespective of any other retention schedule regulations. Willful failure 
to retain records will result in an adverse inference being drawn by the Office of 
Civil Rights or the EEOC with regard to the actions at issue. 

 

h Continuing violations. A complainant may also proceed with a discrimination 
claim where some or all of the discriminatory acts took place more than 45 days 
prior to contact with an EEO counselor by alleging and proving that the alleged 
discriminatory violation constituted a continuing violation.@ A continuing 
violation is a series (serial violation) of related acts, one or more of which falls 
within the 45-day limitation period, none of which is significant enough by itself 
to trigger the need to initiate the complaint process to protect an individual’s 
rights. Under a Aserial violation@ theory, a complainant must show that: 

 

(1) there are a series of related acts, at least one of which occurred within the 
45-day limitation period, and, 
(2) The untimely and timely acts are sufficiently related by a common nexus. 
The key factors in determining whether a series of acts are sufficiently 
related include: 
(a) subject matter; 
(b) frequency (are the acts recurring or are they isolated?); 
(c) permanency (were the acts of sufficient impact that an exercise of a 
right to challenge should have occurred), and 
(d) the involvement of the same individuals or the maintenance of a 
practice concerning the issue 




 

 

 

 

 


CHAPTER VI - ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION 

 

 

1 OPPORTUNITY 


 

The complainant will be notified in the acceptance letter of any Agency or Department 
ADR process available during the formal complaint processing. For ADR options on 
Class Complaints, see Chapter XIV in this manual. The EEO process to investigate 
individual EEO claims is separate and still be conducted in accordance with 29 CFR 
l6l4.l08. If no resolution is reached in any ADR effort, the case will be processed to 
closure under the regulations. The notice of an opportunity for ADR will note: 

 

a An extension of complaint investigation time, up to 90 days, is available in order 
to accommodate ADR. 
b In the event that a resolution or settlement is reached in ADR proceedings, the 
case will be closed and ECD will discontinue any investigation. 
c USDA ADR policies (DR 4710-1) and regulations will be followed in providing 
ADR on formal EEO complaints. 
d The ADR process is voluntary and confidential. 
e A contact point with phone number to obtain additional information about any 
available ADR process 


 

 

 

 

 

2 OFFER 

 

ADR is voluntary for the complainant. A complainant may request ADR efforts at any 
time during formal complaint processing, but the Agency may elect not to participate. 
However, if the Agency formally offers a complainant ADR on a complaint, 
management’s participation is required once the complainant has responded to the offer 
and selected ADR. 

 


CHAPTER VII - INVESTIGATION 

 

 

1 NOTICE 

 

The Office of Civil Rights will notify the complainant and the agency of the accepted 
issues and obtain an investigation of those issues. 

 

2 COVERAGE 

 

The Office of Civil Rights will arrange for an investigation into the issues of the 
complaint. A contractor or USDA employee may conduct the investigation. The methods 
of investigation include direct examination, fact finding or other oral conferences, an 
interrogatory, request for admissions or position statements, or any combination of the 
above. The investigator is responsible for obtaining information that is material, relevant, 
and reliable. This includes: 

 

a comparative evidence between the complainant and similarly situated employees; 
b statistical evidence which may raise the inference of discrimination, and 
c direct evidence, such as testimony and other direct evidence of motive (ie., policy, 
regulations). 


 

 

 

The investigative report will also include: all documentary evidence concerning the 
accepted issues; sworn testimony concerning the reasons for the actions included in the 
accepted issues; all evidence that supports or refutes testimony concerning the reasons for 
the actions included in the accepted issues, or stated reasons themselves, and all evidence 
that supports or refutes the specific evidence presented by the complainant in support of 
the allegations. In addition, witnesses shall be identified as belonging or not belonging to 
complainant’s basis grouping. Where names of employees are removed from a statistical 
compilation or any supporting documents, labels or other identifiable notations will be 
used instead, and will be consistent throughout the investigative report. The Director of 
the Office of Civil Rights will be furnished a key to the substituted labels or notations. 

 

3 SURVEY 

 

Relevant general statistical information shall be obtained and recorded in the investigation. 
The investigation will also include a review of the treatment of members of the 
complainant’s group in the organization segment responsible for the matter giving rise to the 
complaint, and any policies or practices relevant to the accepted issues which may constitute 
discrimination. This statistical information is not limited just to the type of issue involved 
in the complaint. The purpose is to provide statistical information of the general treatment 
of the complainant’s group by the organization. 

 

 


 

4 BACKGROUND 


 

The Office of Civil Rights will make reasonable attempts to provide already available 
statistical data when requesting an investigation. To assist in this matter, agencies may be 
requested to provide a copy of the affirmative employment plan, if any, and the most recent 
minority group statistics report, if any, for the unit involved in the complaint. 

 

5 IMPARTIALITY 


 

The investigation will be conducted impartially. Information that the complainant or any 
Responsible Management Officials wish to present will be received by the investigator and 
submitted with the report. The investigator will include all other relevant information 
received in the report, and list any information received but excluded as not relevant. Any 
witnesses will be allowed to make corrections or additions to their sworn statements. The 
investigator will note for the record any substantial variation between oral and written 
statements from a witness. 

 

6 COOPERATION 


 

Employees of USDA are required to cooperate with the investigators assigned to 
investigate an EEO complaint. This includes answering all questions asked, providing all 
documents requested, and expeditiously reviewing and signing an affidavit. Employees will 
deal directly with the investigator when requested, whether or not represented. Investigators 
will provide an opportunity for representation. Failure to cooperate with the investigator 
may be grounds for disciplinary action, up to and including removal from the service. In 
addition, an adverse inference may be drawn in any adjudication of the matter. All 
witnesses will be free from any interference, restraint, coercion, or reprisal for their 
cooperation in the investigation. Where an agency official believes that the investigation is 
exceeding authorized parameters, cooperation is expected until the Office of Civil Rights 
resolves the question. Such questions should be referred electronically to the Office of Civil 
Rights to expedite resolution. 

 

7 RESPONSIBLE MANAGEMENT OFFICIALS 


 

Agencies are expected to notify Responsible Management Officials of the accepted issues 
when a complaint is accepted. At the time the official is being interviewed, and any time 
thereafter that new or additional information is developed, any Responsible Management 
Officials will be orally informed of relevant allegations in sufficient detail to articulate any 
and all reasons for the challenged actions. The Responsible Management Official will be 
provided sufficient description of the complaint issues to ensure that relevant information 
will be placed in the record if known or available. 

 

8 DISTRIBUTION 


 

The Office of Civil Rights receives and logs the draft investigative report from the 


investigator. A specialist reviews the draft for coverage of issues and completeness 
(including general adherence to the statement of work), sanitization, legibility, and full 
review of the background and reasons presented for the challenged actions (see Issues 
checklist in the Appendix). The specialist will request supplemental work if the report is 
deficient. If the report is accepted as final, the Office of Civil Rights will distribute it to the 
complainant, representative, and the agency. The agency and complainant will then be 
provided an opportunity to supplement the report with comments or evidence pertaining to 
the accepted issues. 

 

9 ACCESS TO REPORT 


 

The investigative report will be utilized by the agency solely in attempts to resolve the 
complaint, including mixed case complaints or appeals, or to address other problems 
developed in the investigation. Routine transmittal of the report (or excerpts) to individuals 
or units not responsible for complaint processing (or resolution of other problems 
identified) is not permissible without the approval of the Office of Civil Rights. 

 

10 SUPPLEMENTAL INVESTIGATION 


 

When an agency or the complainant wishes additional investigation, their request should be 
sent to the Office of Civil Rights within 7 days of receipt of the initial report, with a copy to 
the other party. The Office of Civil Rights will determine: 

 

a whether the additional requested information is required and, if so, 

 

b the manner in which the information will be obtained and added to the file. The 
Office of Civil Rights will distribute supplemental investigation in the same 
manner as with the initial investigation. 

 

11 COMPLETION OF THE INVESTIGATION 


 

The Office of Civil Rights will add any submission received from the complainant and 
agency to the file and notify both the complainant and agency of the completion of the 
investigation, with copies of any submission, by the 180th day from filing, unless the 
complainant has agreed to an extension under 29 C.F.R. 1614.108(e). Upon completion of 
the investigation, the complainant is provided a copy of the report of investigation (ROI) 
for review and resolution attempts. The complainant has 30 days from the receipt of the 
ROI to request a decision on the complaint after a hearing [except in mixed case 
complaints (Chapter XVI, Special Provision) or cases solely involving the bases of marital 
or parental status, genetic information, political beliefs or sexual orientation (Chapter VII, 
Hearings)], or to request a decision on the record. If, within 30 days from the receipt of the 
ROI, the complainant does not request a hearing, the Director of the Office of Civil Rights 
will issue the final agency decision (FAD) on the record (Chapter VIII, Final agency 
Decision). 

 

 


 

 

12 ADEQUACY OF THE ROI 


 

An investigation is adequate if it contains sufficient information to address each accepted 
issue and basis in the complaint. The investigator is authorized to investigate only issues 
that have been specifically accepted by the agency in the letter of acceptance. An adequate 
file meets both substantive and procedural standards and is presented in an appropriate 
format. To determine the sufficiency of the file, the reviewer must ensure whether the file 
contains sufficient evidence to address each element of the legal analysis appropriate to the 
accepted issues, i.e., enough information to establish the prima facie case, sufficient 
information to present management’s articulated reasons or other defenses, and to allow for 
analysis of pretext (see Issues Checklist in the Appendix). 

 

13 EVIDENTIARY CONSIDERATION 


 

Where an allegation of discrimination has been made, the facts must initially establish that 
there is some substance to the allegation. In order to accomplish this, the facts must 
establish a prima facie case of discrimination. This means that their must be material or 
relevant evidence such that, were it not rebutted, the trier of the fact could conclude that 
discrimination did occur. Then the record must contain an articulated legitimate, 
nondiscriminatory explanation for the employment decision. Once the agency has 
articulated such a reason, the question becomes whether the proffered explanation was the 
true reason for the agency’s decision, or merely a pretext for discrimination. Disparate 
treatment is the most easily understood type of discrimination. The employer simply treats 
some individuals less favorably because of their race, sex, etc. 

 

Material evidence relates to one or more of the issues raised by the complainant. To 
determine what constitutes material evidence, the investigation must be clear as to the 
theory of discrimination at issue, the bases, and issues of the complaint. If these are 
correctly identified, it is not that difficult to determine whether evidence is material. 

 

Relevant evidence is that which tends to prove or disprove an issue raised by a complainant 
or a reason articulated by management. The relevance of evidence is testable based on 
whether the file has correctly identified the theory of discrimination, the bases of the 
alleged discrimination, and the issues raised in the complaint. 

 

Evidence is reliable if it is dependable or trustworthy. The more the adjudicator feels that a 
specific piece of evidence is trustworthy, the higher degree of reliability and the more 
weight can be ascribed to the particular piece of evidence. While hearsay testimony is 
admissible in the administrative forum, the degree to which an affiant has actually 
witnessed an event relevant to the issues and/or bases in the complaint also affects 
reliability, and hence, the weight to be accorded with his or her testimony. Reliability is a 
standard to be used in determining the weight a particular piece of evidence should be 
given compared to other evidence gathered during the investigation. 

 


CHAPTER VIII - HEARING 

 

 

1 GENERAL 

 

When a complainant requests a hearing on his/her complaint, the EEOC will appoint an 
EEOC AJ to conduct a hearing. Upon appointment, the EEOC AJ will assume full 
responsibility for the adjudication of the complaint, including overseeing the 
development of the evidence of record. An EEOC AJ, or the hearing examiner with 
appropriate security clearances, will conduct the administrative hearing. 

 

After review of the complaint file, the EEOC AJ may: 

 

a Dismiss the complaint within his/her jurisdiction pursuant to 29 C.F.R. 
1614.107(a) on his/her own initiative, after notice to the parties, or upon an 
agency’s motion to dismiss a complaint; 

 

b Conduct the administrative hearing, or 

 

c Render a decision without a hearing, if some or all material facts are not in 
genuine dispute and there is no genuine issue as to credibility. 

 

Anytime after the filing of the formal complaint, but no later than the date an EEOC AJ 
has been appointed to conduct the hearing, the agency may make an offer of resolution to 
a complainant. The offer of resolution must be in writing and must include a notice 
explaining the possible consequences of failing to accept the offer of settlement. The 
agency’s settlement offer, to be deemed effective, must include attorney’s fees and costs, 
if the complainant is represented by an attorney, and also must specify any non-monetary 
remedial relief. The acceptance by the complainant of a settlement offer must be in 
writing. 

 

Upon receipt of the complainant’s election for a hearing before an EEOC AJ, the Office 
of Civil Rights will notify the agency. The agency will designate a representative. The 
case file, including the investigative report, is duplicated in conformance with EEOC’s 
specifications, and forwarded to the appropriate EEOC District Office. 

 

Because the EEOC does not have jurisdiction in political belief, marital or parental 
status, sexual orientation, or genetic information complaints, any request for a hearing in 
a case where these are the only bases alleged will be handled completely within USDA. 
A determination will be made on whether a hearing is required for additional fact-finding 
before the FAD is issued. Complainants and agencies will be notified of this 
determination and the reason therefor. Where the EEOC has jurisdiction over some, but 
not all bases alleged, the Office of Civil Rights will request a hearing by the EEOC on 
the covered bases. USDA may hold the USDA-only bases in abeyance, and issue a final 
decision on them when the hearing process is completed, or issue a decision on those 
bases immediately.. 


 

2 POLICY 

 

Every effort should be made to present all the facts. Cooperation with requests from the 
AJ is expected. Complainants, representatives, and witnesses who are employees of 
USDA will be on official time when participating in the hearing. 

 

3 PROCESSING 

 

The transmittal of the file to an AJ for a hearing will ask that the decision and the 
transcript be furnished to the Office of Civil Rights. CR will decide whether to file a 
notice of appeal or to fully implement the decision of the AJ after consultation with the 
Agency. CR will issue and distribute to the complainant and the Agency the USDA 
notice of final action on the complaint within 40 days of receipt of the file and decision 
from the AJ. 

 

4 COSTS 

 

The agency will bear all costs incidental to the hearing, including, but not limited to, the 
costs of travel for witnesses, complainants, and representative who are employees of 
USDA; and the costs of the transcripts. Travel of witnesses from other government 
agencies who are testifying based upon previous employment with USDA will also be 
paid by the agency. 

 


CHAPTER IX - FINAL AGENCY DECISION 

 

1 PROCESSING 

 

29 C.F.R. Part 1614 requires the issuance of the FAD within 60 days of receiving 
notification that a complainant has requested a decision on the record from the agency; or 
within 60 days of the end of the 30-day period for the complainant to request a hearing 
before the FAD where the complainant has not requested either a hearing or a decision. 

 

The FAD must include findings on each issue of alleged discrimination raised by the 
complainant, as well as appropriate remedies and relief when discrimination is found. 
The final decision must also inform the complainant of his or her right to appeal to the 
EEOC or to file a civil action in the appropriate U.S. District Court, and of the applicable 
time frames. 

 

2 CONTENT 

 

The FAD will address all unresolved and accepted issues of a complaint (see Final 
Agency Decision Checklist in the Appendix). Any issues not accepted will be dismissed 
if not previously explicitly dismissed, with a statement of the reasons therefor. It will 
include the background of the complaint and an analysis of each issue as to whether or 
not there was discrimination. In disparate treatment cases, the analysis will include a 
determination of whether an inference of discrimination was shown and, if so, whether or 
not any stated reasons were supported or refuted by the evidence. In disparate impact 
cases, the analysis will include a determination of whether an adverse impact was 
established and, if so, whether or not business necessity or validation supported the 
policy or practice. Dismissals will contain a statement of the facts upon which the 
decision is based. 

 

3 CORRECTIVE ACTIONS 

 

The FAD shall include a legal analysis as to whether or not discrimination is found, and 
remedial action, including attorney fees, is deemed appropriate for individual relief of the 
complainant. Corrective action also includes any relief set forth by 29 C.F.R. Part 1614. 

If discrimination is found, the relevant statutes allow for remedial action, which may 
include: 

 

a equitable relief (back pay, restoration of benefits, rescission of personnel 
action, retroactive promotions, etc.); 

 

b injunctive relief (corrective measures to ensure that practices cease and 
environments change, such as training or discipline of supervisors or coworkers); 


 

c compensatory damages (pecuniary losses such as medical costs, loss of 
credit, etc., and nonpecuniary damages, such as payment for pain and 


suffering), and 

 

d attorney’s fees and costs (reasonable costs associated with legal 
representation). 

 

4 RIGHTS TO REVIEW 

 

The FAD will inform the complainant of his/her right to appeal to the EEOC (see 
Chapter XIV) and/or file a civil action in a Federal District Court (see Chapter 
XV), except in the case of marital status, political beliefs, parental status, genetic 
information or sexual orientation complaint, to which there is no right of further 
review. The bases of parental status, marital status, sexual orientation, genetic 
information or political beliefs are not appealable to the EEOC. 

 

5 TRANSMITTAL 

 

CR will transmit to the complainant, representative, if any, and to the agency’s 
EEO officer, a copy of the FAD. The agency will transmit sanitized copies of the 
FAD to any Responsible Management Officials, and provide a copy to the agency 
Human Resource Management Office. 


CHAPTER X - RESOLUTIONS 

 

 

1 VOLUNTARY DISPUTE RESOLUTION 

 

a General. The effectiveness of any workforce depends upon the manner in which 
managers and supervisors respond to day-to-day situations which impact hiring, 
promotions, evaluations, training, discipline, and working conditions. These are 
areas in which managers and supervisors are responsible for making sound 
decisions which will ensure an effective and efficient workforce capable of 
meeting agency requirements. 

 

Federal managers and supervisors who possess a good understanding of EEO 
requirements will be better able to incorporate these requirements into their dayto-
day decisions. However, even the most exemplary of managers may be 
involved in an EEO complaint. 

 

b Discrimination complaint - Form of conflict. Conflict is defined as antagonism or 
opposition between interests or parties. A discrimination complaint filed by an 
employee or applicant for a position reflects a disagreement, misunderstanding or 
controversy concerning an action taken by management, or the failure of 
management to take an action. The complaint process, therefore, is a 
management tool whereby an employee’s allegations based on a prohibited basis 
of discrimination (i.e., race, color, sex, national origin, disability, religion, 
political beliefs, parental status, sexual orientation, marital status, or genetic 
information) are investigated, mediated, and resolved through either an agreement 
or an adjudication. Management exercises most control when the closure is 
through a voluntary agreement. 

 

No matter how well an agency official may perform in meeting EEO goals or in 
advancing anti-discrimination policies, the possibility exists that an employee or 
an outside applicant for a job may perceive an action of decision as being 
discriminatory. 

 

In dealing with any complaint, the basic goal of the agency official should be to 
resolve the complaint in a way that is fair to the complainant, acceptable to the 
agency, and perceived by the rest of the employees as an appropriate outcome. 

 

The first and most important step in meeting that objective requires dealing with 
the agency official’s personal feelings toward the complaint and the complainant. 
It should not surprise anyone that a person charged with discrimination might 
feel betrayed, angry, or disappointed. Nevertheless, in order to deal with the issue 
successfully, responsible agency officials need to set aside their feelings and deal 
with the issues on their substance. That means getting the facts, listening carefully 
to understand why the person feels that he or she was treated improperly, and then 
working towards resolution. 


 

Being careful to treat a complainant in a polite, businesslike, and professional 
manner will not only help in working out an appropriate resolution to the matter, 
but it will also help in avoiding the filing of later complaints claiming reprisal for 
the EEO complaint. 

 

It may help to keep in mind that until USDA decides otherwise, the complaint is 
only a claim or an allegation that reflects the perception of a situation by an 
individual. Allegations must be supported or refuted by facts. Therefore, the role 
of fact-finding and communicating the facts clearly to the complainant and those 
processing the case is important. 

 

The agency has four distinct windows of opportunity to resolve EEO complaints 
prior to the issuance of the FAD. First, at the counseling stage; second, 
immediately after a formal complaint is accepted; third, after receiving a report of 
investigation, and fourth, before the hearing is conducted by the EEOC. The 
Agency and complainant are free to reach a voluntary resolution at any time until 
a decision in a civil action is issued. 

 

2 EFFECT OF A RESOLUTION OFFER 

 

 a Offer. When the agency offers the complainant a resolution that is rejected, it 
insulates itself from further costs or attorney fees unless the complainant achieves 
additional relief by proceeding with the complaint (see 29 C.F.R. 1614.109(c)(3). 

 

 b Documentation. If an agency wishes to preserve the record on the rejected offer, 
the transmittal offer and documentation of the rejection must be submitted to the 
Office of Civil Rights for inclusion in the complaint file. If the offer was 
presented in an ADR effort, it must be presented again outside of the ADR effort 
to preserve the confidentiality of the ADR process. 


CHAPTER XI – REMEDIAL ACTIONS 

 

 

1 POLICY 

 

Provision of relief greater than that which could be authorized through adjudication is not 
authorized. It is the policy of USDA to make completely whole any individual who has 
been found to have suffered from discrimination. It is also the policy of USDA to provide 
relief, where the Department or Agency deems it warranted, resolving a complaint 
whether or not discrimination is explicitly found. Where other improprieties have 
occurred, they will be corrected. 

 

2 SCOPE OF RELIEF 

 

When the USDA finds that the agency has discriminated against an applicant or 
employee, appropriate remedial measures as set forth in 29 C.F.R. Part 1614,. Subpart E - 
Remedies and Enforcement, are awarded. Remedial relief is considered appropriate if 
such remedies reasonably guarantee that the actions challenged in the complaint will not 
recur to the complainant or an individual within the complainant’s protected group. The 
test for adequacy of remedial relief is the implementation of measures which reasonably 
ensures that the corrective, curative, or preventive action will be taken, or measures 
adopted to ensure that violation of the law similar to those found will not recur. Any 
expenses, costs, or lost entitlements arising out of the employment situation may be 
included in the scope of any back pay or lump sum in lieu of back pay that is provided 
the complainant. The agency, independent of the complaint process, will take remedial 
actions concerning non-complainant employees when warranted or appropriate. Any 
officials against whom such action is proposed or taken will be provided access to the 
complete complaint file. 

 

3 AGENCY DISCRETION 

 

Agencies have reasonable discretion in determining appropriate remedial actions 
concerning complainants to remedy discrimination or the appearance of discrimination. 
When discrimination is found, corrective actions concerning other employees require the 
concurrence of the servicing Personnel/Human Resources Management Office. 

 

4 PRESUMPTIONS 

 

If discrimination is found, it is assumed that the discrimination affected the complainant 
unless clear and convincing evidence proves that the same action would have occurred in 
the absence of any discrimination. 

 

5 LIMITATION 

 

Back pay, computed in the manner prescribed by 5 C.F.R. '550.805, shall be awarded 
from the date the individual would have begun duty, assumed the duties of the position at 


issue, or not been removed from the position unless clear and convincing evidence 
indicates that the applicant or employee would have not been selected for, placed into, or 
removed from the position, even absent discrimination. In cases relating to the remedial 
relief for the applicant for employment, back pay for complaints under Title VII or the 
Rehabilitation Act may not extend from a date earlier than 2 years prior to the date on 
which the complaint was initially filed by the applicant. Similarly, in cases relating to 
remedial relief for employees, the back pay liability under Title VII or the Rehabilitation 
Act is limited to 2 years prior to the date the discrimination complaint was filed. Interest 
on back pay shall be included in the back pay computation when sovereign immunity has 
been waived (see Sub Part E - Remedies and Enforcement - 29 C.F.R. 1614.501). Back 
pay is not limited to salary amounts, but also includes all benefits or entitlements that 
may arise out of the employment situation. 

 

6 RELEVANCE 

 

Relief provided the complainant should be relevant to the issues of the complaint or other 
matters involved. Relief will be granted in accordance with applicable law and 
regulations. Whether or not a finding is made, the law provides authority to grant such 
relief, as is appropriate, to make the complainant whole. The provisions of 29 C.F.R. 
1614.501 will be followed in granting remedies on the complaints. 

 

7 TYPES OF REMEDIAL RELIEF 

 

Relief available to individual complainants falls into four general categories: 

 

a Equitable relief. Equitable relief is relief designed to restore the employee to the 
point at which he/she would have been if the contested decisions had been fully in 
his/her favor. It can include back pay, restoration of benefits, rescission of 
personnel actions, expurgation of documents, provisions of training or 
employment opportunities, retroactive promotions, front pay in limited 
circumstances, etc. 

 

b Injunctive relief. Injunctive relief includes corrective or curative measures to 
ensure that practices cease or environments change. It can include training or 
discipline of supervisors or co-workers, the issuance and/or posting of apologies, 
notices of policy statements, etc. 

 

c Compensatory damages. Compensatory damages are monetary payments beyond 
equitable relief (and attorney’s fees) which repay the complainant for losses 
beyond direct effects to terms or conditions of employment. Pecuniary 
compensatory damages include quantifiable losses such as medical costs incurred, 
loss of credit, loss of residence, etc. Nonpecuniary losses include payments for 
pain, suffering, loss of reputation, embarrassment, etc. Punitive damages are not 
recoverable by Federal employees. 

 

d Attorney’s fees and costs. Attorney’s fees and costs are available for 


representational services (see Chapter XI, Attorney Fees) 

 

8 AGENCY NEGOTIATIONS 

 

Agencies have reasonable discretion when reaching settlement with complainants within 
the following restrictions and guidelines: 

 

a No settlement agreement when viewed in its totality may exceed what the 
complainant could obtain if discrimination were found on all of the issues (see 
Chapter, Remedies). 

 

b The agency must document the basis of any decision to offer front pay. 

 

c The agency must obtain objective evidence of damages whenever it agrees to pay 
compensatory damages. The amount of evidence needed will increase with the 
amount of compensatory damages. Before offering to pay unspecified 
compensatory damages, the agency will consider how further gathering of 
evidence or adjudication may affect relationships within the unit. 

 

d When the amount of compensatory damages exceeds a given preauthorized 
amount, or if there is a disagreement between the agency and the complainant on 
a lesser amount, the agency will forward the complaint to the Office of Civil 
Rights for adjudication after it and the complainant establish a record regarding 
the damages incurred. 

 

e Whenever the amount of compensatory damages exceeds a given preauthorized 
amount, the agency will be required to take reasonable corrective actions to 
prevent recurrence of similar circumstances and the reasons therefor, and submit 
the information to the Office of Civil Rights. Either the Agency or the 
Department Office of human Resource Management will review these situations 
to determine if corrective or disciplinary action is warranted. 

 

9 ATTORNEY FEES 

 

If an agency decides to award attorney’s fees, they will be determined in accordance with 
the provisions of 29 C.F.R. 1614.501(e). If the agency and representative are unable to 
achieve an agreement on appropriate fees, the fee submission and the agency’s 
explanation for not paying fees is forwarded to the Office of Civil Rights for 
determination. 


CHAPTER XII - ATTORNEY’S FEES AND COSTS 

 

 

Complainants who prevail on claims alleging discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil 
Rights Act of 1964, as amended, and the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, are 
presumptively entitled to an award of attorney’s fees and costs, provided attorney fees were 
incurred, unless special circumstances render such an award unjust. 29 C.F.R. 1614.501(e)(1). 
Further, complainants prevailing on claims under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 
1967, as amended, and the Equal Pay Act of 1963, as amended, or who solely allege the bases of 
marital or parental status, genetic information, political beliefs or sexual orientation are not 
entitled to attorney’s fees at the administrative level. Only in the rarest of other circumstances, 
or where a Title VII or Rehabilitation Act complainant rejects an offer of resolution made in 
accordance with 29 C.F.R. 1614.109(c) and does not obtain more relief than the agency had 
offered, can the agency limit or deny an award of fees. 

 

A prevailing party, within the meaning of Section 706(k) of Title VII, 42 U.S.C. 2000e-5(k), is a 
complainant who has succeeded on any significant issue that achieved some of the benefits the 
complainant sought in filing the complaint. A purely technical or de minimis success is 
insufficient to confer prevailing party status. 

 

An attorney who represents himself/herself is not entitled to an award of fees. Neither a nonattorney, 
nor a Federal employee (including an attorney) who represents a complainant is entitled 
to an award of fees. 29 C.F.R. 1614.501(e)(1)(iii). 

 

Attorney’s fees are properly considered part of the relief available to the successful complainant. 
The EEOC’s general guidance on fees is set forth at 29 C.F.R. 1614.501(e). In a final decision or 
settlement, the agency may award the complainant reasonable attorney's fees and costs 
(including expert witness fees) incurred in the processing of the complaint. 

 

Whether as a result of a FAD finding discrimination and awarding attorney’s fees, or a 
settlement in which the agency agrees to pay reasonable attorney’s fees, all fee claims will be 
initially processed by the involved agency. The agency may agree to pay the fee claim as filed, 
negotiate a different amount with the representative, or not pay any fee. If the agency and 
representative are unable to achieve an agreement on appropriate fees, or the agency denies the 
requested amount of attorney’s fees and costs, the fee submission, including the agency’s 
explanation for not paying fees, is forwarded to the Office of Civil Rights. The Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, or a designee, will issue the final Department decision on any issue of attorney’s 
fees and costs in dispute (see Attorney’s Fee Checklists in the Appendix). 

 

The basic formula for determining fees, if all other requirements are met, is the number of hours 
reasonably expended multiplied by a reasonable hourly rate. Thereafter, the amount of attorney’s 
fees and costs may be reduced or increased based on the following factors: 

 

$ the time and labor required; 
$ the novelty and difficulty of the questions; 
$ the skill requisite to perform the legal service properly; 



$ the attorney's preclusion from other employment due to the acceptance of the case; 
$ the customary fee; 
$ whether the fee is fixed or contingent; 
$ time limitations imposed by the client or the circumstances; 
$ the amount involved and the results obtained; 
$ the experience, reputation, and ability of the attorney; 
$ the undesirability of the case; 
$ the nature and the length of the professional relationship with the client, and 
$ awards in similar cases. 



CHAPTER XIII - COMPLIANCE WITH SETTLEMENTS AND FINAL AGENCY 
DECISIONS 

 

 

If the complainant believes that the terms of any settlement agreement (whether the settlement 
agreement was reached during the counseling stage or at any time in the formal complaint 
process) have not been implemented by the agency, the complainant may request compliance 
with the agreement, or reinstatement of the initial complaint at the stage at which it was settled. 
This request will be filed with the Office of Civil Rights either directly by the complainant or by 
the agency upon receipt of the request. The request must be filed within 30 days of learning of 
the alleged noncompliance. 

 

Thereafter, an inquiry will be conducted and the Director, Office of Civil Rights (or a designee) 
will issue a decision (see Noncompliance Checklist in the Appendix) as to whether or not the 
agreement has been fully implemented, whether further compliance is required, or whether the 
complaint must be reinstated. The Director may also require any action deemed necessary by an 
agency to fulfill the terms and conditions of a settlement agreement. The decision on the 
compliance allegation will be a final Department decision with appropriate appeal rights (see 
Section VIII, Final Agency Decision and Section XIV, EEOC Appeals). 


CHAPTER XIV - CLASS DISCRIMINATION COMPLAINTS 

 

 

1 GENERAL 


 

A class is defined as a group of employees, former employees, or applicants who are 
alleged to have been adversely affected by an agency personnel policy or practice which 
discriminates against the group on the basis of their common race, color, religion, sex, 
national origin, age, or disability. A class complaint is a written complaint of 
discrimination filed on behalf of the class by the agent of the class, alleging that the class 
is so numerous that a consolidated complaint by the members of the class is impractical, 
that there are questions of fact common to the class, that the claims of the agent of the 
class are typical of the claims of the class, and that the agent of the class and, if 
represented, the representative, will fairly and adequately protect the interests of the class. 

 

2 PRE-COMPLAINT PROCESSING 

 

An employee who seeks to represent a class of employees must initially seek counseling 
and proceed with the pre-complaint processing within 45 days of the discriminatory event 
that implemented the policy or practice as to the complainant. The EEO Counselor will 
provide written notice of the rights and responsibilities of a class agent, and the 
requirements of a class complaint. The complainant does not have to indicate to the EEO 
Counselor that they wish to file a class complaint. The time period may be waived and is 
subject to estoppel and equitable tolling. If the complaint is not resolved on the 30th day 
following initial EEO counseling, the EEO counselor must give the agent written notice 
that he/she has 15 days from receipt of the notice to file a formal complaint. 

 

USDA may extend the counseling period up to an additional 60 days if, prior to the 
expiration of the 30-day period, the aggrieved person agrees, in writing, to postpone the 
final interview. 

 

The complainant may move for class certification at any reasonable point in the formal 
complaint process when it becomes apparent that there are class implications to the claim 
raised in an individual complaint. For example, the individual complaint potentially 
involves questions of law or fact common to a class and the complainant’s claim is 
typical of that of the class. However, undue delay in requesting such certification will 
lead to dismissal of the class complaint. If a complainant moves for class certification 
after completing the pre-complaint process, no additional counseling is required. At this 
time, USDA or the EEOC AJ, as appropriate, must advise the complainant of his/her 
rights and responsibilities as the class agent. 

 

EEO counselors must address both the individual concerns of the complainants and the 
class-wide allegations if raised. Each complaint, individual or class, must be closed by a 
settlement agreement, a notice of withdrawal, or a notice of a right to file a formal 
complaint. Settlement of informal class complaints requires prior review and approval of 
the Director, Office of Civil Rights. 


 

3 FORMAL COMPLAINTS 

 

a Processing. Upon receipt of a formal class action complaint of discrimination, or 
a request to certify an individual complaint as a class action, OGC serves as 
USDA’s representative. 

 

b Content. Formal class complaints must include a description specifically and in 
detail of: 

 

(1) the policy or practice giving rise to the complaint, and 

 

(2) the resulting personnel action or decision adversely affecting the class 
agent. 

 

The complaint should also include an estimation of the number of members of the class, 
an indication of a typical claim of the class, and a showing of the common questions of 
fact. Any representative, and his/her background and experience, should also be 
presented. 

 

4 REFERRAL FOR A RECOMMENDATION TO ACCEPT OR REJECT 

 

a Processing. The Office of Civil Rights will notify OGC of the complaint and 
forward the case file, including agency comments where appropriate, to the 
EEOC, with a request for the assignment of an AJ. The Office of Civil Rights 
will hold in abeyance any individual complaint filed by the agent (and any named 
members or potential members of the class who file formal complaints) on any 
acceptable issues raised. The Office of Civil Rights will notify Agencies of the 
names of complainants who claims are being held in abeyance. If the class is 
certified and a class complaint is accepted for processing, any individual 
complaint on the same basis and issue as the class will be subsumed into the 
complaint. OGC will represent the agency during processing of the class 
complaint at the EEOC. If a class complaint is not certified, the individual 
complaints being held in abeyance will be placed back in processing. 

 

b Recommended decision. The AJ will review the complaint in accordance with 
provision 29 C.F.R.1614.204(d), and submit a recommended decision to the 
Office of Civil Rights on whether to accept or dismiss the class complaint. 

 

c Department decision. The Director, Office of Civil Rights, will issue USDA’s 
decision to accept or dismiss the class complaint. This decision will be issued to 
the agent, the representative, the AJ, and the agency. Any decision to accept a 
class complaint will explain any available ADR options and the procedures to 
request ADR. The Director, Office of Civil Rights, may negotiate a settlement of 
any class complaint recommended for acceptance at any time prior to issuing a 
FAD. 


 

d Dismissal. A decision to dismiss a class complaint will be the final decision of 
USDA. Such a decision will notify the complaint/agent of the right to file an 
appeal or a civil action, and any processing being continued on individual issues. 

 

e Acceptance. If the class complaint is accepted, the Office of Civil Rights will 
prepare the file according to EEOC specifications. Agencies shall notify class 
members within 15 days after acceptance of the complaint acceptance. This 
notice will contain the name of the agency, its location, and the date of 
acceptance, fully describe the issues and background of the complaint; explain the 
binding nature of a final decision or resolution of the complaint; and include the 
name, address, and telephone number of the class representative. Agencies shall 
use reasonable means, such as delivery or mail to the last known address, to 
notify all class members. Agencies will furnish the Office of Civil Rights with 
copies of the notice. 

 

5 PROCESSING ACCEPTED COMPLAINTS 

 

a Responsibility. The AJ will control the development of the case file until a 
recommended decision is issued. 

 

b Time frame. Both parties will develop evidence and prepare the case for the 
hearing. The agency representative is responsible for preparing the agency case 
in accordance with 29 C.F.R.1614.204(f),(g), and (h). 

 

c Resolution. A resolution of the complaint may be agreed upon at anytime by the 
Director, Office of Civil Rights, the agency, and the complainant/agent. Any 
resolution shall be reduced to writing by the Office of Civil Rights. Notice of 
resolution will be given by the agency to all class members using the same means 
used to notify of the acceptance, and shall state the relief granted. Resolution 
agreements of class complaints are subject to the provisions of 29 C.F.R. 
1614.204(g)(4). 

 

The Director, Office of Civil Rights, or a designee will participate in settlement 
negotiations for all class complaints. 

 

6 RECOMMENDED AND FINAL AGENCY DECISION ON THE MERITS 

 

a Recommended decision. The AJ will review the class complaint, including an 
analysis of the hearing record, issue a recommended decision on the merits, and 
forward it to the Office of Civil Rights. 

 

b Final Agency Decision. The Director, Office of Civil Rights, will issue the FAD 
on the class complaint within 60 days from the receipt of the AJ’s 
recommendation. 

 


c Transmittals. The FAD will be transmitted to the complainant/agent, the 
representative, the agency, OGC, and the AJ. In addition, the complainant/agent 
and the agency will be furnished copies of the hearing record. 

 

d Corrective actions. The FAD will authorize the necessary corrective actions and 
advise the complainant/agent of the right to any attorney’s fees. 

 

e Notice. The agency will notify class members of the FAD on the merits of the 
issues of the complaint and the corrective action, if any. 

 

f Individual claims. If discrimination is found, any individual class member who 
believes that discrimination of the type found in the class complaint was applied 
to them may file a claim with the Director of EEO. Such a claim must be filed 
within 30 days of the notification by the agency of the decision on the class 
complaint. Such a claim must indicate specifically the basis for claiming class 
membership and the practice or policy and resulting personal effect claimed to be 
discriminatory. The action of effect must have occurred not earlier than 45 days 
prior to the agent’s initial contact with an EEO counselor. 

 

g Processing. Any claim received by the Director of EEO will be referred by the 
Office of Civil Rights to the agency for processing. The agency will notify the 
Office of Civil Rights of all claims received. Within 30 days from the filing of 
the claim, the agency will either grant relief to accommodate the claimant or 
forward the claim and its comments thereon to the Office of Civil Rights for the 
preparation of the FAD. 

 


CHAPTER XV - APPEALS TO THE EEOC 

 

 

l RIGHT TO APPEAL AND APPLICABLE TIME LIMITS 

 

a Appeals. A complainant alleging race, color, sex, age, disability, national origin, 
religious or reprisal discrimination may appeal an agency’s dismissal of or final 
action on a complaint or an agency’s alleged noncompliance with a settlement 
agreement in accordance with 29 C.F.R. 1614.504. Also, an agency may appeal if 
it determines not to fully implement an EEOC AJ’s decision to dismiss, or on the 
merits of a complaint in an appeal filed simultaneously with the final order served 
on the complainant. An agency must also appeal if it determines, in a class 
complaint, not to fully implement an EEOC AJ’s certification decision in an 
appeal filed simultaneously with the final order served on the agent. In addition, 
an agency may appeal an EEOC AJ’s decision to vacate a proposed resolution of 
a class complaint on the grounds that it is not fair, adequate, and reasonable to the 
class as a whole. 

 

Any complainant, with the exception of complaints which are limited to 
allegations of discrimination based on political beliefs, sexual orientation, genetic 
information, parental or marital status, mixed case complaints, or negotiated 
grievances, may file an appeal with the EEOC within 30 days of receipt of the 
USDA’s dismissal, rejection, final action, or decision. The 30-day time limit is 
subject to waiver, estoppel, and inequitable tolling. 29 C.F.R. 1614.604(c). 

 

b Mixed case complaints. A complainant who has filed a mixed case complaint 
(see Chapter XVI) may appeal to the EEOC only after first appealing through the 
MSPB. A petition for appeal to the MSPB must be filed within 30 days of his/her 
receipt of the USDA’s final decision. Once the MSPB has issued a decision on the 
complaint, an appeal may be filed with the EEOC. 

 

c Negotiated grievances. Where the negotiated grievance system is appropriately 
elected to address allegations of discrimination, a complainant may appeal to the 
EEOC within 30 days of receipt of: (1) a final agency decision; (2) an arbitrator's 
decision or award, or (3) a Federal Labor Relations Authority decision on 
exceptions to an arbitrator's award. If the allegation of discrimination in a 
negotiated grievance involves a mixed case issue, the appeal will be first to the 
MSPB, and subsequently, to the EEOC. 

 

d Notice. Any final agency decision, or any decision on a negotiated grievance that 
covers an allegation of discrimination, will notify the complainant of the right to 
appeal to the EEOC or the MSPB, the proper address to send the appeal, the time 
frames applicable, as well as EEOC Form 573. 

 

 

 


2 PROCESSING 

 

a Notice. When an appeal has been filed with the EEOC, a complainant provides 
written notification and furnishes copies of any appeal submission to the 
following address: 

 

United States Department of Agriculture 

Office of Civil Rights 

1400 Independence Avenue, S.W. 

Mail Stop Code 9440 

Washington, D.C. 20250. 

 

The agency involved in the complaint will be allowed 15 days to submit 
comments to the Office of Civil Rights. Thereafter, the Office of Civil Rights 
will prepare the file and any brief in support of the USDA decision, and furnish it 
to the EEOC within the required time frame. 

 

b Location. The complainant, agent, grievant, or individual class claimant must file 
an appeal by mailing the appeal to the following address: 

 

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 

Office of Federal Operations 

P.O. Box 19848 

Washington, D.C. 20036. 

 

As an alternative to mailing, appeals may be hand-delivered to the following 
address: 

 

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 

Office of Federal Operations 

1801 L Street, N.W. 

Washington, D.C. 20507 

 

or faxed to the EEOC at (202) 663-7022. 

 

c Compliance: After the EEOC has rendered its appeal decision on the complaint 
and forwarded the decision to the Office of Civil Rights, the Office of Civil 
Rights will forward a copy to the agency which will provide a sanitized copy to 
any Responsible Management Officials. 

 

 Any corrective action required will be implemented within 30 days, and evidence 
of such compliance will be immediately furnished to the Office of Civil Rights, 
who will notify the EEOC that corrective action has been fully implemented. 

 

d Request for reconsideration. The Office of Civil Rights will initiate any request 
for reconsideration by the EEOC of a previous appellate decision. However, the 


agency should be mindful that a request for reconsideration is not a second appeal 
to the EEOC. Rather, agencies that wish to request reconsideration of an 
appellate decision issued by EEOC must do so by notifying the Office of Civil 
Rights within 15 days of receipt of the EEOC appellate decision. The agency’s 
notice must include all of the agency reasons supporting such a request for 
reconsideration. Specifically, the agency’s notice must clearly demonstrate that: 
(1) the EEOC’s appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of 
material fact or law, or (2) the decision will have a substantial impact on the 
policies, practices, or operations of the agency. Thereafter, the Office of Civil 
Rights will review the agency’s notice and accompanying documentation in 
support of its request and issue a determination as to whether further action is 
warranted. The Office of Civil Rights shall provide prompt and timely 
notification to the agency. 

 

If the complainant requests that the EEOC reconsider its decision, the EEOC 
provides the Office of Civil Rights with notification of the complainant’s request 
for reconsideration. The Office of Civil Rights will forward a copy of the EEOC 
notification and any attachment to the agency complaint processing office for 
comment. Agency comments will be considered for any brief that the Office of 
Civil Rights elects to submit in response to the complainant’s reopening request. 

 

 


CHAPTER XVI - RIGHT TO FILE A CIVIL ACTION 

 

 

1 RIGHT TO FILE 

 

Any complainant, other than one who has alleged marital or parental status, sexual 
orientation genetic information or political belief discrimination, but including one who 
has filed a notice, mixed case, or negotiated grievance, may file a civil action in an 
appropriate Federal District Court. 

 

2 TIME LIMITS 

 

A discrimination complaint (including a mixed case complaint or a negotiated grievance 
covering discrimination allegations) based on race, color, sex, national origin, reprisal, 
religion, or disabling condition may be filed as a civil action within 90 days after a FAD. 
A civil action may be filed on a complaint after 180 days from filing the complaint if no 
decision has been issued; and on a mixed case complaint after120 days of filing the 
complaint if no decision has been issued. If the complaint has been appealed to the 
EEOC, the complainant may file a civil action within 90 days of receipt of the EEOC 
decision, or 180 days of filing the appeal, if no decision has been issued. If the mixed 
case complaint has been filed with MSPB, the complainant may file a civil action within 
90 days of the MSPB decision, or request a review by the EEOC. Any final 
determination by the EEOC or the MSPB may be reviewed by filing a civil action within 
90 days of receipt of the final decision. 

 

3 PROCESSING 

 

a Files. Upon receipt of a civil action complaint, OGC will notify the Office of 
Civil Rights, who may furnish copies of the official complaint file to OGC at the 
agency's request. The agency involved will be provided an opportunity to submit 
comments and a litigation report on the matter. The Office of Civil Rights may 
submit independent comments and a response to the complaint to OGC. 

 

b Assistance. Agencies will directly assist OGC in providing witnesses, answering 
interrogatories, and otherwise responding to the civil action, and will furnish the 
Office of Civil Rights with copies of all documents generated or submitted in 
response to the civil action. 

 

4 TERMINATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESSING 

 

Filing a civil action on the issues contained in an EEO complaint terminates the 
administrative processing of a complaint. CR will issue a final agency decision 
dismissing the EEO complaint. 

 


CHAPTER XVII - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 

 

 

1 ALLEGATIONS OF REPRISAL 

 

Background. USDA established reprisal panels to address allegations of reprisal in 
employment complaints pursuant to Personnel Bulletin 752-1. The panels operated for a 
period of 1 year, and were then evaluated. Under the terms of Personnel Bulletin 752-1, 
authority for the program ceased as of December 31, 1998. 

 

The Office of Civil Rights hereby implements an Early Resolution Process (pursuant to 
the Administrative Dispute Resolution Act, 5 U.S.C. sec.581-591) as an alternative to the 
reprisal panels. By adopting an early resolution strategy, reprisal allegations will be 
reviewed immediately to determine if the allegations warrant immediate action to protect 
the individual and preserve the integrity of USDA. 

 

The following requirements and procedures address the processing of reprisal allegations. 
The effective date of implementation is December 1, 2000. 

 

2 PROCEDURES FOR COMPLAINTS ALLEGING REPRISAL 

 

a Informal counseling stage (special requirements). The EEO counselor must 
notify the Office of Civil Rights immediately (within 24 hours or 1 working day) 
and in writing of all allegations of reprisal raised by complainants. The EEO 
counselor should also notify the Agency EEO and Human Resource Management 
offices when reprisal is alleged. 

 

 The Office of Civil Rights will conduct a review of facts (within 40 hours or 5 
working days) to determine if the allegations warrant immediate action to 
preserve the integrity of the individual and USDA. If it is determined that the 
allegations warrant immediate action, the Office of Civil Rights will negotiate a 
stay or restraining agreement with the agency proposing such action. Counselors 
will continue counseling activities irrespective of actions by the Office of Civil 
Rights. 

b Negotiating a stay or restraining agreement. In situations where: 

 

(1) an action is pending and the probability of a finding of reprisal is high, or, 
(2) an action is pending that will have a serious negative impact e.g., reduction 
in salary, change of location, etc.), regardless of the potential for a finding, 
the Director of the Office of Civil Rights or a designee will negotiate a stay 
of the pending action with the agency head. The stay will be in effect until 
the Office of Civil Rights review fact finding, investigation, and resolution 
efforts) is concluded. 


 

In situations where the reprisal issues involve ongoing actions or conditions (harassment, 
working conditions, assignments) and the probability of a finding of reprisal is high, the 


Director, Office of Civil Rights, or a designee will negotiate an agreement with 
appropriate Agency officials restraining the agency’s actions affecting the complainant 
until USDA resolves the complaint issues, or some other agreed upon ending date occurs. 

 

In instances where a negotiated stay or restraining agreement does not appear adequate, 
the Office of Civil Rights reserves the authority to negotiate one with the Agency at any 
time in the process should facts indicate it is appropriate. 

 

EEO counseling will proceed in accordance with the time frames specified in 29 C.F.R. 
Part 1614. The EEO counselor in all reprisal cases must notify at least one official in the 
supervisory chain of the manager who is alleged to have committed reprisal, and 
determine, at that level, if a satisfactory adjustment or resolution can be achieved 
expeditiously. 

 

3 FORMAL COMPLAINT PROCESSING STAGES 

 

a Acceptance stage. When a formal complaint is received and reprisal is alleged as 
one of the bases of discrimination, it will be immediately reviewed, and a 
determination as to whether the complaint can be processed will be prepared 
within 5 days. 

 

b Investigation stage. As soon as an acceptable reprisal complaint is identified and 
if there is a previous complaint at the investigation stage, the investigating 
contractor will be contacted to see if the issue can be added to the investigation in 
process. If so, the reprisal complaint issues (and all other bases alleged) will be 
joined to the complaint already being processed so that facts will be developed 
quickly. 

 

If there is no ongoing investigation, or it is too far along to add the reprisal issues, 
then the Office of Civil Rights will ask the complainant in writing (by fax or 
email, whenever possible) whether the complainant wants the traditional 
investigation (which may take about 150 days to complete), or whether an 
expedited 45-day investigation (conducted by the Office of Civil Rights, using email 
and fax for document transmission, interrogatories, and telephone interviews 
for testimony development) is requested. A full explanation of the differences in 
the process will be provided (the quality of work is expected to be the same). The 
complainant will have 15 days to indicate whether the expedited or regular 
investigation process is desired. If there is no response, the regular investigation 
will be initiated. 

 

c Report of Investigation. When the investigation (whether regular or expedited 
process) on any reprisal issue is received, it will be immediately reviewed (5 
working days) to determine whether probable cause for a potential finding of 
reprisal is present. If so, a case summary of the evidence, analysis, and probable 
conclusion will be prepared by the Office of Civil Rights and furnished to the 
Agency. The Office of Civil Rights will initiate resolution efforts with the 


complainant and the agency. If no resolution is achieved, or the 180 day period to 
complete the investigation occurs, the ROI will be distributed to the complainant 
and the Agency. 

 

In cases where reprisal is found, the agency will agree to an immediate review of 
the case, including the gathering of further evidence to determine potential 
disciplinary or other corrective actions (Departmental Personnel Bulletin 752-2, 
Discipline Discrimination Cases; DPM Letter 920-11, SES Performance 
Appraisal System Revision; and USDA Personnel Bulletin governing the SES 
Performance Management and Accountability System). 

 

d Hearing, decision, and appeals. Upon completion of the ROI, whether through 
the regular or expedited process, copies will be furnished to the complainant to 
elect a final decision on the record or after a hearing before an EEOC AJ. From 
this point forward, the reprisal complaint will be handled in accordance with the 
customary procedures for processing complaints. 

 

Once a complaint is closed by USDA, whether by a settlement agreement or final 
decision, a negotiated stay or restraining agreement becomes null and void. At 
that point, the remedy, if any, in the final decision or agreement becomes the 
controlling factor of the agency’s actions towards the complainant. The remedy 
in any Office of Civil Rights’ final decision finding reprisal will include a review 
and followup, including the requirement to take disciplinary action, on the 
agency’s failure to address the reprisal at the agency counseling stage and when 
the ROI was distributed to the agency. 

 

Further, where a finding of reprisal discrimination is entered, or a settlement 
agreement is negotiated with the complainant to stay a finding (where manager’s 
actions were not justified), the Office of Civil Rights will review and document 
agency performance (Office of Civil Rights Performance and Accountability 
System). Agency efforts to seek early resolution of complaints in the counseling 
stage or after the investigative stage will be a factor in determining Office of Civil 
Rights performance ratings for senior executive employees. 

 

4 NOTICE OF INTENT TO SUE 

 

a Policy. Under the ADEA, special provisions apply to notice of intent to sue (see 
ADEA Notices). 

 

b Processing. Upon receipt of an ADEA notice covered by this sub-chapter, the 
Office of Civil Rights will notify the agency complaint processing office of the 
nature of the issues involved and furnish a copy of the notice. The agency is 
encouraged to settle the matter informally, if possible. Any settlement must be 
reduced to writing, with a copy to the Office of Civil Rights. Agencies will 
immediately forward to the Office of Civil Rights any ADEA notice filed with the 
agency. Agencies will notify any employee that is a prospective defendant in the 


case of the ADEA notice. 

 

c Inquiry. The Office of Civil Rights will determine the nature of any inquiry to be 
conducted, which may include: (1) an administrative hearing; (2) an investigation; 
(3) documentary review; (4) interrogatories; (5) personal interviews, or (6) a 
combination of the above. 

 

d Decision. Upon completion of the inquiry, a FAD will be issued by the Director, 
Office of Civil Rights, or a designee, on the issues involved in the matter. A copy 
of the FAD will be forwarded to the complainant, the EEOC, and the agency. 
Copies of the inquiry will also be forwarded to the complainant and the agency. 

 

e Time limits. ADEA notices may be filed with the EEOC within 180 days of the 
action alleged to be discriminatory. Charges are deemed filed on the date of a 
postmark or, if not postmarked, the date of receipt. 

 

5 MIXED CASE COMPLAINTS 

 

a Election and notice. Any matter appealable to the MSPB may be raised first with 
USDA, and then with MSPB, or be taken directly to MSPB, but may not be filed 
and processed by both at the same time. The employee makes an election to 
proceed under one process or the other by filing a timely complaint, or an MSPB 
appeal. Where an allegation of discrimination is raised during the processing of 
an action that is appealable to the MSPB, the notice of the agency decision will 
inform the employee of the requirement to elect a route of review (i.e., the right to 
file a complaint or an appeal, the full procedures of each forum, and the 
applicable time limits). 

 

b Policy. Complaints on matters that are appealable to the MSPB are to be 
processed as outlined in this subsection. Mixed case complaint issues will be 
broadly interpreted to include not only the specific appealable action, but all 
charges and incidents relied on or referenced by the agency in its action, and any 
affirmative defenses raised by the complainant. Allegations of coerced 
resignation or retirement from employees covered by 5 U.S.C. 7512 are 
considered appealable actions. 

 

c Processing. In general, mixed case complaints will be processed in accordance 
with the requirements of 29 C.F.R. 1614.302. The mixed case complainant has 
the right to appeal the action to the MSPB and receive an administrative hearing. 

 

d Decisions. The Office of Civil Rights will determine which allegations accepted 
for processing constitute mixed case issues. The Director, Office of Civil Rights, 
will dismiss a mixed case issue that is appealed to the MSPB, either after 120 
days have lapsed from filing the complaint, or prior to the filing of the complaint, 
or which the MSPB has considered or should have considered in a previous 
appeal. Proper rejections of mixed case complaints are not appealable to the 


EEOC. 

 

e Time frames. Every effort will be made to expedite the processing of a mixed 
case complaint so that a decision may be issued within a reasonable period of 
time. 

 

6 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER DISPUTE RESOLUTION SYSTEMS 

 

a Administrative grievance system. Where the issue in an EEO complaint is also the 
issue, or is related to the issue, of a grievance under DPM Chapter 771, the issue 
involving discrimination will be processed under this sub-chapter as a 
discrimination complaint. The grievance issue should be returned to the 
aggrieved person/complainant pending the processing of the complaint. If the 
grievance issue is adjudicated or resolved in the processing of the complaint, the 
grievance has been processed. If the grievance issue is not adjudicated, the 
grievance may be refiled within 30 days of the EEO complaint closure. 

 

b Negotiated grievance system. Where a negotiated agreement provides a remedy 
for discrimination complaints, allegations of discrimination may not be filed 
under both processes. The employee must elect one of the processes and make 
this election by filing a timely complaint or grievance under the appropriate 
procedure. The first filing requirement is satisfied by a formal EEO complaint or 
the first written submission of a negotiated grievance. 


APPENDIX A 

 

 

 

EEO Counselor Checklist: 

 

____ a. Right to anonymity in the counseling phase of the complaint process unless 
waived. 

 

____ b. Right to representation. 

 

____ c. Advised on other avenues of redress: 

 

____ d. The potential opportunity to elect ADR in both the informal and formal stages, 
including the process necessary to do so, the time limits and time frames 
applicable, the Agency’s right to not engage in ADR, and the policies applicable 
to the ADR process; 

 

Special Counsel; 

 

Merit Systems Protection Board, when the issue is an appealable action; 

 

Negotiated grievance, when a procedure has been established for the bargaining 
unit that allows allegations of discrimination; 

 

Classification appeal rights, when position classification is the issue and 
discrimination is not an allegation; 

 

Administrative grievance, when discrimination is not an allegation; 

 

ADEA right to a civil action after notice when age is the basis; 

 

The right to file directly to U.S. District Court on claims of sex-based wage 
discrimination under the Equal Pay Act. 

 

____ e. Requirement that the aggrieved person file a complaint within 15 days of receipt 
of the counselor's notice of right to file a formal complaint. 

____ f. Right to a hearing before the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in a 
non-mixed case after 180 days or after completion of the investigation. 

 

____ g. Right to file a civil action in the U.S. District Court after 180 days after filing a 
formal complaint or 180 days after filing an appeal. 

 

____ h. Duty to mitigate damages (the interim earnings or amounts which could be earned 
by individual with reasonable diligence generally must be deducted from an 
award of back pay). 


 

____ i. Requirement to keep the agency informed of current mailing address and to serve 
copies of the appeal papers to the agency. 

 

____ j. Only issues raised at the counseling stage may be subject of a formal complaint. 

 

____ k. The time frames in the complaint process. 

 

 


MANAGER REVIEW OF EEO 

 

 

 

 

 

COUNSELOR'S REPORT 

 

 

 

 

 

Counselor:______________________________________ 

 

Complainant:_____________________________________ 

 

Agency:__________________________________________ 

 

The following administrative problems are noted: 

 

[ ] Counselor not certified as completing required training 

[ ] Contact not reported as closed to CR 

[ ] Contact not reported at all to CR 

[ ] Time to closure is excessive 

[ ] Report late 

[ ] No counselor's report 

 

A review of the report revealed: 

 

[ ] Issue not specifically defined 

[ ] Date(s) of issue(s) not provided 

[ ] Responsible Management Official not contacted 

[ ] Responsible Management Official not contacted in a timely manner 

[ ] Articulated reasons not provided 

[ ] Factual information concerning this case is not complete 

[ ] Report contains a chronological listing of contacts 

[ ] An excellent report - concise, detailed, complete 


A review of the counselor's performance revealed: 

 

[ ] No offer or options were suggested to management for consideration. 

[ ] No reasonable offers were made or accepted by management and the case was not 
escalated to higher levels. 

[ ] Election rights are involved and there is no indication they were explained to 
complainant. 

[ ] Election rights improperly explained. 

[ ] Counselor stated a judgement on the merits of the case on whether or not there was 
evidence of discrimination. 

[ ] Counselor tried to dissuade the complainant from filing. 

[ ] Counselor made excellent substantive efforts at the appropriate levels, and achieved a 
reasonable offer. 

 


 

 

ACCEPTANCE/DISMISSAL CHECKLIST 

 

 

 

 

 

YES NO 

 

[ ] [ ] The complaint is filed within 15 days of receipt of the NRF. 

 

[ ] [ ] Complaint is signed by the person claiming to be aggrieved. 

 

[ ] [ ] Complaint is sufficiently precise to identify the aggrieved individual and the 
agency and to describe generally the action(s) or practice(s) that form the issues 
of the complaint. 

 

[ ] [ ] The complainant contacted an EEO counselor within 45 days of the 
discriminatory event or within 45 days of the effective date of the personnel 
action, or within 45 days of reasonable suspicion of discrimination. 

 

[ ] [ ] If contact is beyond 45 days from the incident or reasonable suspicion of 
discrimination, the complainant showed the 45-day contact period should be 
extended because he or she was not aware of the time limits or did not know and 
reasonably could not have known that the matter or personnel action occurred or 
that despite due diligence was prevented by circumstances beyond his or her 
control from contacting a counselor within the 45-day time limit. 

 

[ ] [ ] The complainant stated a claim of discrimination covered by law or regulation 
(i.e., a covered discriminatory basis is alleged, and the issues are within USDA's 
jurisdiction) and the issue is not moot. 

 

[ ] [ ] The complainant does not have the same claim pending before or had been 
decided by USDA or the EEOC. 

 

[ ] [ ] The complainant did not raise the matter in a negotiated grievance procedure or 
elect to appeal the matter to the MSPB. 

 

[ ] [ ] The alleged action is not a preliminary step or a proposal to take a personnel 
action (unless reprisal is alleged as the basis). 

 

If any answer is "no," the complaint issue(s) are not accepted. Any dismissal Decision includes 
reasons for the action, cites the subsection of the EEOC’s regulations and further rights of 
appeal. If all answers are "yes," complaint issues and bases are identified, accepted, and 


referred for investigation. 

 

In addition, at any time in the process, USDA may dismiss a complaint or a portion of a 
complaint that: 

 

YES NO 

 

[ ] [ ] is the basis of a civil action in a U.S. District Court in which the complainant is a 
party, provided that at least 180 days have passed since the filing of the 
complaint, or that was the basis of a civil action decided by a U.S. District Court 
in which the complainant was a party. 

 

[ ] [ ] the complainant cannot be located, provided that reasonable efforts have been 
made to locate the complainant and the complainant has not responded within 15 
days to a notice of proposed dismissal sent to his or her last known address. 

 

[ ] [ ] USDA has provided the complainant with a written request to provide relevant 
information or otherwise proceed with the complaint and the complainant has 
failed to respond to the request within 15 days of its receipt, or the complainant's 
response does not address the agency's request, provided that the request included 
a notice of the proposed dismissal. 

 

[ ] [ ] after the issuance of the certified offer of full relief, the complainant refuses 
within 30 days of receipt of the offer to accept, provided that the offer gave notice 
that failure to accept it would result in dismissal of the complaint. 


NONSELECTION CHECKLIST 

 

NONSELECTICHECKLIST 

When the complainant was among the best qualified applicants referred to the selecting official. 

 

Prima Facie: 

 

YES NO 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the complainant is a member of a protected group(s) on the basis of 
his/her (basis). 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the complainant applied, was found qualified for but was not selected for 
the position of _________ advertised under vacancy announcement number 
________. 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether an applicant not of the complainant's group was selected for the position, 
or some other fact raises a discriminatory inference. 

 

Articulated Reason 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the agency selecting official(s) articulate(s) a legitimate, 
nondiscriminatory reason for the actual selection, the complainant's nonselection, 
or both (the reasons must be articulated clearly enough and with sufficient 
specificity to allow examination of them in the pretext phase of the investigation). 

 

Merit Promotion Package: 

 

Evidence 

 

YES NO 

 

[ ] [ ] Vacancy announcement 

[ ] [ ] Position description 

[ ] [ ] Evaluation criteria or crediting plan 

[ ] [ ] Rating of candidates 

[ ] [ ] Certificate of eligible candidates/selection roster 

[ ] [ ] Evaluation worksheets prepared by selecting official and panel members 


[ ] [ ] Application materials for complainant, selectee, and other best-qualified 
applicants 

 

Other documentation: 

 

Evidence 

 

YES NO 

 

[ ] [ ] Classification standards for series. 

[ ] [ ] Qualification standards for position in that series. 

[ ] [ ] Employment roster or workforce profile for the organizational unit in which the 
vacancy occurred, by accepted protected bases. 

[ ] [ ] Staffing and organization charts for the organizational unit in which the vacancy 
occurred, by accepted bases. 

[ ] [ ] Relevant excerpts from official personnel folders of complainant and applicants, 
including selectee (identified by basis), such as SF-50 and SF-52 for selection at 
issue. 

[ ] [ ] Agency promotion plan and guidelines in effect at time of selection. 

[ ] [ ] Approved affirmative action plan in effect at time of selection if protected basis is 
addressed (unnecessary if basis is age, reprisal, or religion). 

[ ] [ ] Any other relevant regulations/guidelines. 

[ ] [ ] Questions and notes taken during interviews or notes of charts made by selecting 
official when reviewing application materials. 

[ ] [ ] Promotional data for 2 years showing selections made by the selecting official by 
bases of selectees and best qualified applicants, vacancy announcement number, 
position title, job series, and grade, date of selection. 

 

Testimony: 

 

Evidence 

 

YES NO 

[ ] [ ] affidavit - complainant 

[ ] [ ] affidavit - responsible management official 

[ ] [ ] affidavit - personnel or staffing specialist 

[ ] [ ] affidavit - witnesses, as relevant 

[ ] [ ] affidavit - selectee 

[ ] [ ] affidavit - some best-qualified applicants 

[ ] [ ] affidavit - individuals who provided references of complainant and selectee, if 
selecting official contacted them for references 

NONREFERRALS CHECKLIST 

 

 

Prima Facie: 

 


YES NO 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the complainant is a member of a protected group(s) on the basis of 
his/her (basis). 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the complainant applied, was found not best qualified and was not 
referred for possible selection for the position of __________________ 
advertised under vacancy announcement number ______________. 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether other candidates with the complainant's credentials and not of 
complainant's protected group(s) were referred for the selection, or another fact 
raises an inference of discrimination. 

 

Articulated Reason: 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the agency official(s) responsible for not ranking the complainant among 
the best qualified and not referring the complainant to the selecting official for 
consideration for the position at issue articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory 
reason for the nonreferral. 

 

Evidence: 

 

For the nonreferral complaint, the focus is on the criteria applied by the individual(s) who rated 
applicants against the KSAs for the position at issue. 

 

[ ] [ ] Many of the same documents are needed as for nonselection cases; however, 
obtain application materials for all candidates found qualified and rated, not just 
those on the best qualified list. 

 

[ ] [ ] Statistical data for nonreferral for the 2-year period prior to action at issue, 
showing the ratings, best qualified lists, and bases of all rated applicants for those 
earlier ratings. 

 

[ ] [ ] If the same panelists served together on earlier panels, obtain statistical data for 
nonreferral for those particular panels for the 2-year period prior to action at 
issue, including all rating sheets, best qualified lists, and a table of the bases and 
ratings of all rated applicants for those earlier positions. 

 

[ ] [ ] Affidavits should be taken from the complainant, the individual who requested 
the certificate, panel members (or personnel specialist) who rated the applicants, 
and the personnel officer who advised the panel. 

 

[ ] [ ] Position description 

 

[ ] [ ] Evaluation criteria or crediting plan 

 


[ ] [ ] Rating of candidates 

 

[ ] [ ] Certificate of eligible candidates/selection roster 

 

[ ] [ ] Evaluation worksheets prepared by selecting official and panel members 

 

 


APPRAISALS CHECKLIST 

 

 

Prima Facie: 

 

YES NO 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the complainant is a member of a protected group(s) on the basis of 
his/her (basis). 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the complainant received an annual performance rating of 
_____________________. 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether similarly situated employees not of complainant's protected group(s) 
received more favorable performance ratings, or another fact that indicates an 
inference of discrimination. 

 

Articulated Reason: 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the agency official(s) responsible for complainant's performance 
appraisal rating articulate(s) a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for it. 

 

Evidence: 

 

[ ] [ ] Performance appraisals, including elements and standards for the rating period at 
issue for complainant, and others rated and reviewed by the same official showing 
relevant bases of employees. 

 

[ ] [ ] Workforce profile and organization chart. 

 

[ ] [ ] Complainant's position description. 

 

[ ] [ ] Testimony and backup work product documentation with regard to how the 
complainant was rated on each element compared to all others similarly situated. 

 

[ ] [ ] Notes on any counseling offered to complainant prior to the development of the 
appraisal at issue. 

 

[ ] [ ] Pertinent agency regulations on performance appraisals, including union contract, 
if applicable. 


[ ] [ ] Comparative data including the differential, if any, in appraisal scores for each 
person assessed by the rating officer, by the basis raised in the complaint, for a 
period of 2 years preceding the complaint. Include copies of all appraisals for a 
2-year period. 

 

[ ] [ ] Affidavit from complainant. 

 

[ ] [ ] Affidavit from rating official. 

 

[ ] [ ] Affidavit from reviewing official. 

 

[ ] [ ] Affidavits from similarly situated coworkers regarding complainant's performance 
and/or work environment and/or other witnesses with knowledge of complainant's 
performance or the performance of significant comparators. 

 

 


DISCHARGE (DISCIPLINE) CHECKLIST 

 

 

Prima Facie: 

 

YES NO 

 

 [ ] [ ] Whether the complainant is a member of a protected group(s) on the basis of 
his/her (basis). 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the complainant was discharged from his/her employment. 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether similarly situated employees not of complainant's protected group(s) 
were not discharged from employment; whether the complainant was replaced by 
an employee outside the protected group(s), or whether another fact raises an 
inference of discrimination. 

 

Articulated Reason: 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the agency official(s) responsible for complainant's discharge articulates 
a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the complainant's discharge. 

 

Evidence 

 

[ ] [ ] Workforce profile showing position, title, series, grade, and protected bases for 
each employee under the direct and indirect supervision of highest level official 
responsible for the discharge at issue. 

 

[ ] [ ] Organization chart showing work relationships of the affiants. 

 

[ ] [ ] Documentation regarding decision to remove complainant from employment, 
including proposal to remove, underlying documentation, complainant's response, 
if any, and decision letter. 

 

[ ] [ ] Related earlier disciplinary actions, if any, warnings, reprimands, suspensions. 

 

[ ] [ ] Notes on any counseling offered to complainant prior to the development of the 
appraisal at issue. 

 

[ ] [ ] Documentation (proposal, responses, and decision letter) regarding other 
employees removed by responsible official during the 2-year period prior to the 
removal at issue, with each employee identified by the protected bases of the 
complaint, and all file information concerning individuals who allegedly 
committed performance or conduct violations and were not disciplined as 
severely or at all. 

 


[ ] [ ] Agency rules and regulations on discharge in effect at the time of the discharge at 
issue, if any, including union contracts. 

 

[ ] [ ] If discharge is based on misconduct allegations, agency rules and regulations on 
employee conduct and disciplinary action and table of disciplinary penalties. 

 

[ ] [ ] If discharge is based on performance deficiencies, include the complainant's 
position description, performance standards, record of counseling on performance 
deficiencies, pertinent work product documentation, and agency rules and 
regulations regarding performance. 

 

 [ ] [ ] Documentation for other underlying reasons. 

 

[ ] [ ] Affidavit from complainant. 

 

[ ] [ ] Affidavit from responsible management official. 

 

[ ] [ ] Affidavit from witnesses with knowledge of underlying reasons for discharge. 

 

[ ] [ ] Affidavits from employee relations specialist with knowledge of procedures to be 
followed. 


REPRISAL CHECKLIST 

 

 

Prima Facie: 

 

YES NO 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the complainant is a member of a protected group by virtue of his/her 
participation in protected EEO activity (the protected activity must be EEObased, 
not whistleblowing or union activity) or opposition to EEO violations. 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the complainant experienced an adverse employment action after his/her 
participation in or opposition to EEO activity. 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the management officials responsible for the alleged action knew or 
should have known of the complainant's participation in prior EEO activity before 
they took the action(s) at issue. 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether similarly situated employees with no prior EEO activity were treated 
differently by the responsible management officials in similar circumstances. 

 

Articulated Reason: 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the agency management official(s) responsible for the action at issue 
articulate legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for their actions. 

 

Pretext: 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the articulated reason is a pretext for discrimination, including whether 
there is a causal connection between the action at issue and the complainant's 
prior EEO activity. 

 

Evidence: 

 

 Reprisal allegations may involve almost any subject matter, such as nonselection, 
appraisal ratings, disciplinary actions, etc. Therefore, all documents relevant to the 
specific adverse action need to be collected. 


[ ] [ ] Connection between the alleged adverse action and the prior protected EEO 
activity. 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the employer treated the employee differently than before the knowledge 
or differently than the way in which similarly situated nonprotesting employees 
were treated. 

 

[ ] [ ] Evidence of additional surveillance, unusual record keeping, etc. 

 

[ ] [ ] Time between the employer's learning of the prior protected activity and the 
alleged adverse action (the shorter the time, the stronger the inference of a casual 
connection). 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the treatment of the complainant is considered unusually harsh by peers 
and/or coworkers. 

 

[ ] [ ] Affidavit from complainant. 

 

[ ] [ ] Affidavit from responsible management official. 

 

[ ] [ ] Affidavit from coworkers who have knowledge of work environment. 

 

[ ] [ ] If official denied knowledge of complainant's prior EEO activity, affidavits from 
others regarding official's knowledge. 

 

 


SEXUAL HARASSMENT CHECKLIST 

 

 

Prima Facie: 

 

YES NO 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the complainant is a member of a protected group by virtue of his/her 
sex. 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the complainant alleges that he/she was subjected to unwelcome sexual 
advances or activity. 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the complainant alleges that terms, conditions, or the working 
environment was adversely affected as a result of unwelcome sexual advances or 
activity. 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the unwelcome advances or activity came from a supervisor, coworker, 
or nonemployee. 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether, if by a coworker or nonemployee, the employer knew or should have 
known of the behavior at issue and did not take prompt and appropriate remedial 
action. 

 

Articulated Reason: 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the employer articulates a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the 
events (such as that the alleged events did not take place or that they were isolated 
or genuinely trivial). 

 

Evidence: 

 

In general, sexual harassment cases depend on testimony. Harassment cases often involve an 
allegation that sexual behavior between parties other than the complainant has created an adverse 
action or hostile environment for the complainant. Often clarification regarding the following 
must be established: 

 

[ ] [ ] Whether the alleged harassment was quid pro quo or hostile. 

[ ] [ ] Whether the alleged contacts were voluntary. 


[ ] [ ] Whether the complainant made known her/his dislike of the advances. 

[ ] [ ] Affidavit from complainant. 

[ ] [ ] Affidavit from responsible management official. 

[ ] [ ] Affidavits from witnesses (credibility of the key actors). 

 


RESOLUTION STRATEGY 

 

 

Every reasonable effort should be made to resolve the complaint without the necessity of 
carrying it to a final decision. The earlier the resolution is achieved, the less frustrating the 
conflict results for everyone involved. Voluntary settlement is a resolution of the complaint and 
is not only authorized, but encouraged. All parties should be on constant alert for opportunities 
to settle at every stage of the complaint process. 

 

I Interests, prerogatives, flexibilities 

 

The first step in determining whether and how to resolve a dispute is usually the identification of 
the important management interests involved (hiring/promoting the best qualified; 
correcting/preventing inappropriate behavior/performance; encouraging or rewarding good 
performance; achieving program objectives; minimizing workflow disruption). The objective 
then becomes the retention of as much control over these interests as possible. When 
adjudication is selected by management instead of resolution, management interests and 
prerogatives are being placed in the hands of a third party, not only in the individual dispute, but 
possibly in other similar circumstances as well. The greater the policy implications, the greater 
the need for managers to retain as much control (by resolution) as possible. Settlement is the 
best method of protecting management interests. 

 

 a. Identify the issue:____________________________________________ 

 

b. Determine the prerogative involved:____________________________ 

 

c. Assess its impact/importance:__________________________________ 

 

II Cost comparisons 

 

Managers should strive to minimize costs, especially those that are not directly tied to program 
objectives (such as complaint processing costs). Where two options are both acceptable to 
management, the lower costs option is generally preferable. Long term total average costs 
should be factored in. 

 

a. Determine the amount at risk:_________________________________ 

 

b. Determine the average amount lost: ____________________________ 

 

c. Determine the cost of resolution:_______________________________ 

 

d. Determine cost of processing:__________________________________ 

 

III Impact on workforce relationships 

 

Managers should strive to maximize good relationships and minimize adverse factors in 


relationships. Three situations usually must be considered: 

 

a. The current relationship/performance assessment of the complainant. If the 
complainant is a satisfactory or better employee, management must decide if it 
wants to begin battle with the employee. 

 

b. Peer assessment of the complainant must be accurately determined (settlement 
with a "bad" employee should not be a simple "caving" in.) 

 

c. Settlement options must be assessed for impact on other employees. 

 

IV Risk analysis 

 

As integral part of balancing the first three factors is assessing the risks of a case in terms of 
strengths and weaknesses. This will vary depending on case facts and the theory of 
discrimination involved. Amount of risk, if high, may make settlement imperative. If low, 
settlement would be appropriate only on very favorable terms. The important operative is that 
settlement is still preferred, on the right terms, even if the chance of winning is very high. There 
is no guaranteed winner or loser. 

 

a. Establish the facts:__________________________________________ 

 

b. Apply the law:______________________________________________ 

 

c. Assess the strengths and weaknesses of the case:_________________ 

 

d. Quantify the chances:________________________________________ 

 

V Strategy applied to options 

 

In each case, there will be innumerable options. These range from absolutely no relief all the 
way to full relief. Each option will have a different impact on management interests; costs a 
different amount of money; will impact differently on the workforce, and will affect long term 
risks differently. In every case, there is a resolution that is completely acceptable to 
management. The model is used to identify it, determine the acceptable bargaining leeway, and 
justify resolution. 

 

VI The merits of the claim are not a factor 

 

Whether one is right or wrong is not important in resolution management. Reasonably resolving 
the case is what is important, and this depends on the strengths and weaknesses of the case. 
Every case has strengths and weaknesses. A manager is not right squandering tax dollars to 
satisfy a personal belief in having done the right thing. The right thing is what is best for the 
organization and the attainment of organizational objectives. Finally, if one is absolutely right, 
and one can achieve those same interests by resolution, it is morally reprehensible to risk 
management interests in the hands of a third party to satisfy the personal belief. 


 

VII There is no formula to weigh the factors 

 

Usually management interests will be important in the case, but occasionally, impact will 
predominate. Risk factors also pay a significant role if chance of success drops below 70 percent. 
Cost, however, never is the sole factor or the most important factor in resolution. It is cheaper 
to settle every case for full relief than to process cases. Management should work to minimize 
costs, but not at the expense of interests or impact on workforce. Cost is, therefore, to be 
considered but not to predominate the decision-making process. 

 

VIII Use the strategy to justify litigation 

 

Once an acceptable resolution is identified, and bargaining parameters established, the key is 
obtaining the complainant's agreement. If this cannot be obtained, the complainant's demands 
should be analyzed under the model to ascertain their impact on interests, costs, workforce, and 
risks. Where significant drawbacks exist, the model will justify going forward. If benefits still 
predominate over drawbacks, then resolution on those terms is still preferable to going forward 
to adjudication. The analysis at this stage can be likened to picking the terrain on which the 
conflict will be decided. 

 


SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT ANALYSIS FORM 

 

 

I COMPLAINANT: 
II AGENCY: 
III ISSUES: 
IV BASIS 
V TERMS: 


 

 

 

 

 

(A) NON-MONETARY RELIEF:________________________________ 

 

 (B) MONETARY: _____LUMP SUM ____BACK PAY ___OTHER 

 

 ______ COMPENSATORY DAMAGES 

 

VI JUSTIFICATION FOR RESOLUTION AND RELIEF AWARDED: 

 

(A) INTERESTS PROTECTED: 

 

(B) RELATIONSHIPS PROTECTED: 

 

(C) RISK OF LOSS: 

 

(D) COST ANALYSIS: 

 

(E) OTHER: 

 

VII DAMAGES DETERMINATION: 

 

(A) PECUNIARY DAMAGES: 

 

(B) NON-PECUNIARY DAMAGES: 

 

VIII ACTION TAKEN TO ELIMINATE SIMILAR FUTURE COMPLAINTS: 

 

(A) TRAINING: 

 

(B) DISCIPLINE: 

 

(C) OTHER: 


ATTORNEY’s FEES CHECKLIST 

 

 

YES NO 

 

[ ] [ ] A finding of discrimination raises a presumption of entitlement to an award of 
attorney's fees. 

[ ] [ ] Complainant is the prevailing party in a settlement agreement. 

[ ] [ ] Attorney's fees are allowable only for the services of members of the Bar and law 
clerks, paralegals, or law students under the supervision of members of the Bar. 

[ ] [ ] Attorney's fees shall be paid only for services performed after the filing of a 
written complaint. 

[ ] [ ] Attorney's fees shall be paid only for services performed after the complainant has 
notified the agency that he or she is represented by an attorney. (Fees are 
allowable for a reasonable period of time prior to the notification of 
representation for any services performed in reaching a determination to represent 
the complainant.) 

 

Amount of Awards: 

 

YES NO 

 

[ ] [ ] The complainant's attorney submitted a verified statement of costs and attorney's 
fees (including expert witness fees), within 30 days of receipt of the decision. 

[ ] [ ] The attorney's fees statement is accompanied by an affidavit executed by the 
attorney of record itemizing the attorney's charges for legal services. 

[ ] [ ] The amount of fees shall be calculated in accordance with existing case law using 
the following standards: 

 

Number of hours reasonably expended multiplied by a reasonable hourly rate. 
The amount may be reduced or increased in consideration of the following 
factors: 

 

1. the time and labor required; 

2. the novelty and difficulty of the questions; 

3. the skill requisite to perform the legal service properly; 

4. the attorney's preclusion from other employment due to the 
acceptance of the case; 

5. the customary fee; 

6. whether the fee is fixed or contingent; 

7. time limitations imposed by the client or the circumstances; 

8. the amount involved and the results obtained; 

9. the experience, reputation and ability of the attorney 

10. the undesirability of the case; 

 11. the nature and the length of the professional relationship with the 
client, and 


 12. awards in similar cases. 

 

YES NO 

 

[ ] [ ] A statement of the number of hours spent in the preparation and presentation of 
the case. 

 

[ ] [ ] The statement includes dates and exactly what was done. 

 

[ ] [ ] Statement describes the training and experience of each individual who worked 
on the case and the number of hours spent by each individual. 

 

[ ] [ ] A sworn statement of the attorney’s usual and customary hourly charge, as well as 
the usual fee for each person who worked on the case. 

 

[ ] [ ] A sworn statement explaining whether the fee for the case was fixed or 
contingent, whether the handling of the case precluded other employment, the 
nature and the length of the professional relationship with client, and any other 
factors that might affect the amount of the award. 

 

[ ] [ ] Sworn statements by other attorneys in the relevant geographical area who work 
in the field of employment discrimination. 


AGREEMENTS CHECKLIST 

 

 

Under 29 CFR 1614.504, a settlement agreement, which is reached at any stage of the complaint 
process, is binding upon an agency and the complainant provided that it was "knowingly and 
voluntarily" entered into. In addition, a final decision is binding on the agency. 

 

YES NO 

 

[ ] [ ] If complainant believes that an agency failed to comply with the terms of a 
settlement agreement or final decision, she or he must notify the EEO Director, in 
writing, within 30 days of when she or he knows or should have known of the 
alleged noncompliance. (The complainant must satisfy this notice requirement as 
part of his/her requirement to exhaust available administrative remedies.) 

 

[ ] [ ] The agency provided evidence showing compliance with the settlement 
agreement or the decision. 

 

Standards 

 

The EEOC recognizes that a settlement agreement is a written contract between parties which is 
enforceable under 29 CFR 1614.504. Its analysis of noncompliance is based, therefore, on 
several longstanding legal principles underlying contract interpretation. These include the 
following: 

 

YES NO 

 

[ ] [ ] The jurisdiction is limited to review of breaches in settlement agreements entered 
into by the parties during the EEO administrative process. 

 

[ ] [ ] The settlement agreement is a contract. It is in writing and supported by adequate 
legal consideration. 

 

[ ] [ ] The settlement agreement must be signed by both parties. (The EEOC will not 
enforce oral settlement agreements.) 

 

[ ] [ ] In contract interpretation, the critical inquiry is the wording of the document, the 
parties' intention when the agreement is executed and their actions after 
execution. To determine the parties' intention, the EEOC relies generally upon 
the plain meaning of the "words." If the document is "plain" and "unambiguous" 
on its face, its meaning must be determined from the four corners of document 
itself without resort to extrinsic evidence. The language is interpreted according 
to its usual meaning, such as "rescission" rather than "cancellation." The EEOC 
will apply the customary usage for terms and assume that the parties would have 
inserted additional language if they intended anything other than their ordinary 
and normal meaning. 


 

[ ] [ ] The parties explicitly described their expectations and understanding in the 
written document and did not rely on contradictory verbal or oral statements. 

 

[ ] [ ] If a settlement agreement is made in good faith and is otherwise valid, it may not 
be set aside merely because one party made a "poor" bargain. 

 

[ ] [ ] In the absence of bad faith or agency misrepresentation, a settlement agreement 
may be set aside where a complainant is deprived of the primary benefit for which 
she or he had bargained because of unforeseen extraordinary circumstances. 

 

[ ] [ ] If the term was legitimately misunderstood by one party or the other, then there 
was no meeting of the minds, and the agreement is void. 

 


FINAL DECISION 

 

 

If yes to the following, a prima facie case has been established: 

 

YES NO 

[ ] [ ] Does complainant identify a protected basis? 

 

[ ] [ ] Was the complainant affected by an agency personnel change or action affecting 
the terms and conditions of employment? 

 

[ ] [ ] Was the complainant treated less favorably than similarly situated employees 
outside his/her protected group or, in the alternative, is there some other evidence 
raising an inference of prohibited discrimination? 

 

Articulated Reasons 

 

[ ] [ ] Are there legitimate nondiscriminatory reasons for the employment action 
affecting the complainant? 

 

[ ] [ ] Are the reasons produced with sufficient clarity and completeness so as to allow a 
fair opportunity to analyze for pretext? 

 

Analysis for pretext 

 

[ ] [ ] Are the reasons offered by the agency a pretext for discrimination (pretext may be 
established if any of the following are answered yes.) 

 

[ ] [ ] Do the reasons lack credibility? 

 

[ ] [ ] Are the reasons contradicted by the facts? 

 

[ ] [ ] Are the reasons unreliable? 

 

[ ] [ ] Does a preponderance of the evidence support a finding of discrimination? (The 
complainant’s protected trait must have played a role in the agency’s decisionmaking 
process on the employment action affecting the complainant.) 

 

[ ] [ ] Are the reasons offered not legitimate managerial prerogatives? 

 

[ ] [ ] Are the reasons not applied uniformly and consistently? 




 

 

 

DM 4300-2 

 

 

REASONABLE 
ACCOMMODATION 
PROCEDURES 


REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION PROCEDURES 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

Page 

Table of contents i 

Foreword ii 

1 Purpose 1 

2 Definitions 1 

3 Roles/Responsibilities 3 

4 Requesting an accommodation 5 

5 Written requests for record keeping purposes 6 

6 Interactive process 6 

7 Determining if the individual requesting the accommodation 8 

has a disability. Requests for medical information 

8 Confidentiality requirements regarding the reasonable 9 

accommodation process 

9 Time frames for processing requests and providing 10 

reasonable accommodation 

10 Granting a reasonable accommodation request 12 

11 Denial of reasonable accommodation request 12 

12 Information tracking and reporting 12 

 

 

APPENDICES 

 

A Confirmation of request for reasonable accommodation form A-1 

B Reasonable accommodation information reporting form B-1 

C Denial of reasonable accommodation request form C-1 

D Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Resources D-1 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 FOREWORD 

 

 

The Department of Agriculture (USDA) recognizes that all its employees need the tools 
necessary to be productive, and that making reasonable accommodation is simply a way of 
providing the tools needed to accomplish its mission. An employee with a disability need only 
request an accommodation of the immediate or first line supervisor, who, in many instances is 
authorized via these procedures to provide the accommodation. 

 

This manual sets forth the procedures to be used, if necessary, when considering the provision of 
reasonable accommodation to employees and applicants with disabilities. In the majority of 
situations, providing a reasonable accommodation is simple, quick and inexpensive. The 
procedures set forth in this manual shall be used for record keeping purposes to document 
reasonable accommodation requests, grant or deny requests. The procedures shall also be used 
to request documentation in cases when the disability and/or the need for accommodation is not 
obvious. 

 

Requests for accommodation must be considered on a case-by-case basis, and, in the majority of 
cases, can be resolved between employee and supervisor. It is imperative for the employee with 
a disability to be involved and consulted regarding specific accommodations needed and other 
aspects of reasonable accommodation through an interactive process. These procedures outline 
who may be involved in this interactive process. 

 

USDA agencies have been directed to establish central funds for accommodations within their 
own budgets so that agencies’ individual offices or units are not reluctant to fund 
accommodations that cost money. Although some accommodations, (e.g., equipment, hardware, 
software) may cost money, many others (e.g., alternative work schedules, leave, modifying 
policy or procedures, relocating an office) to name a few, cost little or nothing to implement. 
Therefore, using “monetary cost” as a basis for an undue hardship claim is not easily 
defensible. 

 

USDA is committed to a simple and streamlined process for providing reasonable 
accommodation. As a model employer and pursuant to Departmental Regulation (DR) 4300-8, 
USDA may take steps, as appropriate, beyond those required by the reasonable accommodation 
process. 

 

These reasonable accommodation procedures will help make USDA the “Employer of Choice”. 

 

 

 

 


