                        U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                              WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                         NUMBER:
     DEPARTMENTAL MANUAL                                 DM 5600-001
SUBJECT: Environmental Pollution Prevention, Control,    DATE:
and Abatement Manual                                     October 7, 2024
                                                         EXPIRATION DATE:
OPI: Office of Property and Environmental Management
                                                         October 7, 2027



Section                                                                          Page

1. Purpose                                                                            1
2. Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                 1
3. Scope                                                                              2
4. Environmental Compliance Program                                                   2
5. Environmental Preparedness and Emergency Response                                  7
6. Conducting Hazardous Materials Cleanups                                           17
7. Hazardous Materials Management Appropriation                                      22
8. Environmental Liability                                                           25
9. Program Reviews and Data Calls                                                    30
10. Roles and Responsibilities                                                       31
11. Inquiries                                                                        34

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                          A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                         B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                          C-1



1. PURPOSE

   This Departmental Manual (DM) provides procedures for United States Department of
   Agriculture (USDA) to meet the requirements of the Departmental Regulation (DR) 5600-
   005, Environmental Management. The DM also includes procedures that ensure compliance
   with the waste management requirements in DR 5600-006, Sustainable Operations.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

   This DM supersedes DM 5600-001, Environmental Pollution, Control, and Abatement
   Manual dated November 18, 2004.
3. SCOPE

  This DM applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices.

  a.   It applies to all USDA facilities and properties, owned, managed, or leased (hereafter
       referred to as USDA properties); and all activities conducted on USDA properties.

  b.   It applies to all activities performed by USDA’s employees and appointees.

  c.   It applies to activities performed by USDA’s contractors, permittees, grantees, and
       concession partners, when they are conducting those activities on USDA properties.

  d.   It applies to activities performed on non-USDA properties by USDA’s contractors when
       conducting or supporting environmental response or compliance actions under contract
       to a Mission Area, agency, or staff office.


4. ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE PROGRAM

  a.   Environmental Compliance Plan (ECP)

       (1) ECP Scope

           Agencies and staff offices will develop ECPs as follows:

           (a) Include the facilities with the highest potential risk of impacting human health
               and the environment;

           (b) Address only the environmental requirements and associated equipment and
               systems managed by the agency, or staff office when leasing to other tenants or
               as a tenant;

           (c) Maintain the ECPs at any appropriate level, such as agency, regional, area, or
               facility level; and

           (d) Utilize existing agency databases, as possible, to document the required
               elements.

       (2) ECP Elements

           ECPs include the following elements:

           (a) Compliance inventory;

           (b) Environmental audit program;



                                                2
         (c) Tracking and Reporting of Notices of Violation (NOV);

         (d) Corrective action program; and

         (e) Training Requirements.

b.   Compliance Inventory

     (1) The ECP includes an inventory of the environmental requirements and associated
         equipment and systems applicable to each facility it covers.

     (2) Inventories include the following environmental requirements, equipment, and
         systems, as applicable:

         (a) Hazardous waste and material storage locations;

         (b) Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC) unit, refrigerator, or
             freezer containing more than 50 pounds of ozone-depleting refrigerant;

         (c) Spill Prevention, Control, and Countermeasure (SPCC) Plan;

         (d) Underground or above ground storage tanks, except portable tanks;

         (e) Public Water Systems regulated under the Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 United
             States Code (U.S.C). §§ 300f, et seq.;

         (f) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits; and

         (g) Environmental permits and the equipment and systems the permits address,
             including, but not limited to:

              1   Boilers;

              2   Generators;

              3   Incinerators;

              4   Wastewater facilities, except septic systems;

              5   Paint spray booths;

              6   Parts washers; and

              7   Cooling towers.




                                              3
     (3) The ECP identifies the staff position responsible for the compliance of each of the
         requirements, equipment, and system in the inventory.

c.   Environmental Audit Program

     (1) The auditing program in the ECP includes a schedule of the audits required for all
         facilities covered by the plan.

         (a) Each facility will self-audit.

         (b) Each facility will have a second-party or third-party audit at least every 5
             years. Exceptions may be made for facilities that have limited environmental
             requirements.

         (c) Agencies can choose to conduct the required second- and third-party audits
             during the 5-year cycle on:

              1    A representative number of facilities that are under the management of a
                   single manager;

              2    A targeted group of facilities biased toward recurring compliance issues or
                   common activities that represent a high environmental liability risk; or

              3    A combination of the conditions stated in Sections 4c(1)(c)1 and 2.

         (d) The ECP will include an explanation of the approach and objectives for the
             audit program.

              1    Provide or reference the protocol for the audits. The protocol could be an
                   agency-specific procedure or a standard reference. Standard references
                   include the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) E2107-
                   20 Standard Practice for Environmental Regulatory Compliance Audits or
                   the U.S. Army Corps of Engineer’s The Environmental Assessment and
                   Management (TEAM) Guide.

              2    List and justify the exclusion of facilities from second- or third-party
                   audits.

              3    If the approach is to audit a representative number of facilities, justify the
                   number of facilities being audited, to ensure that the auditing is
                   representative and comprehensive.

              4    For programs that audit facilities based on bias or a combination approach:

                   a   Provide a summary statement about the overall auditing approach;
                       and



                                                4
              b   Each year, update the rationale for auditing the groups of facilities
                  chosen for that year.

(2) The auditing program will also require:

    (a) Written reports for all audits by facility that include the protocol for the audit
        and a list of findings; and

    (b) A strategy for reporting the results of the audit to upper management and
        facility personnel.

(3) Audit findings are grouped into three categories.

    (a) Major non-compliance: A condition that is likely to lead to an unpermitted
        release or discharge of pollutants or result in a penalty.

    (b) Minor non-compliance: A condition that is unlikely to lead to an unpermitted
        release or discharge of pollutants or result in a penalty.

    (c) Best practice recommendation: A recommendation for improved operations.

(4) Audits will include all environmental compliance areas that are applicable to each
    facility. These requirements may include, but are not limited to:

    (a) Air pollution;

    (b) Solid waste management;

    (c) Hazardous waste management;

    (d) Hazardous materials storage and management;

    (e) Spill prevention and control;

    (f) Hazardous substance release response;

    (g) Universal waste;

    (h) Waste oil;

    (i) Hazard communication;

    (j) Emergency planning and community right-to-know;

    (k) Aboveground and underground storage tank management;



                                          5
         (l) Wastewater management;

         (m) Stormwater management;

         (n) Drinking water management;

         (o) Management of lead, polychlorinated biphenyls, and asbestos-containing
             materials;

         (p) Pesticide and herbicide management; and

         (q) Pollution prevention, waste minimization, and green chemistry.

d.   Corrective Action Program

     (1) The corrective action program includes procedures to track and correct audit
         findings, NOVs, and other notices of non-compliance.

     (2) For NOVs, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will:

         (a) Report all notices received in a fiscal year to the Environmental Management
             Division (EMD) within the Office of Property and Environmental Management
             (OPEM), as part of the annual data call specified in Section 9b, Data Calls;

         (b) Perform corrective actions within the time frame specified in the notice; and

         (c) For notices that are not resolved within the specified time frame:

              1   Report the notice to the USDA Office of the General Counsel (OGC); and

              2   Develop a Corrective Action Plan with a schedule to bring the facility
                  back into compliance.

e.   Training Requirements

     (1) All staff who handle hazardous materials or wastes should take training on how to
         perform their duties in an environmentally safe manner. This should include
         training on proper disposal practices.

     (2) Environmental Program Managers should take an overview course in environmental
         compliance law and auditing.

     (3) Equivalent education or work experience can be used as a substitute for courses that
         are not mandatory.




                                              6
       (4) Training for staff that operate the equipment, or the systems listed in Section 4b,
           Compliance Inventory will include proper operation, record keeping, and reporting,
           in accordance with the state requirements. This includes training to maintain
           required licenses to operate.

       (5) Supervisors and managers of these staff should have training in environmental
           management and liability.


5. ENVIRONMENTAL PREPAREDNESS AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE

  USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will comply with 40 Code of Federal
  Regulations (CFR) § 300, National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency
  Plan (NCP). The NCP addresses how to report and respond to discharges of oil and releases
  of hazardous substances, pollutants, and contaminants (hereafter referred to as spills). State
  regulations may also apply. The three basic functions performed under the NCP are
  notification and communications, response operations, and preparedness planning and
  coordination for response. USDA agencies and staff offices also have a role in supporting
  spill response as members of the National Response Team (NRT) and Regional Response
  Teams (RRT). Under the NCP, USDA agencies and staff offices do not have the delegated
  authority to direct Emergency Response for the cleanup of spills that must be reported. That
  authority, even for spills to USDA property, is delegated to the U.S. Environmental
  Protection Agency (EPA) and the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG). USDA agencies and staff
  offices are required to clean up the spills caused by their employees.

  a.   Notification and Communication

       (1) Reporting Entity

           Mission Area, agency, and staff office employees must report the spills they cause,
           when the spill is at or above the reportable quantity. If a reportable spill is caused
           by a third party to USDA managed land, employees with knowledge of the spill
           should ensure that the responsible party does the reporting. Third parties include
           USDA’s contractors. If the responsible party is not known or does not report the
           spill, the USDA employee must report the spill. If it is not clear whether a spill is at
           or above a reportable quantity, the default is to report.

       (2) Reporting to the National Response Center (NRC)

           (a) Mission Area, agency, and staff office employees that cause a discharge of oil
               or a release of a hazardous substance at or above a reportable quantity must
               immediately call the NRC at (800) 424-8802. Immediate means within 15
               minutes or less of discovering the spill. Reporting of a hazardous substance
               spill is only required if the reportable quantity is met or exceeded within 24
               hours. If it is not clear if a spill occurred within 24 hours, the default is to
               assume it has occurred within 24 hours.



                                                 7
    (b) Clean Water Act regulation, 40 CFR § 110.3, Discharge of Oil in such
        quantities as ‘‘may be harmful’’ pursuant to section 311(b)(4) of the Act
        identifies an oil discharge as reportable when it causes one or more of the
        following conditions:

         1   Violation of applicable water quality standards;

         2   A film or "sheen" upon, or discoloration of the surface of the water or
             adjoining shorelines; or

         3   A sludge or emulsion to be deposited beneath the surface of the water or
             upon adjoining shorelines.

    (c) Hazardous substances and their reportable quantities are listed in Table 302.4,
        40 CFR § 302.4, List of Hazardous Substances and Reportable Quantities.

(3) Reporting to State, Local, or Tribal Planning Committees

    (a) Employees must immediately report releases of hazardous substances and
        extremely hazardous substances to the State or Tribal Emergency Response
        Commission (SERC or TERC) and Local or Tribal Emergency Planning
        Committee (LEPC or TEPC) if

         1   The spill occurred on agency or staff office property;

         2   The spill is above a reportable quantity; and

         3   The spill may result in the exposure to someone outside the property
             boundaries.

    (b) Extremely hazardous substances are listed in 40 CFR § 355, Appendix A, The
        List of Extremely Hazardous Substances and Their Threshold Planning
        Quantities.

    (c) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must submit a follow-up written
        report to the SERC or TERC and LEPC or TEPC as soon as practicable after
        the release.

(4) Reporting to the State

    Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should be aware of and comply with any
    additional reporting required by the state where the spill occurs. This may include
    more stringent reporting requirements and lower thresholds for hazardous substance
    releases.




                                         8
b.   Response Operations

     (1) Spills caused by a USDA Employee

         (a) The Mission Area, agency, or staff office is responsible for cleaning up the
             spill. This includes spills from USDA owned and operated equipment.

         (b) If the spill meets or exceeds the reportable quantity, the designated Federal On-
             Scene Coordinator (OSC) has the authority to oversee the response. The
             Mission Area, agency, or staff office must coordinate their response efforts
             with the designated Federal OSC or the Federal OSC’s delegated state or local
             response agency.

     (2) Spills caused by a Third Party

         (a) The Federal OSC oversees response actions for spills over a reportable quantity
             that are caused by a third party. The Federal OSC oversight applies whether
             the spill is on USDA managed land, most other Federal land, or non-Federal
             land. If the Federal OSC requests assistance with an oil spill, the Mission
             Area, agency or staff office will request a signed Pollution Removal Funding
             Authorization (PRFA) to reimburse their response actions, before providing
             assistance, as described in Section 5b(5)(b).

         (b) The Mission Area, agency, or staff office oversees the response actions of the
             third party for spills under a reportable quantity. Seek reimbursement from the
             third party for any costs to support the response action.

     (3) The Mission Area, agency, or staff office will inform the USDA’s RRT
         representative of any spill on USDA managed lands when a Federal OSC directs the
         response. This notification maintains the situational awareness of the RRT
         representative. The RRT representative may also be able to offer additional
         resources to support the response. These resources can be reimbursed through the
         Federal OSC.

     (4) Inventory of Spills

         (a) Each Mission Area, agency, and staff office will maintain an inventory of all
             spills reported to any entity in the National Environmental Accomplishment
             Tracking (NEAT) system. The spill inventory documents the reporting and
             response actions. This information is essential when filling out a Hazardous
             Substance Activity Certification, to dispose of the real property in the future.

         (b) At a minimum, the record for each spill should include the type of substance
             released, quantity, location, responsible party, response action taken, party
             conducting the response action, date(s) of release, and completed response
             action.



                                              9
(5) Reimbursement for Emergency Response Activities

    The Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices can be reimbursed for the costs
    incurred responding to a third-party spill through several different mechanisms.

    (a) Reimbursement from the Responsible Party. Federal agencies can file claims
        directly with the responsible party to recover costs incurred responding to a
        spill. The Federal OSC can assist with obtaining reimbursement from the
        responsible party. This mechanism is the most commonly used when the spill
        is on USDA managed land.

    (b) Reimbursement through the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund (OSLTF). A
        Federal OSC can also authorize payment to other federal agencies through the
        OSLTF for oil spill response. Reimbursement from the OSLTF is typically
        through a signed PRFA. Claims for reimbursement under a PRFA must be
        authorized by the Federal OSC and submitted to and approved by the National
        Pollution Funds Center. Reimbursement from the OSLTF is applicable when
        there is no responsible party identified or the responsible party is unable or
        unwilling to pay. OSLTF reimbursement is also applicable for services
        provided under an NRT or RRT activation.

        1    The Federal OSC should issue a signed PRFA prior to a Mission Area,
             agency, or staff office providing aid to a response effort. However, there
             may be instances where the need to respond is immediate. In these cases,
             the responder can initiate activities and request a PRFA after the fact to
             cover the costs. The USCG’s National Pollution Funds Center website,
             Pollution Removal Funding Authorizations provides the PRFA form and
             instructions.

        2    The PRFA includes a cost ceiling, period of performance, and statement of
             work. The statement of work outlines the goods and services provided.
             Time and travel expenses, contractor fees, expendable equipment, and
             daily rates for equipment use are eligible costs. Written documentation of
             all costs, including payroll records, is required.

    (c) Reimbursement from the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
        Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA) or Superfund, 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601,
        et seq. A Federal OSC may authorize payment from the Superfund for
        responses to releases of hazardous substances. However, the EPA rarely uses
        the Superfund to reimburse other Federal agencies.

    (d) Reimbursement through a Mission Assignment. The cost of supporting spill
        response when activated under Emergency Support Function (ESF) #10, Oil
        and Hazardous Material Response Annex, is partially reimbursed under a
        Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA) Mission



                                        10
             Assignment. FEMA issues Mission Assignments to request assistance under a
             Major Disaster Declaration, Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency
             Assistance Act (Stafford Act), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 5121. Support
             requested under a FEMA Mission Assignment would only be for response
             operations on non-Federal land. The Mission Assignment would only provide
             for reimbursement of staff overtime, travel, and other expenses. Responders
             must document all costs.

         (e) Documentation for Reimbursement. To be eligible for reimbursement under
             any authority, the Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will:

             1    Only conduct activities and request reimbursement for costs specified in
                  the signed agreement;

             2    Track and document all costs separately for the activities specified in the
                  signed agreement; and

             3    Submit required documentation of costs in accordance with the signed
                  agreement.

c.   Preparedness Planning and Coordination for Response

     The NRT and RRT are key organizational elements that perform the preparedness
     planning and coordination for response required under the NCP. USDA is one of 16
     Federal departments and agencies represented on these teams. EPA and the USCG serve
     as the Chair and Co-Chair respectively. Each Federal agency on these teams has
     responsibilities and expertise in various aspects of emergency response to pollution
     incidents. Being a part of the NRT and RRT commits the USDA Mission Areas,
     agencies, and staff offices to support nationwide spill preparedness and response
     activities. This support is inclusive of all private and public land.

     (1) USDA Agencies and Staff Office Support Capabilities

         During planning and preparedness activities or in an actual response, USDA
         Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may provide assistance in their respective
         areas of expertise, as described in 40 CFR § 300.175, Federal agencies: additional
         responsibilities and assistance, or delegated under 7 CFR Part 2, Delegations of
         Authority by the Secretary of Agriculture and General Officers of the Department.

         (a) OPEM serves as USDA’s representative on the NRT. OPEM coordinates
             USDA preparedness or response activities in support of the NRT.

         (b) The Office of Homeland Security (OHS) supports intra agency and interagency
             coordination when the NRT declares a Spill of National Significance (SONS).




                                             11
    (c) The Forest Service (FS) serves as the USDA’s representative on the RRT. In
        this role, the FS coordinates USDA preparedness or response activities in
        support of the RRT. The FS capabilities include personnel, laboratory, and
        field resources. These capabilities allow the FS to assess and control, as
        needed, releases of hazardous substances on lands under their jurisdiction.

    (d) The Agriculture Research Service (ARS) has technical personnel and
        laboratories. ARS personnel have experience in air, soil, wastes, pesticides,
        radiation, and toxic substances. These capabilities allow ARS to assess and
        control releases of hazardous substances at their facilities.

    (e) The Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) has expertise in
        slowing the spread of diseases in plants and animals. They can assist in
        preventing wildlife from entering areas impacted by oil or hazardous
        substances.

    (f) The Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) works with other Federal and
        state agencies to establish acceptability for slaughter of animals and their
        products when they have been exposed to hazardous substances.

    (g) The Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) has technical specialists
        capable of predicting the effects of pollutants in soil and wetlands. These
        specialists can aid in assessing hazardous sites and provide advice on plans for
        response actions.

(2) RRT Functions and Representation

    RRTs are responsible for planning and coordination of regional preparedness. They
    also support the Federal OSC in coordinating any response actions. RRTs function
    in two ways, as a standing team and as an incident-specific team. The roles and
    responsibilities of the RRTs are described in more detail in 40 CFR § 300.115,
    Regional Response Teams.

    (a) USDA Representation

        1    A FS staff member serves as the RRT representative for all USDA
             Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices. The FS Regions do not align
             directly with the regions covered by the RRTs. One FS Representative
             may cover multiple RRT regions. In some cases, the RRT region may
             include states outside of the representative’s FS Region.

        2    A lead RRT representative and one or more alternates represent each RRT
             region. The lead representative may assign alternates who are responsible
             for specific states. This is particularly recommended when those states do
             not fall within the lead representative’s FS Region.




                                        12
(b) RRT Standing Team Representation

    The main function of the RRT Standing Team is preparedness. It provides a
    mechanism for the development and coordination of preparedness activities in
    each region. There are multiple duties to maintain USDA representation on
    this interagency team.

    1   Attend all meetings of the RRT. RRT members typically meet semi-
        annually.

    2   Participate in USDA NRT and RRT quarterly meetings to share
        information and best practices. Assist the group in the development of
        standard operating procedures as needed.

    3   Review and provide input to the Regional Contingency Plan (RCP). The
        RCPs identify the contact information for each Federal agency and other
        team members. The RCPs also include information on facilities and
        resources to aid response efforts.

    4   Review and coordinate input to Area Contingency Plans (ACP) from all
        USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices. These plans cover areas
        of special economic or environmental importance that might be damaged
        by a discharge. These plans lay out all the considerations for removing a
        worst-case discharge in the area. The ACP includes a Fish and Wildlife
        and Sensitive Environments Plan as an annex. The annex provides the
        necessary information and procedures to immediately and effectively
        respond to spills that may adversely affect fish and wildlife and their
        habitat and sensitive environments. The plans consider USDA resources,
        especially National Forest System lands. The USDA RRT representatives
        should coordinate with local units covered by the ACPs, such as forests.

    5   Participate in RRT exercises. The RRT conducts exercises to practice
        coordination among the members. Tabletop exercises, convened by
        conference call, are the most common. In a tabletop exercise, RRT
        members answer questions based on a spill scenario. There also may be
        requests for information on specific resources to support the spill
        response. Other exercises are of the ACPs. These exercises may have a
        field component. For ACP exercises, the RRT representative should
        coordinate participation with the local unit in the area, such as a forest.

(c) RRT Incident-specific Team Representation

    The incident specific RRT coordinates assistance and provides advice to the
    Federal OSC during incident response. The incident-specific team is
    comprised of those agencies with specific expertise or those impacted by the
    incident. Activation of an incident specific RRT typically comes at the request



                                   13
   of a Federal OSC. One or more RRT members may also request an activation.
   One or both Co-Chairs can also activate the RRT based on the criteria specified
   in the NCP. When the RRT is activated, USDA representatives must be
   responsive to the Co-Chair’s requests.

   1   Participate on activations calls and provide technical advice to the Federal
       OSC, as appropriate. These activations may include conference calls to
       discuss the use of dispersants or other chemical and biological agents for
       an oil spill response. The RRT may request USDA’s participation in these
       calls whether or not USDA resources are threatened.

   2   Respond as soon as possible, if the Federal OSC requests USDA technical
       assistance or resources, as follows:

       a    Coordinate appropriate USDA resources, across all Mission Areas,
            agencies, and staff offices within the region;

       b    Request or assist other USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
            offices in requesting a PRFA from the Federal OSC, prior to
            providing services to support the response;

       c    Coordinate with and represent the interests of the Forest unit or other
            local USDA unit on the RRT, if the discharge threatens USDA
            properties or easements; and

       d    Monitor the spill response for any RRT activation when a spill
            threatens or impacts USDA properties or easements.

   3   Report and coordinate RRT activations with the USDA NRT
       representatives as follows:

       a    Notify the USDA NRT representative when notified by a Federal
            OSC of an activation of the RRT when a spill impacts or threatens the
            agency’s property;

       b    Consult with the USDA NRT representative, as needed, when a
            Federal OSC requests USDA support for spill response; and

       c    Provide daily situation reports to the USDA NRT representative when
            taking any actions at the request of the Federal OSC on USDA
            managed land or other property.

(d) USDA Support to the RRT




                                  14
        USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will coordinate their
        activities with their USDA RRT representative when they participate in an
        RRT activation, as follows.

        1    Notify the USDA RRT representative when notified by a Federal OSC of
             an activation of the RRT when the spill impacts or threatens the agency’s
             property.

        2    Consult with the USDA RRT representative on any support requested by
             the Federal OSC to assist response efforts.

        3    Provide daily situation reports to the USDA RRT representative of any
             actions in aide of the Federal OSC or for response actions taken on agency
             property.

(3) NRT Functions and Representation

    The NRT plans for national preparedness and response, coordinates regional
    planning, and provides policy, guidance, and support to the RRTs. The NRT’s
    committees and subcommittees have regular meetings to discuss planning and
    preparedness for response. These committees address the full range of topics to
    support an incident response such as environmental compliance, worker safety and
    training, science and technology, and national exercises. When activated during an
    incident, the NRT provides national-level advice and assistance. Activation of the
    NRT provides access to member agency resources that could not be provided at the
    RRT level. See 40 CFR § 300.110, National Response Team for more details on
    the roles and responsibilities of the NRT.

    (a) USDA Representation

        1    The OPEM EMD Chief, represents USDA on the NRT. Staff members of
             the EMD serve as alternate representatives.

        2    USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may provide technical
             assistance and resources in support of an NRT activation.

    (b) USDA’s NRT representatives will perform the following tasks:

        1    Participate on NRT committees and subcommittees to represent USDA
             interests and maintain national preparedness for spill response;

        2    Review, provide input, and approve documents and decisions distributed
             by the Executive Secretariat of the NRT;

        3    Coordinate USDA participation in NRT-led exercises;




                                       15
              4    Convene periodic meetings of the RRT representatives to share
                   information, discuss best practices, and assist with preparedness;

              5    Assist the USDA RRT representative, if needed, during an RRT
                   activation;

              6    Consult with and coordinate resources from USDA Mission Areas,
                   agencies, and staff offices to support an NRT activation; and

              7    Provide daily situation reports on spill response to the USDA Operations
                   Center when activated for a SONS.

         (c) The USDA Mission Areas, agencies and staff offices will provide support
             under a NRT activation as follows:

              1    Provide technical assistance or resources, as able, to support the spill
                   response;

              2    Coordinate all activities with the USDA NRT representative and USDA
                   RRT representative in the region of the spill; and

              3    Provide daily situation reports to the USDA NRT representative of any
                   actions in support of response actions.

d.   Emergency Response under ESF #10

     (1) As a NRT member, USDA is also a supporting agency to ESF #10. USDA will
         provide support when activated under the Stafford Act by a Mission Assignment
         from FEMA.

     (2) On behalf of USDA, OPEM will coordinate the request with EPA, the coordinating
         agency for ESF #10.

     (3) OPEM or the responding Mission Area, agency, or staff office will establish a
         reimbursable account to receive the Mission Assignment.

     (4) OPEM will coordinate with the Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to
         identify personnel to support the services requested under the Mission Assignment.

     (5) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will assign staff or provide other services,
         as available, to fill the Mission Assignment.

     (6) Staff responding under the Mission Assignment will coordinate their activities
         directly with the ESF #10 Field Coordinator assigned to the specific mission.




                                               16
       (7) Staff responding under the Mission Assignment will provide daily situation reports
           to OPEM.

       (8) OPEM will provide daily situation reports to the Office of Homeland Security
           (OHS) Operations Center on staff activities under an ESF #10 Mission Assignment.

       (9) Mission Area, agency, and staff office personnel will charge overtime and expenses
           to the account established for the mission for all activities conducted in support of
           the Mission Assignment.

  e.   Training Requirements

       The following courses are a prerequisite for the role of the RRT representative.

       (1) IS-0100.c: An Introduction to the Incident Command System, offered by FEMA.

       (2) IS-1190: The National Oil & Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan
           and Response System Independent Study Course, offered by FEMA.

       (3) Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) Hazardous Waste
           Operations and Emergency Response training and annual refresher, as required by
           29 CFR § 1910.120, Hazardous Waste Operations and Emergency Response.


6. CONDUCTING HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUPS

  a.   Critical Requirements of Agency Cleanup Programs

       All USDA Mission Areas and agencies will meet these requirements when planning and
       conducting response actions.

       (1) Consult with EMD and OGC when a release or threat of a release of a hazardous
           substance, pollutant, or contaminant is discovered to determine applicable
           authorities and the most appropriate course of action. This consultation does not
           apply to emergency response actions. The following authorities should be noted:

           (a) Except for emergency responses, USDA generally has delegated CERCLA
               authority when there is a release or threatened release of a CERCLA hazardous
               substance on or solely from USDA managed properties.

           (b) USDA generally does not have CERCLA authority for a release not on or
               solely from USDA managed property. USDA also does not have authority for
               response when the release is not a CERCLA hazardous substance (such as
               petroleum). In these cases, the state agency or EPA will likely determine and
               oversee any response.




                                                17
    (c) If a site consists of USDA managed property and other property, USDA may
        share the authorities with other Federal agencies. These circumstances will
        require close coordination with the state or EPA.

(2) Conduct response actions in accordance with the applicable legal authority.

    (a) Conduct response actions in accordance with the NCP when USDA has
        delegated CERCLA authority for the response.

    (b) Conduct response actions in accordance with the state or EPA requirements
        when USDA does not have delegated CERCLA authority.

(3) Maintain an inventory of sites where there is a release or threat of a release of
    hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants for the following types of
    properties:

    (a) USDA properties where the release resulted from USDA, other Federal
        agency, or third-party activities, and

    (b) Non-USDA properties where the release resulted in part or entirely from
        USDA activities.

(4) Utilize the USDA NEAT system to maintain the site inventory. Populate all fields,
    as information is available.

(5) At sites where USDA has delegated CERCLA authority, complete an initial site
    assessment to determine if there is a threat to public health, welfare, or the
    environment. Where there is a threat, conduct response actions in consultation with
    OGC and EMD.

(6) At sites where USDA does not have delegated CERCLA authority, coordinate the
    appropriate actions with the state regulators or EPA, after consulting with OGC and
    EMD.

    Prioritize the sites for cleanup using the USDA’s program funding priorities. EMD
    reviews the factors annually to align them with USDA administration goals. The
    primary factors are protection of human health and the environment. The threat of
    enforcement from the EPA or a state regulatory agency is also a key factor.

(7) Conduct a Potentially Responsible Party (PRP) search at each site where cleanup
    work is anticipated. Work with OGC and EMD to determine if there are viable
    PRPs. Seek a PRP clearance memo from EMD after a site assessment determines
    there is a release or threat of a release and prior to expending significant funds for
    site investigation and cleanup actions.




                                          18
     (8) Report site investigation and cleanup activities each fiscal year by the end of
         October in NEAT. Upload the related milestone documents into NEAT. Enter the
         estimate to clean up each site where a decision document has been issued for the
         site, but the cleanup is not complete. EMD will compile and report agency cleanup
         accomplishments to USDA leadership. This information is used for the Hazardous
         Material Management Account (HMMA) annual budget report.

     (9) Consult with EMD concerning USDA sites on the Federal Agency Hazardous
         Waste Compliance Docket, EPA’s FEDFacts website, to ensure appropriate actions
         are taken at these sites.

b.   Requirements when USDA may be a PRP

     (1) Consult with EMD and OGC to determine the applicable legal authorities and the
         appropriate actions to take. These actions may include identifying other PRPs.

     (2) Work with the Federal or State regulators and other PRPs to address site conditions
         as appropriate following coordination with EMD and OGC.

c.   Requirements when there is a PRP other than a Federal Agency at USDA managed
     Properties

     (1) Consult with EMD and OGC to determine the applicable legal authorities.

     (2) If recommended, work with OGC to execute an enforceable agreement with the
         PRP to ensure project completion.

     (3) Conduct technical oversight of the PRP’s project execution to ensure they comply
         with the agreement.

d.   Requirements when another Federal Agency is the PRP at USDA Managed Properties

     (1) Access Agreement

         (a) Consult with OGC and EMD on applicable legal authorities and process.

         (b) Enter into a formal agreement that authorizes access to the USDA property,
             consistent with site-specific factors. The agreement should, for example:

              1   Outline specific considerations for the cleanup actions based on sensitive
                  site-specific resources, land management requirements, and applicable
                  legal authorities;

              2   Specify the process for USDA concurrence of the documents that
                  represent the phases and milestones of the cleanup action;




                                             19
        3    Outline a process to resolve disputes;

        4    Describe the mechanism and level of communication necessary for USDA
             oversight and participation in the cleanup action; and

        5    Require the signatures of both the PRP agency and USDA agency.

    (c) Authorize on-site work only after both parties sign the agreement.

(2) Document Review

    (a) Review and comment on draft work plans, reports, and other documents
        produced by the other agency project team.

    (b) Establish a schedule for providing comments with the other agency. Conform
        to that schedule or formally request extensions.

    (c) Send a formal concurrence letter following the resolution of any comments to
        document the agreement reached on any issues.

    (d) Coordinate as appropriate with the state regulator.

    (e) Attempt to resolve disputes on significant issues at the project level.

    (f) After 30 business days, consult the USDA agency’s leadership about
        unresolved disputes and the need to resolve the dispute at the next level.

(3) Records of Decision or Other Decision Documents

    (a) Selected remedies should be compatible with the future land use of the
        property. The remedy must account for protection for subsurface activities as
        well as surface activities. This is especially important when the land use is for
        recreation and requires routine maintenance.

    (b) Assess the appropriateness of land use controls, which may be a part of a
        remedy. It is important to fully understand potential mission impacts prior to
        agreeing to a land use control.

    (c) Verify that the decision document describes the land use controls, which may
        be part of a remedy. The decision document should describe the controls in
        sufficient detail ensure that they are appropriate and will be effective.

    (d) Verify that the decision document clearly states the role of each agency in
        maintaining a land use control.




                                         20
    (e) Verify that the agency completing the action will implement the remedy and
        bear the costs.

    (f) Understand and agree with what assistance is required from the USDA agency
        to implement and maintain the remedy, prior to agreeing with the decision
        document.

    (g) Verify the operation and maintenance activities that are required to contain any
        waste that is left-in-place. The decision document should state that the agency
        that conducts the response action is responsible for the operation and
        maintenance activities, with limited exceptions.

(4) Project Planning and Coordination

    (a) Designate a single agency representative as the technical point of contact to
        coordinate with the other agency project team, state regulators, and other
        stakeholders.

    (b) Designate an administrative representative at the local unit level to serve as a
        liaison to the other agency’s field team. This representative will serve as the
        point of contact for the project team, when they are on the ground conducting
        work on the USDA agency’s property.

    (c) Form a USDA project team to consult with on the cleanup, including technical
        natural resource experts, legal staff, and line management.

    (d) Convene or participate in a kick-off meeting with the other agency, the
        contractor, and the state regulators to initiate project planning. Provide
        detailed information on the anticipated future land use in kick-off meetings.

    (e) Represent the USDA agency at all project planning meetings to ensure the
        mission requirements are considered in the key decisions.

    (f) Coordinate the agency’s attendance at public meetings. Represent the agency’s
        interests at all meetings.

    (g) Support the forming of a Restoration Advisory Board to help inform the
        cleanup actions being conducted by the Department of Defense components.

    (h) Meet with the other agency annually to review on-going cleanup actions and
        projects planned for future years.

(5) Operation and Maintenance

    (a) Accept responsibility only for administrative tasks to maintain a remedy that is
        put in place by the responsible Federal agency.



                                         21
           (b) Establish a formal agreement with the responsible Federal agency to document
               any tasks that each agency will conduct to maintain the remedy.

  e.   Requirements when there is a Third-party who is not a PRP but willing to Undertake
       Site Response Actions at USDA Managed Property

       (1) Consult with OGC and EMD on applicable legal authorities and process.

       (2) Enter into a formal agreement that authorizes access to the USDA property,
           consistent with site-specific factors. The agreement should, for example:

           (a) Outline specific considerations for the cleanup actions based on sensitive site-
               specific resources, land management requirements, and applicable legal
               authorities;

           (b) Specify the process for USDA approval or concurrence of the documents that
               represent the phases and milestones of the cleanup action;

           (c) Outline a process to resolve disputes;

           (d) Describe the mechanism, level, and frequency of communication necessary for
               USDA’s oversight and participation in the cleanup action; and

           (e) Require the signature of both parties.

  f.   Training Requirements

       The following training courses or their equivalents are required for USDA OSCs and
       Remedial Project Managers (RPM):

       (1) EPA CERCLA Course: Superfund 101;

       (2) One of the EPA CERCLA courses: Remedial Process Training, Removal Process,
           or Removal Process for Remedial Project Managers (RPM);

       (3) OSHA Hazardous Waste Operations and Emergency Response 40-hour and annual
           refresher training, as required by 29 CFR § 1910.120; and

       (4) USDA Course: CERCLA Process for USDA OSCs and RPMs.


7. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS MANAGEMENT APPROPRIATION

  a.   Use of HMMA Funds




                                               22
     (1) HMMA funds will only be used for activities that are consistent with the current
         language that is stated in each annual Appropriations Act. The appropriation states:
         “for necessary expenses of the Department of Agriculture, to comply with the
         Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (42
         U.S.C. 9601, et seq.) and the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901), et seq.
         $X,XXX,XXX to remain available until expended: Provided, That appropriations
         and funds available herein to the Department for Hazardous Materials
         Management may be transferred to any agency of the Department for its use in
         meeting all requirements pursuant to the above Acts on Federal and non-Federal
         lands”.

     (2) Prohibited Uses of HMMA Funding

         The following uses are prohibited:

         (a) Correcting issues as the result of noncompliance with environmental laws and
             regulations in effect at the time;

         (b) Cleaning up a contaminated property that was acquired after October 17, 1986;
             and

         (c) Paying fines or penalties resulting from agency violations.

b.   Selection Process for HMMA Funding

     (1) EMD requests project proposals for HMMA funding based on the funding
         availability.

     (2) The agencies will use a standard form provided for submitting funding requests.
         This form delineates required project information and describes the criteria to
         evaluate and rank the proposals. The form is made available as part the EMD’s
         annual data call.

     (3) EMD reviews the project proposals for eligibility and completeness. EMD then
         ranks the eligible projects for the USDA Project Priority List (PPL).

     (4) EMD ranks the projects for HMMA funding based on the risk to human health and
         the environment and certain modifying factors. The ranking criteria are determined
         by the USDA program funding priorities that are reviewed annually.

     (5) EMD generally funds projects on the USDA PPL in rank order and in the year the
         project is planned. EMD may use its discretion to fund projects out of order. Final
         funding decisions will consider the best fit based on funding availability, project
         readiness, or changes in site conditions that result in an immediate threat to human
         health or the environment.




                                              23
c.   Project Funding Procedures

     (1) EMD gives HMMA funds to the agencies using the Bureau of the Fiscal Service
         Interagency Agreement (IAA) Between Federal Agencies Standard Forms 7600A,
         General Terms and Conditions Section and 7600B, Order Requirements and
         Funding Information Section.

         (a) EMD asks the agency to submit IAA forms and a scope of work for the project
             and an updated cost estimate for EMD review.

         (b) EMD sends the IAA to the Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Financial
             Management Division (FMD) staff for review. The FMD staff return the IAA
             to EMD.

         (c) EMD sends the IAA to the agency for signature. The agency submits the
             signed IAA to EMD.

         (d) EMD sends the IAA to the OPEM Director for signature.

         (e) EMD sends the IAA to the FMD staff for signature by the FMD Branch Chief.
             Points of Contact signatures are optional. The IAA is final once the Program
             Officials and Funding Officials sign.

         (f) FMD establishes the purchase order and sends the signed IAA and a screen
             shot of the purchase order to EMD.

         (g) EMD distributes the signed IAA and purchase order to the agency.

         (h) EMD enters the IAA information into NEAT.

     (2) The agencies will notify EMD promptly when they expect the project costs will
         exceed the allocated amount. Agencies may request additional HMMA funding to
         cover these costs. EMD will evaluate each request on a case-by-case basis. EMD
         may approve, at its discretion, additional funding for a project. Approval depends
         on the amount requested, the reasons for the excess costs, and the availability of
         funds. If approved, EMD will work with the agency to modify the IAA to include
         the new project costs.

d.   Monitoring HMMA Spending

     (1) Agencies must conduct cleanup projects in a manner consistent with the NCP.
         EMD will monitor compliance with the NCP through project reviews, financial
         evaluations, field visits, and the review of milestone documents.

     (2) Each quarter, FMD will prepare an Unliquidated Obligations (ULO) Report for
         EMD showing spent and obligated amounts for each active IAA. For practical



                                             24
           purposes, FMD tracks only those obligations that are more than a year old. The
           OPEM Director reviews and certifies the ULO Report as valid, in accordance with
           the procedures in DR 2230-001, Reviews of Unliquidated Obligations.

  e.   Project Closeout Procedure

       (1) When the agencies complete a project, they will notify EMD of any unexpended
           HMMA funds.

       (2) The agencies will de-obligate the unexpended funds by modifying the IAA using
           the procedures outlined in Section 7c(1) or by reducing the sales order and
           submitting a closure letter.

       (3) EMD reviews and the OPEM Director signs the modified IAA and sends it to FMD
           for processing.

       (4) Upon receipt of the IAA modification or closure letter, FMD will zero out the funds
           in the associated purchase order (PO) and mark the PO as final.

       (5) EMD will apply returned HMMA funds to other projects on the USDA PPL as
           funds allow.


8. ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY

  To minimize liability, the following procedures are established to evaluate properties prior to
  land transfers. These procedures do not apply to partial interests in real property, such as
  rights-of-way or other easements.

  a.   Acquisitions

       Acquisitions include any process by which USDA may obtain real property including
       purchase, lease, transfer, exchange, gift, or foreclosure.

       (1) All-Appropriate Inquiries Standard

           The Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will comply with the All-Appropriate
           Inquiries Standard (AAI), 40 CFR Part 312, Innocent Landowners, Standards for
           Conducting All Appropriate Inquiries, for acquisition of real property. See ECM
           10-2, Pre-Acquisition Environmental Assessment Guidance for Federal Land
           Transactions. The ECM presents an overview of the AAI requirements and
           guidelines for Federal agencies.

       (2) Required Investigations and Remediation

           (a) All Actions, except for Foreclosures



                                                25
1   Perform a Phase I Environmental Site Assessment (ESA). The American
    Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) standard practice guides are
    useful to meet the AAI requirement:

    a   ASTM 1527-21, Standard Practice for Environmental Site
        Assessments: Phase I Environmental Site Assessment Process and

    b   ASTM E2247-16, Standard Practice for Environmental Site
        Assessments: Phase I Environmental Site Assessment Process for
        Forestland or Rural Property.

2   Update the Phase I ESA, as needed, in accordance with the AAI
    requirement. The ESA must be dated not more than 180 calendar days
    prior to completing the acquisition.

3   Exceptions to complying with the AAI requirement require notification to
    OPEM.

    a   For acquisitions that are subject to OPEM review, submit a
        memorandum with the review package to justify any noncompliance
        with the AAI requirement. Include any existing information on the
        environmental condition of the property with the memorandum.

    b   For acquisitions that are not subject to OPEM review, justify the
        noncompliance with the AAI requirement in an acquisition-specific
        memorandum. Save the memorandum to the acquisition file. Send a
        copy to OPEM.

4   When acquiring real property from a Federal agency, the Mission Areas,
    agencies, and staff offices may perform an Environmental Baseline Survey
    (EBS), instead of a Phase I ESA. Use ASTM D6008-96(2014), Standard
    Practice for Conducting Environmental Baseline Surveys to conduct an
    EBS.

5   If the Phase I ESA or EBS indicates that a recognized environmental
    condition (REC) is present, take steps to ensure the REC is resolved prior
    to the acquisition. This may include performing or requesting the seller
    perform a Phase II ESA. Use ASTM E1903-19, Standard Practice for
    Environmental Site Assessments: Phase II Environmental Site Assessment
    Process to conduct a Phase II ESA.

6   If an environmental release is identified, the Mission Areas, agencies, and
    staff offices will take one of the following actions:




                               26
             a   Require the seller to remediate the property to make it safe for the
                 intended land use;

             b   Provide appropriate compensation for cleanup costs; or

             c   Exclude the contaminated portion of the parcel from the acquisition.

    (b) Foreclosure Actions

         1   The Mission Area or agency will perform a Phase I ESA or a complete a
             transaction screen within 180 calendar days prior to completing the
             foreclosure. The transaction screen should conform with ASTM E1528-
             22, Standard Practice for Limited Environmental Due Diligence:
             Transaction Screen Process.

         2   If the Phase I ESA indicates that a REC is present, perform a Phase II
             ESA, before deciding to foreclose.

         3   If the transaction screen indicates potential environmental concerns,
             perform a Phase I or Phase II ESA, before deciding to foreclose.

(3) Review Procedures for Acquisitions, except Foreclosures.

    (a) The Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will submit the acquisition
        proposals required for review by OPEM to OGC and the OPEM Property
        Management Division (PMD), in accordance with DR 5100-004, Real
        Property Management.

    (b) The proposal should contain all the environmental data that is available. At a
        minimum, the proposal will include the Phase I and Phase II ESAs and any
        information on remediation of the property.

    (c) PMD will forward the proposal to EMD for environmental review.

    (d) EMD will review the proposal and make a recommendation depending on the
        property type.

         1   For unimproved land, EMD will make a recommendation to the Director
             of OPEM to approve or disapprove the acquisition.

         2   For improved land, that is valued at more than $1,500,000, EMD will
             make a recommendation to the Assistant Secretary for Administration to
             approve or disapprove the acquisition.




                                        27
             3    For land that is specifically authorized by Congress, EMD will make a
                  recommendation to the Mission Area, agency, or staff office that is
                  acquiring the property regarding any contamination that may be present.

         (e) EMD may request additional data prior to making a recommendation.

         (f) OGC will review the proposal separately and also provide a recommendation.

     (4) Review Procedures for Foreclosures

         (a) The following types of properties require an environmental review prior to
             foreclosure:

             1    Commercial property;

             2    Farms; and

             3    Other non-residential property.

         (b) The Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will submit all environmental
             documentation for OGC and EMD review.

         (c) OGC will review the Phase I ESA and any other available environmental data
             and consult with EMD.

         (d) EMD will make a recommendation to the Mission Area, agency, or staff office
             regarding whether additional environmental due diligence is necessary.

         (e) To avoid liability on a foreclosed property with evidence of contamination,
             USDA should not be involved in the management of the property except to
             preserve its security interests and prepare it for sale. OGC will be consulted
             prior to any decision to foreclose on property with known or suspected
             contamination.

b.   Disposals

     (1) The requirements of CERCLA Section 120(h), 42 U.S.C. § 9620(h), Properties
         transferred by Federal agencies will be followed when the Mission areas and
         agencies dispose of USDA managed land.

     (2) Contents of Deeds

         (a) Provide a notice in the deed of hazardous substance activity to the purchaser.

         (b) Include a covenant in the deed stating that all remedial action necessary to
             protect human health and the environment with respect to any substance



                                              28
         remaining on the property has been taken before the date of transfer. Consult
         with the OGC regarding any possible exceptions to this requirement.
         Exceptions to this requirement could include not conducting a remedial action
         if conveying the property to a PRP.

    (c) Consult with OGC to determine the scope of any necessary covenants
        regarding future cleanup at the property.

    (d) Include any necessary covenants that restrict future land use in the deed.

    (e) Include a clause granting the United States access to the property for any case
        in which the property would require remedial or corrective action after the date
        of transfer.

(3) Disposal after Foreclosures

    (a) The requirements of CERCLA Section 120(h) do not typically apply to real
        property disposals following foreclosures by USDA agencies, with exceptions.

    (b) Consult with EMD and OGC to ensure that the disposal qualifies for the
        CERCLA secured creditor exemption, and the Section 120(h) requirements do
        not apply.

(4) Review Procedures for Disposals

    (a) The Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will submit the disposal
        packages to OGC and PMD, in accordance with DR 5100-004.

    (b) If hazardous substance activity occurred at the site, the disposal package
        should contain:

         1   All environmental data that is available; and

         2   An EBS, Phase I ESA, or other document that meets CERCLA 120(h)
             requirements.

    (c) PMD will provide the disposal packages to EMD.

    (d) EMD will:

         1    Review the packages;

         2   Consult with OGC as appropriate; and

         3   Advise PMD regarding any contamination that may remain on the
             property.



                                        29
9. PROGRAM REVIEWS AND DATA CALLS

  a.   Program Reviews

       OPEM EMD will conduct program reviews to monitor agency and staff office
       compliance with the policies established in DR 5600-005 and the guidance provided in
       this Manual.

       (1) EMD will conduct program reviews of each agency, agency region, or staff office,
           with applicable environmental requirements, approximately once every three years.

       (2) The program review will assess the agency’s or staff office’s compliance with
           CERCLA and the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), program
           management, use of HMMA funds, legal matters, agency and staff office needs,
           site-specific concerns, and how best EMD can assist. Environmental compliance
           reviews to monitor the agencies’ and staff offices’ compliance with requirements
           documented in the ECPs, may be conducted concurrently or at a different time.

       (3) EMD will notify the agencies at least 60 calendar days prior to the review and
           provide a list of questions or topics to be discussed during the review.

       (4) The agencies and staff office es will coordinate with the relevant staff to review the
           list of questions and topics. Environmental Program Managers, OSCs, RPMs, the
           program lead for facility compliance, RRT representatives, and other technical staff
           that have responsibility in managing the environmental programs, should be
           available to participate in the program review.

       (5) After the program review, EMD will prepare a written summary report, focusing on
           conformance with DR 5600-005 and DM 5600-001. The report will include
           recommendations for improvement. The agencies and staff offices will have an
           opportunity to comment on the draft report prior to finalizing.

  b.   Data Calls

       OPEM EMD conducts annual and periodic data calls to gather agency and staff office
       information about the Environmental Program.

       (1) The annual data call is initiated in the fourth quarter of the fiscal year with a
           turnaround time of 30 calendar days. Detailed instructions for completing the data
           call are provided in the request. The request for information includes the following
           items, although all items may not be applicable to all agencies or staff offices:

           (a) Prior fiscal year funding and request for current year funding from the HMMA;




                                                30
           (b) Estimate of total environmental liability;

           (c) List of NOVs and notices of non-compliance;

           (d) List of state and Federal reportable spills;

           (e) List of accomplishments or activities for cleanup sites and completed key
               milestone documents; and

           (f) Written narratives of successful projects.

       (2) Periodic data calls may be initiated throughout the year to inform USDA policy or
           respond to leadership inquires. Turnaround times for these data calls will vary
           depending on the complexity of the request.


10. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Director, OPEM will:

       (1) Formulate and execute HMMA funds according to appropriation requirements;

       (2) Review all enforceable agreements and approve Unilateral Administrative Orders
           that are issued to a PRP;

       (3) Review and approve IAAs to distribute or close out HMMA funds, as detailed in
           Section 7c and 7e;

       (4) Review and certify the HMMA ULO report, quarterly;

       (5) Review the acquisition and disposal of real property with the agencies, as detailed
           in Sections 8a(3)-(4) and 8b(4); and

       (6) Coordinate with the Director, OHS on:

           (a) Intra agency and interagency response efforts when a SONS is declared; and

           (b) Senior level exercises, where the scenario includes an NRT activation.

  b.   The Chief, OPEM EMD will:

       (1) Represent USDA on the NRT and coordinate USDA’s responsibilities for
           environmental preparedness and emergency response, as specified in Sections 5c(3)
           and 5d;




                                                31
     (2) Coordinate with the Environmental Program Managers on reporting requirements,
         initiation of response activities, HMMA funding requests, program reviews, and
         data calls, as specified in Sections 4d(2), 6a-e, 7b-e and 9; and

     (3) Coordinate the review of the acquisition and disposal of real property with the
         agencies, as detailed in Section 8a(3)-(4) and 8b(3)-(4).

c.   The Heads, USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices, as appropriate, will

     (1) Establish policy and procedures to:

         (a) Prepare ECPs and conform with the requirements of those ECPs, as detailed in
             Sections 4a-d;

         (b) Implement corrective actions resulting from NOVs to meet the required
             timelines, as specified in Section 4d;

         (c) Notify, coordinate, and respond to discharges of oil or releases of hazardous
             substances, as detailed in Sections 5a-b;

         (d) Track costs separately for any actions taken to respond to third party spills, as
             detailed in Section 5b(5)(e);

         (e) Provide assistance to the Federal OSC and coordinate with the USDA NRT
             and RRT representatives, as detailed in Sections 5c(1), 5c(2)(d), 5c(3), and 5d;

         (f) Conduct and oversee cleanup actions, as detailed in Sections 6a-e;

         (g) Review and approve enforceable agreements that are issued to a PRP;

         (h) Request and manage HMMA funding for cleanup projects, as detailed in
             Sections 7a-e;

         (i) Conduct environmental reviews to acquire and dispose of real property, as
             detailed in Sections 8a(1)-(2) and 8b(1)-(2);

         (j) Coordinate the review of the acquisition and disposal of real property with
             OPEM and OGC, as detailed in Sections 8a(3)-(4) and 8b(3)-(4);

         (k) Train employees on the environmental requirements for their staff positions, as
             detailed in Sections 4e and 6f and maintain records of the training;

         (l) Include a requirement to comply with all applicable environmental regulations
             in contracts or permits, for any USDA contractors, permittees, concessionaires,
             or grantees;




                                               32
         (m) Coordinate environmental program reviews with OPEM EMD and implement
             changes to address OPEM’s program review recommendations, as detailed in
             Section 9a; and

         (n) Respond to data calls, as detailed in Section 9b.

     (2) Establish and maintain internal controls to ensure compliance with the requirements
         of DR 5600-005, in accordance with the procedures and standards stated under DR
         1110-002, Management’s Responsibility for Internal Control; and

     (3) Assign an Environmental Program Manager to lead environmental program
         compliance and reporting, as specified in DR 5600-005, Section 5d(1).

d.   The Chief, USDA FS, in addition to duties listed in Section 10c, will:

     (1) Assign primary and alternative representatives to each of the 13 RRTs on behalf of
         USDA as detailed in Section 5c(2)(a);

     (2) Establish policy and procedures to represent USDA on the 13 RRTs, as detailed in
         Section 5c(2)(b)-(c); and

     (3) Train employees on the environmental requirements for their staff positions, as
         detailed in Section 5e.

e.   The Director, OHS will:

     (1) Support intra and interagency coordination in conjunction with the OPEM Director
         when a SONS is declared; and

     (2) Coordinate with the OPEM Director on senior level exercises that include an NRT
         activation.

f.   The Chief, FMD will:

     (1) Review, approve, and issue IAAs and purchase orders to distribute HMMA
         funding;

     (2) Track ULO for each IAA funded by the HMMA; and

     (3) Prepare an ULO report for each IAA at the end of each quarter.

g.   The General Counsel will:

     (1) Advise OPEM, the Mission Areas, agencies, and other staff offices on
         environmental compliance requirements and activities, and review NOVs, as
         specified in Section 4d(2);



                                              33
       (2) Assist OPEM, the agencies, and other staff offices with response, enforcement, cost
           recovery, and related activities, as specified in Section 6; and

       (3) Provide legal review for proposed real property transactions involving known or
           suspected contamination, as specified in Sections 8a(3)-(4) and 8b(3)-(4).

  h.   The Environmental Program Manager for a Mission Area, agency, and the Office of
       Operations will:

       (1) Support the head of their Mission Area, agency, or staff office, as appropriate, in
           implementing and managing the environmental management program;

       (2) Coordinate with OPEM as the single point of contact for the Mission Area, agency,
           or staff office environmental program;

       (3) Coordinate with OGC on response, enforcement, and cost recovery activities, as
           specified in Sections 6a(8) and 6b-6e;

       (4) Coordinate with OPEM on reporting requirements, initiation of response activities,
           HMMA funding requests, data calls, and program reviews, as specified in Sections
           4d(2), 6a-6e, and 7b-e, 8c, and 9; and

       (5) Maintain a site inventory and environmental accomplishment information and
           documents in the USDA’s NEAT system, as specified in Section 5b(4), 6a(4), and
           6a(9).

  i.   The USDA RRT representative and alternates will conduct the duties detailed in Section
       5c(2).


11. INQUIRES

  All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must send inquiries regarding this DR
  to OPEM at SM.OPEM.EMD@usda.gov.


                                            -END-




                                                34
                              APPENDIX A

                  ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AAI       All Appropriate Inquiries
ACP       Area Contingency Plan
APHIS     Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
ARS       Agricultural Research Service
ASTM      American Society for Testing and Materials
CERCLA    Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act
CFR       Code of Federal Regulations
DM        Departmental Manual
DR        Departmental Regulation
EBS       Environmental Baseline Survey
ECP       Environmental Compliance Plan
EMD       Environmental Management Division
EPA       U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
ESA       Environmental Site Assessment
ESF #10   Emergency Support Function 10 – Oil and Hazardous Materials Response
FEMA      Federal Emergency Management Agency
FMD       Financial Management Division
FS        Forest Service
FSIS      Food Safety and Inspection Service
HMMA      Hazardous Materials Management Appropriation
HVAC      Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning
IAA       Interagency Agreement
LEPC      Local Emergency Planning Committee
NCP       National Contingency Plan
NEAT      National Environmental Accomplishment Tracking
NOV       Notice of Violation
NPDES     National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NPFC      National Pollution Funds Center
NRC       National Response Center
NRCS      Natural Resources Conservation Service
NRT       National Response Team
OGC       Office of the General Counsel
OHS       Office of Homeland Security
OPA       Oil Pollution Act
OPEM      Office of Property and Environmental Management
OSC       On-Scene Coordinator
OSHA      Occupational Safety and Health Administration
OSLTF     Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund
PMD       Property Management Division
PO        Purchase Order
PPL       Project Priority List



                                     A-1
PRFA           Pollution Removal Funding Authorization
PRP            Potentially Responsible Party
RCP            Regional Contingency Plan
RCRA           Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
REC            Recognized Environmental Condition
RPM            Remedial Project Manager
RRT            Regional Response Team
SERC           State Emergency Response Commission
SONS           Spill of National Significance
SPCC           Spill Prevention, Control, and Countermeasure
Stafford Act   Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act
SWDA           Solid Waste Disposal Act
TEAM           The Environmental Assessment and Management
TEPC           Tribal Emergency Planning Committee
TERC           Tribal Emergency Response Commission
ULO            Unliquidated Obligations
U.S.C.         United States Code
USCG           United States Coast Guard
USDA           United States Department of Agriculture




                                           A-2
                                          APPENDIX B

                                          DEFINITIONS


Agency. Organizational units of the Department, other than staff offices as defined below,
whose heads report to officials within the Office of the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Under
Secretaries, Assistant Secretaries, and Assistant to the Secretary. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-
001, Departmental Directives System)

All Appropriate Inquiries. An inquiry into the previous ownership and uses of a facility in
accordance with generally accepted good commercial and customary standards and practices,
that are codified in 40 CFR Part 312, Innocent Land Owners, Standards for Conducting All
Appropriate Inquiries. (Source: 42 U.S.C. § 9601(35)(B)(i)(I), Hazardous Substances Releases,
Liabilities, and Compensation, Definitions)

Environmental Audit. A systematic, documented, periodic, and objective review of facility
operations and practices related to meeting environmental requirements. (Source: EPA 300-B-
96-011, Environmental Audit Program Design Guidelines for Federal Agencies)

Hazardous Substance. Elements, compounds, and wastes designated in Table 302.4—List of
hazardous substances and reportable quantities. (Source: 40 CFR § 302.4, NCP, Designations
of Hazardous Substances)

Mission Area. A group of agencies with related functions that report to the same Under or
Assistant Secretary. Research, Education, and Economics is an example of a Mission Area.
(Source: USDA, DR 0100-001)

Mission Assignment. A work order issued by FEMA to another Federal agency directing
completion of a specified task and citing funding, other managerial controls, and guidance.
(Source: 44 CFR § 206.2, Federal Disaster Assistance, Definitions)

Notice of Violation (NOV). Any written notice from a Federal, State, or local entity with
authority to enforce environmental laws and regulations to a Mission Area, agency, or staff
office stating they have violated an environmental law or other requirement.

Oil. Oil of any kind or in any form, including petroleum, fuel oil, sludge, oil refuse, and oil
mixed with wastes other than dredged spoil, but does not include any substance which is
specifically listed or designated as a hazardous substance under subparagraphs (A) through (F) of
Section 101(14) of CERCLA and which is subject to the provisions of that Act. (Source: 33
U.S.C §§ 2701, Oil Pollution Liability and Compensation)

Oil Spill. Also, oil discharge. An occurrence or series of occurrences having the same origin,
involving one or more vessels, facilities, or any combination thereof, resulting in the discharge or
substantial threat of discharge of oil into or upon navigable waters of the United States, adjoining




                                                  B-1
shorelines, or the exclusive economic zone. (Source: USCG, National Pollution Funds Center
(NPFC) User Reference Guide, USCG NPFC website)

Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund (OSLTF). The fund authorized under the Oil Pollution Act (OPA),
33 U.S.C. §§ 2701, et seq. to pay for expeditious oil removal and uncompensated damages from
oil spills. The USCG's NPFC is responsible for managing and administering the Fund, including
adjudicating claims. (Source: USCG, NPFC User Reference Guide, USCG NPFC website)

Pollutant or contaminant. Any element, substance, compound, mixture, or disease-causing
agents defined by Section 101(33) of CERCLA. (Source: 40 CFR § 300.5, NCP, Definitions)

Pollution Removal Funding Authorization (PRFA). A financial obligation document that
commits the OSLTF to payment, by reimbursement, of costs incurred in pollution response
activities undertaken by another government agency working for the Federal OSC. (Source:
USCG, NPFC User Reference Guide)

Potentially Responsible Party (PRP). Any person who may be liable pursuant to Section 107(a)
of CERCLA, for response costs incurred and to be incurred by the United States not inconsistent
with the NCP. (Source: 40 CFR § 304.12, Arbitration Procedures for Small Superfund Cost
Recovery Claims)

Recognized Environmental Condition. The presence of hazardous substances or petroleum
products in, on, or at a property due to a release to the environment; the likely presence of
hazardous substances or petroleum products in, on, or at a property due to a release or likely
release to the environment; or the presence of hazardous substances or petroleum products in, on,
or at a property under conditions that pose a material threat of a future release to the
environment. (Source: ASTM E1527-21)

Release. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting,
escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the environment (including the abandonment or
discarding of barrels, containers, and other closed receptacles) of any toxic chemical. (Source:
40 CFR § 372.3, Toxic Chemical Release Reporting: Community Right-To-Know)

Spill. Collective term for release of hazardous substances or discharge of oil.

Staff Office. Departmental administrative offices whose heads report to officials within the
Office of the Secretary. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-001)

Waters of the United States. Defined in Water Programs, Definition of Waters of the United
States, 40 CFR § 120.2, et seq.




                                                 B-1
                                        APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES

7 CFR Part 2, Delegations of Authority by the Secretary of Agriculture and General Officers of
the Department

29 CFR § 1910.120, Hazardous Waste Operations and Emergency Response

33 U.S.C. § 2701, Oil Pollution Liability and Compensation

40 CFR § 110.3, Discharge of Oil in such quantities as ‘‘may be harmful’’ pursuant to section
311(b)(4) of the Act

40 CFR § 120.2, et seq., Water Programs, Definition of Waters of the United States

40 CFR Part 300, National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP)

40 CFR Part 300.5, NCP, Definitions

40 CFR § 300.110, NCP, National Response Team

40 CFR §300.115, NCP, Regional Response Teams

40 CFR § 300.175, NCP, Federal agencies: additional responsibilities and assistance

40 CFR § 302.4 Table 302.4, List of Hazardous Substances and Reportable Quantities

40 CFR § 304.12, Arbitration Procedures for Small Superfund Cost Recovery Claims

40 CFR Part 312, Innocent Landowners, Standards for Conducting All Appropriate Inquiries

40 CFR § 355 Appendix A, The List of Extremely Hazardous Substances and Their Threshold
Planning Quantities

40 CFR § 372.3, Toxic Chemical Release Reporting: Community Right-To-Know

42 U.S.C. § 9601(35)(B)(i)(I), Hazardous Substances Releases, Liabilities, and Compensation,
Definitions

44 CFR § 206.2, Federal Disaster Assistance, Definitions

ASTM International, ASTM D6008—96(2014), Standard Practice for Conducting
Environmental Baseline Surveys, December 27, 2016




                                                C-3
ASTM International, ASTM E1527-21, Standard Practice for Environmental Site Assessments:
Phase I Environmental Site Assessment Process, December 21, 2021

ASTM International, ASTM E1528-22, Standard Practice for Limited Environmental Due
Diligence: Transaction Screen Process, Jul 29, 2022

ASTM International, ASTM E1903-19, Standard Practice for Environmental Site Assessments:
Phase II Environmental Site Assessment Process, January 8, 2020

ASTM International, ASTM E2107-20, Standard Practice for Environmental Regulatory
Compliance Audits, January 5, 2021.

ASTM International, ASTM E2247-16, Standard Practice for Environmental Site Assessments:
Phase I Environmental Site Assessment Process for Forestland or Rural Property, December 28,
2016

Bureau of the Fiscal Service, Interagency Agreement Form 7600A, General Terms and
Conditions Section

Bureau of the Fiscal Service, Interagency Agreement Form 7600B, Order Requirements and
Funding Information Section

Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act
(CERCLA/Superfund), 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601, et seq.

CERCLA 120(h), Properties transferred by Federal agencies, 42 U.S.C. § 9620(h), et seq.

EPA, CERCLA Course: Superfund 101

EPA, CERCLA Course: Remedial Process Training

EPA, CERCLA Course: Removal Process

EPA, CERCLA Course: Removal Process for RPMs

EPA, EPA 300-B-96-011, Environmental Audit Program Design Guidelines for Federal
Agencies, Spring 1977

EPA FEDFacts Website, Federal Agency Hazardous Waste Compliance Docket Updates

Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board, Federal Financial Accounting and Auditing
Technical Release 2: Determining Probable and Reasonably Estimable for Environmental
Liabilities in the Federal Government, March 15, 1998

FEMA, Emergency Support Function #10, Oil and Hazardous Materials Response




                                              C-3
FEMA, IS-0100.c, An Introduction to the Incident Command System

FEMA, IS-1190, The National Oil & Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan and
Response System Independent Study Course

Government Services Administration, Hazardous Substance Activity Certification, November
2017

Oil Pollution Act (OPA), as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 2701, et seq.

Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (RCRA), as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901, et
seq.

Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, as amended,
42 U.S.C. § 5121, et seq.

Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 300f, et seq.

Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 6901, et seq.

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, TEAM Guide

USCG, Pollution Removal Funding Authorizations, USCG NPFC website

USCG, Pollution Removal Funding Authorization Form, USCG NPFC website

USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System, January 4, 2018

USDA, DR 1110-002, Management’s Responsibility for Internal Control, March 5, 2021

USDA, DR 2230-001, Reviews of Unliquidated Obligations, October 28, 2020

USDA, DR 5100-004, Real Property Management, April 1, 2021

USDA, DR 5600-005, Environmental Management, February 28, 2022

USDA, DR 5600-006, Sustainable Operations, June 22, 2021

US Department of the Interior, ECM 10-2, Pre-Acquisition Environmental Assessment Guidance
for Federal Land Transactions, June 16, 2010




                                                C-3
