                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                           Number:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION DR 0100-001
                                                           DATE:
                                                           January 4, 2018
SUBJECT: Departmental Directives System                    OPI:
                                                           Office of the Chief Information
                                                           Officer



Section                                                                                  Page

1. Purpose                                                                                 1
2. Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                      1
3. Policy for Departmental Directives                                                      3
4. Types of Departmental Directives                                                        3
5. Clearance                                                                               4
6. Signature Authority                                                                     6
7. Effective Date                                                                          6
8. Cancellations                                                                           6
9. Roles and Responsibilities                                                              7
10. Forms                                                                                 11
11. Procedures                                                                            11
12. Inquiries                                                                             11

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                  A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                 B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                  C-1



1. PURPOSE

   This Departmental Regulation (DR) describes the structure, general issuance authority,
   policies, and responsibilities for issuing United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)
   Departmental directives.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

   a.     This regulation supersedes DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System dated
          September 16, 2011.
b.   The principal changes to DR 0100-001 are as follows:

     (1) New procedures for clearing Departmental directives. (See Departmental Manual
         (DM) 0100-001, Preparing Departmental Directives)

     (2) Streamlined formal clearance process for amending directives without full revision
         and reissuance for non-substantive or minor substantive changes (e.g., updating
         organizational structure names, updating Web links, clarifying existing policy or
         requirements; or for general updating that changes less than 25 percent of the
         directive ). DRs and DMs will be revised and reissued through the procedures
         identified in DM 0100-001 in instances in which more than minor substantive
         changes are made (e.g., a change in policy, a more than minor change in the
         underlying statutory authority is being implemented; or more than 25 percent of the
         directive is changed).

     (3) Add a new tier of Departmental Guidebooks (DG) to provide guidance and more
         detailed information which may be more technical, or programmatic in nature,
         which assists in implementing policies found in DRs and processes and procedures
         found in DMs. DGs will be subject to a streamlined formal clearance process.

     (4) Add time limits for Offices of Primary Interest (OPI) for the adjudication of review
         comments and the revision of draft Departmental directives to promote timelier
         processing of directives in formal clearance. Time limits had previously been
         added for clearance office reviewers in the prior version of this DR after a Lean Six
         Sigma analysis.

     (5) Add an expiration timeframe or date for all new, amended, revised, and reissued
         Departmental directives issued subsequent to the effective date of this DR to foster
         the reduction of the average age of Departmental directives to 5 years or less.
         Keeping Departmental directives current will ensure continual alignment with
         current laws, regulations, and guidance, and facilitate elimination of obsolete
         directives.

c.   All Departmental directives must be prepared using the Departmental enterprise word
     processing solution.

d.   The proper process for the preparation, review coordination, and distribution of
     Departmental directives is detailed in DM 0100-001. The companion DM 0100-001
     establishes written procedures to use when implementing this DR.

e.   The definitions provided in Appendix B of this DR and in Appendix A of DM 0100-001
     shall be applied consistently as the standard USDA definitions across all Departmental
     directives and need not be repeated in each one.




                                         2
3. POLICY FOR DEPARTMENTAL DIRECTIVES

  USDA agencies and staff offices will use the Departmental Directives System to issue
  policies, procedures, and guidance which have general applicability to employees and two or
  more USDA agencies or staff offices. Directives that are applicable to only one agency or
  staff office are not part of the Departmental Directives System.

  Agencies and staff offices manage internal issuances which interpret Departmental
  directives, external directives, or which enable legislation. The internal issuances are not
  required to follow the format prescribed in this DR and DM 0100-001.


4. TYPES OF DEPARTMENTAL DIRECTIVES

  Departmental directives and issuances consist of the documents discussed below. Generally,
  the content and format of each is similar. For a detailed discussion of coordination, structure,
  and content requirements see DM 0100-001.

  a.   Permanent Directives are directives that are in force for a defined period of time with a
       predetermined expiration date or until specifically cancelled. Permanent directives
       consist of:

       (1) Regulations. Departmental Regulations (DR) promulgate Departmental policy;
           delegate authority; establish responsibility; establish statutory or interagency
           committees; and/or prescribe high-level procedures governing USDA activities and
           operations. DRs also may include selected material of an administrative nature that
           is published in the Federal Register or the Code of Federal Regulations. DRs must
           be reviewed and revised or reissued at least every 5 years to ensure they remain
           aligned with current applicable statutory, regulatory, and/or policy requirements.

       (2) Manuals. Departmental Manuals (DM) are used for detailed, relatively lengthy but
           higher-level technical guidance that is procedural in nature and Departmentwide in
           scope. Manuals generally are written for "specialist" audiences. They provide
           standards and guidance pertaining to a particular subject or administrative function,
           generally of the type that must be referred to on a daily or frequent basis. Some
           manuals implement external agency directives with USDA policy and procedural
           guidance. DMs must be reviewed and revised or reissued at least every 3 years to
           ensure they remain aligned with current statutory, regulatory, and/or policy
           requirements.

       (3) Guidebooks. Departmental Guidebooks (DG) provide guidance and very detailed
           information which may be more technical or programmatic in nature, which assists
           in implementing policies found in DRs and processes and procedures found in
           DMs. DGs may include guides, handbooks, standards, reference books, standard
           operating procedures, and other similar documents. DGs may not establish policy



                                            3
           or impose roles and responsibilities beyond those found in the governing
           Departmental directive. Unlike DRs and DMs which should remain technology
           agnostic, DGs may be used to provide highly detailed technology or system specific
           procedures, instructions, or standards. DGs will be subject to a streamlined formal
           clearance process (see DM 0100-001) and will provide OPIs with a method to
           quickly issue enforceable guidance in an agile environment under the Departmental
           Directives System. DGs must be reviewed and revised or reissued at least every 3
           years to ensure they remain aligned with current statutory, regulatory, and/or policy,
           technical, and standards requirements.

  b.   Temporary Directives. Temporary directives may not be in effect for more than 1 year
       and cannot be renewed or reissued. Temporary directives consist of:

       (1) Notices. Departmental Notices (DN) announce:

           (a) Policy or procedure of Department-wide interest that is temporary or of a one-
               time nature that addresses a single subject;

           (b) Permanent policy or procedure which requires immediate dissemination and
               will be codified into a DR or DM within 1 year; or

           (c) Delegations of Authority from the Assistant or Under Secretaries or other
               General Officers pending publication in the Federal Register.

       (2) Secretary's Memoranda. Secretary’s Memoranda (SM) establish or announce
           changes in major policy concerning missions and programs of the Department,
           direct or implement action on Departmental programs, or redirect or change policy
           or action in Departmental programs. Examples include actions which by law
           require the endorsement of the Secretary of Agriculture and delegations of authority
           by the Secretary.

           Items not requiring the Secretary's endorsement should be issued in another format.

  OPIs must codify material of a permanent nature that was originally issued as a temporary
  directive. All such material is to be codified, within 1 year after issuance, in either a DR or
  DM, or in the case of delegations made via SMs, published in the Federal Register for
  codification in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). The expiration date of the temporary
  directive must be identified in the Codification/Expiration block of Form Agriculture
  Department (AD)-813, Departmental Notice and clearly stated in SMs.


5. CLEARANCE

  OPIs must coordinate and formally clear proposed directives with stakeholders (those with
  defined roles and responsibilities in the directive) and affected organizations, particularly
  when policy or legal implications are involved.



                                            4
a.   Mandatory Clearances. It is mandatory that all new or revised (i.e., reissued) DRs,
     DMs, DNs, and SMs be cleared through the following offices. DGs will be subject to a
     streamlined clearance process which may not involve all of the mandatory clearance
     offices. The streamlined clearance process for amendments to DRs, DMs, and DGs is
     also set forth in DM 0100-001.

     (1) Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO). All Departmental directives and
         Secretary’s Memoranda must be cleared through the USDA Departmental
         Directives Manager (DDM). The USDA DDM must be listed as the first and last
         clearance point on the Form AD-116, Clearance and Approval for Departmental
         Issuances, Other Clearances block. The directive submission must also be
         accompanied by a Form AD-3108, Note to Reviewers for Draft Departmental
         Directives which provides the key drivers for the issuance of the directive. The
         USDA DDM does not do simultaneous clearance.

     (2) Office of Budget and Program Analysis (OBPA) will review the document for
         budget and program considerations. OBPA does not do simultaneous clearance.

     (3) Office of the General Counsel (OGC) will review the document for legal
         sufficiency. OGC does not do simultaneous clearance.

     (4) Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA) will review all Departmental
         directives and will be responsible for having the directive cleared within the scope
         of the ASA’s authority, to include a review by the Office of Human Resources
         Management (OHRM), Labor Relations to determine if the Department has a
         national consultation obligation under 5 U.S.C. 71, Labor Management Relations.
         National Consultation Rights (NCR) obligation reviews initiated at Optional
         Clearance may occur simultaneously with the other mandatory reviewers (i.e.,
         OBPA and OGC) but must be completed prior to the ASA review. The ASA
         receives the directive after optional clearance offices and mandatory offices review
         and clear the directive. At the discretion of the ASA, the directive may be routed to
         additional optional clearance offices. The ASA does not do simultaneous clearance.

     (5) Office of the Executive Secretariat (OES) will act as a non-reviewing clearance
         official only when the directive is to be signed in the Office of the Secretary.

b.   Optional Clearances. The OPI and the USDA DDM have the discretion to determine the
     optional clearance officials. Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, and stakeholders that
     have a direct role or responsibility under or are significantly impacted by the proposed
     directive are strongly recommended to be clearance offices. Optional Clearance offices
     review directives submissions simultaneously or concurrently.

c.   Clearance Order.

     (1) OPI and applicable internal management



                                          5
       (2)   USDA DDM
       (3)   Optional Clearance offices
       (4)   OBPA
       (5)   OGC
       (6)   ASA
       (7)   USDA DDM
       (8)   OES (only if signed by the Secretary)
       (9)   Signature Authority

       Note: If any of the clearing offices make any substantive changes to the proposed
       directive after OGC has reviewed, the proposed directive must be returned to OGC.
       OGC will review the changes for legal sufficiency and send back to the clearing office
       that made the changes. The OPI must identify the substantive changes that require re-
       review by OGC.


6. SIGNATURE AUTHORITY

  Persons in specific positions may issue policy, guidance and procedures within the scope of
  their delegated authority and assigned functions:

  a.   Regulations, Manuals, Notices, and Guidebooks. The Secretary, the Deputy Secretary,
       Under Secretaries, Assistant Secretaries, Assistant to the Secretary, other General
       Officers, agency heads, and Departmental staff office directors may delegate Signature
       Authority to their principal subordinates, and must notify the USDA DDM in writing of
       such delegations.

  b.   Secretary's Memoranda. Only the Secretary or Acting Secretary may issue Secretary's
       Memoranda.

  Signature Authorities will approve the issuance of Departmental directives in accordance
  with their delegated authorities and assigned functions by signing the AD-116. Secretary’s
  Memoranda can be signed on the directive itself or the AD-116.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE

  The date that the signature authority signs the Form AD-116 is the effective date, unless
  otherwise indicated under "SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS." If the
  signature authority is the Secretary, the effective date is the date the Secretary signed the
  directive and the AD-116.


8. CANCELLATIONS

  DRs, DMs, and DGs can be cancelled by another Departmental directive, upon request from



                                             6
  the OPI, or by expiration date. DNs and SMs can be cancelled by:

  a.   Another DN or SM, but only a SM can cancel a SM;

  b.   Codification into a DR or DM. The DR or DM should include the cancellation
       instructions; or

  c.   Expiration Date.


9. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA DDM will:

       (1) Establish policies, standards, and procedures for the Departmental Directives
           System;

       (2) Manage all aspects of the Departmental Directives System, serving as a central
           control point to prevent overlapping, duplication, and conflict;

       (3) Provide assistance and advice to originators of Departmental directives;

       (4) Recommend the issuance of new or revised Departmental directives to responsible
           officials;

       (5) Review all draft Departmental directives prior to formal clearance to ensure that
           provisions of this DR and companion DM 0100-001 are met;

       (6) Process approved Departmental directives following formal clearance and approval.
           Processing includes adding the classification number and date to all pages, as well
           as assigning and adding the serial number to directives prior to publishing;

       (7) Manage the Departmental Directives Classification System and ensure that all
           Departmental directives are properly classified;

       (8) Maintain an electronic system and operating procedures to ensure immediate access
           to Departmental directives by posting to the Departmental Directives Web page
           within 5 days after receipt of a signed directive;

       (9) Maintain Departmental directives in the electronic system with their most current
           content by updating the electronic file of Departmental directives within 5 days
           after receipt of a signed amendment;

       (10) At least quarterly, issue bulletins to all agencies and staff offices notifying them of
            issuance of new Departmental directives, or of amendment, revision, or rescission
            of existing directives. Bulletins can be issued more frequently if the volume of



                                             7
         amendment, revision, rescission, or issuance activity warrants more frequent
         issuance;

     (11) Maintain an electronic repository of bulletins on the Departmental Directives Web
          Page. Each bulletin that contains an amendment to a directive shall include as an
          attachment the amendment changes pages. Inclusion of amendment changes pages
          within the electronic repository of bulletins will enable agencies and staff offices to
          keep track of the effective dates of each set of changes to a directive;

     (12) Audit the Departmental Directives System, evaluate and approve suggestions for
          improving the directives system, eliminate Departmental directives when possible,
          and ensure that the Departmental Directives System agrees with other management
          programs and controls;

     (13) Maintain historical files of Departmental directives, including copies of current and
          superseded directives, clearance forms, and other pertinent information (including
          but not limited to adjudicated comments and notes to reviewers); and

     (14) Serve as a mandatory clearance office for all Departmental directives and SMs.

b.   Department Agencies and Staff Offices will:

     (1) Ensure that all USDA staff are aware of and comply with the provisions of this
         regulation;

     (2) Ensure that all Departmental directives in their area of responsibility are complete,
         accurate, and current;

     (3) Ensure Departmental directives that are highly sensitive are not posted on the
         public-facing USDA Departmental Directives Web page. Directives containing
         sensitive information will be so noted by the originating office;

     (4) Maintain a system that permits access to Departmental directives within 5 days after
         issuance;

     (5) Appoint a Directives System Liaison Officer (DSLO) to manage, control, and
         coordinate all Departmental directive activities within their organizations; and
         provide the name, complete mailing address, e-mail address, and telephone number
         of the appointed DSLO (or any replacement) to the USDA DDM. A list of the
         DSLOs is posted on the Directives Contacts Web page; and

     (6) Maintain historical files of Departmental directives, including copies of current and
         superseded directives, clearance forms, and other pertinent information for
         directives for which they are responsible.




                                           8
c.   OPIs will:

     (1) Prepare Departmental directives within the scope of their delegated authority;

     (2) Determine the impact of new and revised laws and regulations, Executive Orders,
         external agency policy (e.g., Office of Management and Budget (OMB), Office of
         Personnel Management (OPM), General Services Administration (GSA), National
         Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)), and audit
         findings/recommendations on assigned functions and issue or update Departmental
         directives as appropriate to implement or incorporate the external issuances;

     (3) Identify through mandatory Departmental marking methods if the directive contains
         sensitive information; verifying the need and the appropriate level of marking with
         a cybersecurity officer as applicable. If a directive contains sensitive information,
         the directive should be clearly identified as containing sensitive information, and it
         should not be posted to a public-facing Web page. The OPI will be responsible for
         distributing directives containing sensitive information to the affected parties;

     (4) Coordinate and clear proposed Departmental directives with stakeholders and
         affected organizational units (see DM 0100-001) including OHRM-Labor Relations
         and the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights (OASCR) as applicable;

     (5) Recommend a classification number and distribution code(s);

     (6) Ensure that their policy writers, editors, and subject matter experts complete
         periodic Departmental directives training;

     (7) Type, revise, edit, and proof Departmental directives. Prepare all directives using
         the Departmental enterprise word processing solution;

     (8) Adjudicate review comments and incorporate changes into a revised directive in
         order to timely resume formal clearance per the following timeframes:

         (a) Within 5 business days for standard resolution of comments;

         (b) Within 20 business days for a mandatory clearance office nonconcur requiring
             remedy; and

         (c) Within 4 calendar months for a mandatory clearance office nonconcur
             requiring a rewrite;

     (9) Provide electronic Section 508 compliant final files using the Departmental
         enterprise word processing format, and transmit the documents electronically for all
         newly approved directives to the USDA DDM. The USDA DDM will only accept
         an electronic copy of the directive; the OPI is responsible for ensuring that the



                                          9
         electronic version of the directive is the exact version of the paper document
         approved by the agency official as provided to the USDA DDM;

     (10) Provide a schedule to the USDA DDM for directive amendments, which delineates
          the amendment changes pages for inclusion in an electronic repository of
          amendment bulletins on the Departmental Directives Web Page.

     (11) Retain background material (e.g., adjudicated comments received during clearance)
          after issuance of a Departmental directive; and

     (12) At least annually, review Departmental directives for which they are responsible
          and amend, revise and reissue, rescind, or codify as appropriate.

d.   Clearance Offices will:

     (1) Participate in informal coordination sessions when requested by the OPI;

     (2) Review proposed Departmental directives for organizational impact, coordinate
         with the OPI for necessary changes, and indicate formal concurrence/non-
         concurrence;

     (3) Return comments to the OPI within 3 business days if the Clearance Office is
         optional; within 3 business days for the USDA DDM, OBPA, and OES mandatory
         Clearance Offices; and within 10 business days for the OGC (5 business days for
         DR/DM amendments) and ASA mandatory Clearance Offices (see Sections 5a and
         5b). If the Clearance Office is not able to complete review within the required
         timeframe, the Clearance Office other than the USDA DDM must request a formal
         extension in time; and

     (4) In the case of disputes, will proactively work with the OPI to resolve areas of
         conflict that promote the issuance of the directive and meet the needs of both
         parties. The DDM will be available to assist in moderating and mediating these
         discussions as needed.

e.   The ASA will:

     (1) Serve as a mandatory clearance official; and

     (2) Route the directive to additional optional clearance offices at the discretion of the
         ASA.

f.   For Directives Signed in the Secretary’s Office OES will:

     (1) Forward the directive to the Secretary of Agriculture for signature;

     (2) Obtain the signature of the Secretary and establish the effective date;



                                          10
        (3) Provide a copy of the signed AD-116 and the final directive to the OPI and to the
            USDA DDM; and

        (4) Maintain the original copy, original clearance form, and all relevant background
            material on all directives signed by the Secretary.

   g.   DSLOs will:

        (1) Serve as liaison to the USDA DDM on all matters relating to the Departmental
            Directives System;

        (2) Assist the OPI in the clearance process of Departmental directives; and

        (3) Assist the USDA DDM with audit requests.


10. FORMS

   Use the following forms to prepare, clear, and issue Departmental directives. These forms
   are available electronically at the Departmental Forms Web page.

   a.   Form AD-116, Clearance and Approval for Departmental Issuances

   b.   Form AD-778, Secretary's Memorandum (first page)

   c.   Form AD-811, Departmental Regulation (first page)

   d.   Form AD-812, Departmental Manual (first page)

   e.   Form AD-813, Departmental Notice (first page)

   f.   Form AD-814, Departmental Guidebook (first page)

   g.   Form AD-3108, Note to Reviewers for Draft Departmental Directives


11. PROCEDURES

   DM 0100-001, Preparing Departmental Directives, contains procedures to use when
   implementing this DR.


12. INQUIRIES

   All USDA agencies and staff offices shall direct questions and inquiries regarding this DR



                                            11
and the companion DM 0100-001 to the DDM via email at OCIO-PD@ocio.usda.gov.


                                    - END -




                                    12
                          APPENDIX A

              ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AD       Agriculture Department (for Departmental forms use only)
ASA      Assistant Secretary for Administration
CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
DDM      Departmental Directives Manager
DG       Departmental Guidebook
DM       Departmental Manual
DN       Departmental Notice
DR       Departmental Regulation
DSLO     Directives System Liaison Officer
GSA      General Services Administration
NCR      National Consultation Rights
NIST     National Institute of Standards and Technology
OASCR    Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
OBPA     Office of Budget and Program Analysis
OCIO     Office of the Chief Information Officer
OES      Office of the Executive Secretariat
OGC      Office of the General Counsel
OHRM     Office of Human Resources Management
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
OPI      Office of Primary Interest
OPM      Office of Personnel Management
SM       Secretary's Memorandum
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                                A-1
                                      APPENDIX B

                                      DEFINITIONS


a. Agency. Organizational units of the Department, other than staff offices as defined
   below, whose heads report to officials within the Office of the Secretary, Deputy
   Secretary, Under Secretaries, Assistant Secretaries, and Assistant to the Secretary.

b. Agency Directives. Issuances that originate within Department agencies or staff offices
   as interpretations of internal or external directives, or enabling legislation.

c. Amendment. An amendment is used for general updating that makes non-substantive or
   only minor substantive changes to 25 percent or less of the text of an existing DR, DM,
   or DG; e.g., for an organizational name change or personnel title change resulting from a
   realignment; to add language to the directive that clarifies, but does not change, existing
   policy or roles and responsibilities; for updating Web site links or updating references to
   external sources; or for updating references to the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) or
   United States Code (U.S.C).

d. Classification. The arrangement of directives into categories and subcategories according
   to their subject matter. In the Departmental Directives System, categories are identified
   and their subdivisions logically related by a numbering system.

e. Classification Code. A 4-digit number (7-digits for some specialized OHRM directives
   to align with overarching OPM guidance), indicating the basic subject matter of a specific
   directive; e.g., code 1041 indicates that the subject of a directive is committee
   management.

f. Classification Number. The number that uniquely identifies each Departmental directive.
   It consists of a series designator, a classification code, and a 3-digit serial number; e.g.,
   DR 1041-001 would be the first DR on committee management.

g. Codification. The issuance of a directive, appropriately numbered, in permanent form, or
   the conversion of a temporary directive to permanent issuance.

h. External Directives. Federal regulations, Executive Orders, or other issuances that
   originate outside USDA but may apply to USDA operations.

i. Format. The design of directive pages for positioning constant information such as
   directive number, subject, OPI, date, page number, margins, etc.

j. Head. Agency administrator, office director, or the person acting as head.

k. Mandatory Clearance Office. A clearance office that directives must be cleared through
   prior to issuance.

                                            B-1
l. Mission Area. A group of agencies with related functions that report to the same Under or
   Assistant Secretary. Research, Education, and Economics (REE) is an example of a
   mission area.

m. Office of Primary Interest (OPI). The office responsible for the origination and content
   of a directive related to a particular function or program.

n. Office of the Secretary. This term includes the immediate office of the Secretary, the
   Deputy Secretary, the Under and Assistant Secretaries.

o. Rescission. The cancellation of a directive.

p. Revision. A revision or reissuance is used for general updating in which more than minor
   substantive changes are made or more than 25 percent of the text of a DR, DM, or DG is
   changed; for language changes necessitated by the revision of underlying statutory or
   regulatory authority; for making substantive changes to the policy set forth in the
   directive; or for making changes to agency and staff office and other stakeholder
   responsibilities set forth in the directive.

q. Secretary. The Secretary of Agriculture.

r. Series Designator. A 2-letter alphabetical abbreviation indicating the series of a
   particular Departmental directive (e.g., DR, DM, DN, DG, SM).

s. Signature Authority. The office/person that approves the directive in accordance with
   delegated authorities and assigned functions.

t. Staff Office. Departmental administrative offices whose heads report to officials within
   the Office of the Secretary.

u. Stakeholder. An official, mission area, agency, staff office, or component with a defined
   role and responsibility or vested interest in a Departmental directive.




                                         B-2
                                        APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


GSA, GSA Governmentwide Section 508 Accessibility Program Web site

Labor Management Relations, 5 U.S.C. 71

Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. § 794 (d), as amended

USDA, Departmental Directives Web Page

USDA, Template for Departmental Regulation

USDA, Template for Departmental Manual

USDA, Template for Departmental Notice

USDA, Template for Secretary’s Memorandum

USDA, DM 0100-001, Preparing Departmental Directives

USDA, DR 4030-001, Section 508, September 8, 2014

USDA, DR 4300-004, Civil Rights Impact Analysis, October 17, 2016

USDA, Departmental Forms Web Page

USDA, AD-116, Clearance and Approval for Departmental Issuances

USDA, AD-778, Secretary’s Memorandum

USDA, AD-811, Departmental Regulation

USDA, AD-812, Departmental Manual

USDA, AD-813, Departmental Notice

USDA, AD-814, Departmental Guidebook

USDA, AD-3108, Note to Reviewers for Draft Departmental Directives

USDA, Directives Contacts Web Page




                                              C-1
