                         U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


     DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                    Number:
                                                                1061-003
SUBJECT:                                                        DATE:
                                                                November 4, 2014
USDA Executive Resources Board
                                                                OPI:
                                                                Office of Human Resources
                                                                Management


Section                                                                    Page

1      Purpose                                                             1
2      References                                                          1
3      Special Instructions                                                2
4      Policy                                                              2
5      Delegations of Authority                                            2
6      ERB Membership                                                      2
7      Responsibilities                                                    3
8      Procedures                                                          6


1.     PURPOSE

       Each Federal agency is required by 5 U.S.C. § 3393(b) to establish one or more
       Executive Resources Boards (ERB’s), the members of which shall be appointed by the
       Secretary. The ERB will conduct the merit staffing process for career entry into the
       Senior Executive Service (SES); entrants into the Presidential Management Fellow
       Program (PMF); and other functions relating to the management of the Department’s
       executive resources, as delegated by the Secretary, to include the oversight of human
       resources matters related to SES and Senior Level (SL) and Scientific or Professional
       (ST) employees. The purpose of this directive is to set forth the Department of
       Agriculture’s (USDA) policies and procedures for administering the USDA ERB.


2.     REFERENCES

       a.      Title 5 United States Code (U.S.C.) Section 3393(b), Career Appointments
       b.      Title 5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 317, Employment in the Senior
               Executive Service
          c.   Title 5 CFR, Part 319, Employment in the Senior Level and Scientific and
               Professional Positions
          d.   Title 5 CFR, Part 362 Subpart D, Presidential Management Fellow Program
     e.     Title 5 CFR, Parts 412.302, Senior Executive Service Candidate Development
            Program and 412.401, Continuing Executive Development
     f.     5 CFR 430 Subpart C, Managing Senior Executive Performance
     g.     OPM SES Desk Guide
     h.     USDA Desk Guide for Executive Resources


3.   SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS

     This replaces Departmental Regulation 1061-002, dated October 4, 2012.


4.   POLICY

     It is USDA’s policy to ensure the conduct of proper merit staffing for career appointment
     to SES and SL positions and to provide institutional continuity in executive personnel
     management in the Department through the general oversight of the management of the
     agency’s executive staffing resources, development, evaluation, and pay policy, through
     the ERB.

     There shall be one ERB at USDA that serves as the Departmental governing board for
     executive resources policy. There will be no executive resources policy decisions made
     or delegated to the agencies. The ERB will provide institutional continuity in executive
     and senior employee personnel management for the Department by overseeing the merit
     staffing process for career appointment to the SES and to SL positions and providing
     advice to the Secretary in executive and senior employee personnel planning, executive
     resource utilization, executive development, and other related activities as the Secretary
     deems necessary. The Chair may establish ERB subgroups and committees to facilitate
     the successful accomplishment of Board business, as deemed appropriate.


5.   DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY

     Under this directive the Secretary reserves the right to delegate, in writing, additional
     roles and responsibilities as deemed necessary.

     The Secretary delegates authority to the Chairperson to appoint all other Members as
     outlined in this directive.


6.   ERB MEMBERSHIP

     ERB members must be SES and SL/ST employees of the Department. To the extent
     practicable, ERB membership should be a cross section of career and non-career
     appointees and be reflective of the broad diversity of the Department.



                                               2
7.   RESPONSIBILITIES

     a.   The USDA Secretary shall:

          (1)    Have the sole discretion to appoint the Chairperson.

          The USDA Secretary may:

          (1)    Establish a specific term of service for ERB members and the ERB
                 Chairperson and document such discussions in the ERB Charter; and

          (2)    Delegate to the ERB additional functions and authorities beyond the
                 mandatory responsibilities in 5 U.S.C § 3393(b), 5 CFR § 412.302 (a), and
                 5 CFR § 362.401, as the Secretary deems appropriate.

     b.   The ERB Chairperson serves as a permanent member of the board and is
          responsible for overseeing the activities of the ERB, to include, but not limited to
          the following:

          (1)    Appointing the Vice Chair, who will serve as a permanent member;

          (2)    Appointing members as delegated by the Secretary;

          (3)    Ensuring membership is a mix of career/non-career SES and SL/ST
                 employees and is representative of USDA Mission Areas;

          (4)    Convening ERB meetings;

          (5)    Establishing the ERB agenda;

          (6)    Serving as ERB point of contact with the appointing authority, the Office
                 of Personnel Management, and others, as appropriate;

          (7)    Seeking technical and or legal advice and guidance, as necessary; and

          (8)    Distributing work of the ERB among small groups of members or
                 appointing outside work groups and subcommittees to efficiently
                 accomplish the work of the ERB.

     c.   The Director for the Executive Resources Management Division in the Office of
          Human Resources Management is responsible for:

          (1)    Establishing, revising and issuing Department-wide policy directives and
                 guidance for the ERB and updating such policy directives as needed;



                                            3
     (2)    Serving as Executive Secretary to the ERB;

     (3)    Providing staff support to the ERB, including all administrative, analytical
            or other services necessary to carry out the functions of the ERB; and

     (4)    Conducting all day-to-day operations pertaining to personnel actions and
            administration of executive personnel programs.

d.   ERB Members are responsible for:

     (1)    Overseeing the merit staffing process for career appointment to SES and
            SL positions;

     (2)    Advising the Secretary in executive and senior employee personnel
            planning, executive resource utilization, executive development, and other
            related activities as the USDA Secretary deems necessary; and

     (3)    Communicating with their USDA Mission Area about the ERB’s
            recommendations on the various SES and SL/ST policies under this
            directive.

     The major activities of ERB members include:

     (1)    Position Management/Succession Planning/Resource Utilization

            Ensures that USDA has the appropriate number and types of SES, SL and
            ST positions and appointing authorities needed for accomplishing the
            Department’s mission, and structures the work of its executive/senior
            positions for maximum program efficiencies and effectiveness.

     (2)    Staffing Management

            Ensures that USDA recruits, selects, and retains SES and SL staff with the
            qualifications needed for accomplishing the Department’s present mission
            and future program needs.

            Under this directive the Secretary authorizes the ERB to delegate the merit
            staffing process for career appointments to the Executive Merit Staffing
            Board (EMSB) for:

            (a)    Reviewing the executive qualifications of each candidate for a
                   position to be filled by a career appointee (5 U.S.C § 3393(b)(1));
                   and

            (b)    Making written recommendations to the appropriate appointing
                   authority concerning such candidates (5 U.S.C. § 3393(b)(2)).

                                      4
      Each EMSB will have a Chairperson and members will be appointed in
      accordance with USDA policy. The Chair of each EMSB will work
      closely with the Executive Resources Management Division in the Office
      of Human Resources Management to ensure adherence to merit staffing
      principles in accordance with 5 CFR § 317 and 319. The EMSB will:

      (c)    Review and evaluate competitive candidates against the executive
             core qualifications and any mandatory technical qualifications
             identified;

      (d)    Ensure that candidates are evaluated and rated in accordance with
             Departmental procedures and those evaluations are fully
             documented; and

      (e)    Certify and refer the “Best Qualified” group of candidates to the
             Director, Executive Resources Management Division who refers
             the certified group and the non-competitive group of qualified
             applicants to the recommending official.

(3)   Executive Development Management

      Ensures that USDA identifies and prepares its best employees for the
      future assumption of executive and management positions and provides
      opportunities for continuing growth of its current executive and senior
      team to enhance accomplishment of the Department’s mission.

      The ERB will approve the SES Career Development Program (SES CDP)
      Plan for USDA; certify Individual Development Plans (IDP’s) for each
      candidate participating in the program; and certify graduate executive core
      qualifications and completion of program requirements prior to
      submission of a graduating participant’s packages to OPM.

      The ERB may delegate the review of IDP’s and participant packages to a
      sub or ad hoc executive group.

(4)   Performance Management

      Ensures the Department’s SES and SL/ST employees have clear work
      objectives and performance standards; that progress and accomplishments
      are reviewed periodically, with adjustments, as appropriate, to objectives,
      standards, and assignments to improve the attainment of Departmental
      goals.

(5)   Compensation Management



                                5
                  Ensures that SES and SL/ST employees are compensated equitably for
                  their work and that their accomplishments are recognized and rewarded,
                  by reviewing and recommending pay level increases and/or nominations
                  for Presidential Rank Awards; and providing advice on matters relating to
                  executive/senior compensation (e.g., bonuses, incentive awards, base pay,
                  etc.).

           (6)    Presidential Management Fellows Program (PMF)

                  Oversees the development and certification of USDA’s PMF Program.
                  The ERB provides oversight of both the Senior component of the Program
                  (GS-13 through GS-15) and the Fellows component of the Program (GS-9
                  through GS-12). In accordance with 5 CFR 362.401, the ERB may
                  delegate these responsibilities to a sub or ad hoc executive group to:

                  (a)    Approve initial appointments of Senior Fellows;

                  (b)    Request appointment extensions from the Office of Personnel
                         Management (OPM) of up to one additional year for both Fellows
                         and Senior Fellows;

                  (c)    Certify IDP’s for Senior Fellows; and

                  (d)    Certify successful completion of all program requirements and
                         direct the Executive Secretary to submit certifications to OPM and
                         agency PMF Coordinators for both Fellows and Senior Fellows.


8.   PROCEDURES

     (1)   A quorum is required for ERB action. A quorum is defined as the ERB
           Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson and at least 50 percent of its appointed
           members.

     (2)   Consensus shall be the preferred decision-making process; however, in the
           absence of consensus, the ERB Chairperson shall call for majority vote.

     (3)   The ERB may establish such procedures as necessary to carry out its functions.


                                         -END-

                                        /s/
                                        Thomas J. Vilsack
                                        Secretary


                                           6
