                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                 NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                         DR 1042-126
 SUBJECT: Task Force on Agricultural Air Quality                 DATE:
 Research                                                        April 27, 2021
                                                                 EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Natural Resources Conservation Service
                                                                 April 27, 2026



Section                                                                                     Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                     1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                          1
3.   Background                                                                                  2
4.   Scope                                                                                       2
5.   Policy                                                                                      2
6.   Membership                                                                                  2
7.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                                  3
8.   Inquiries                                                                                   4

Appendix A - Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                      A-1
Appendix B - Authorities and References                                                      B-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) re-establishes the USDA Task Force on Agricultural Air
     Quality Research (Task Force) pursuant to Section 391 of the Federal Agriculture
     Improvement and Reform Act of 1996 (FAIR Act), Public Law (P.L.) 104-127, April 4, 1996,
     codified at 7 United States Code (U.S.C.) 5405. The FAIR Act directs the Chief of the
     Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) to establish an advisory committee to
     address agricultural air quality issues.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     a.   This revision supersedes DR 1042-126, Task Force on Agriculture Air Quality
          Research, dated April 15, 2014.

     b.   This policy is effective immediately and remains in effect until it is superseded or
          expires.
3. BACKGROUND

  The Task Force was originally established to strengthen vital research efforts related to
  agricultural air quality and to ensure intergovernmental cooperation in addressing research
  and other activities related to agricultural air quality. Congress wanted to ensure that any
  Federal policy recommendations that may be issued by any Federal agency to address air
  pollution problems related to agriculture would be based on sound scientific findings and
  subject to adequate peer review and take into account economic feasibility.


4. SCOPE

  This DR applies to USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices responsible for
  agricultural air quality research, policy, and implementation.


5. POLICY

  a.   The FAIR Act directs the Chief of NRCS to establish a task force to oversee and review
       research in agricultural air quality issues in order to ensure intergovernmental
       cooperation in research activities.

  b.   The Task Force is responsible for advising the Secretary of Agriculture (Secretary) on
       air quality and its relationship to agriculture based on sound scientific findings.

  c.   The Task Force will advise the Secretary on efforts to strengthen vital research efforts
       related to agricultural air quality and on cost-effective ways in which the agricultural
       industry can improve air quality.

  d.   The Task Force will advise the Secretary on efforts to coordinate and ensure
       intergovernmental cooperation on research activities related to agricultural air quality
       issues to avoid duplication and ensure data quality and sound interpretation of data.

  e.   NRCS will provide administrative support for the Task Force.


6. MEMBERSHIP

  There are no legal limitations to the number of members who may serve on the Task Force.
  The Task Force membership will consist of:

  a.   The Chief of NRCS as the Task Force Chair;

  b.   Representatives, selected by the Secretary, of academia, agribusiness, regulatory
       organizations, environmental organizations, health disciplines, special government
       employees (SGEs), and other experts in the fields of agriculture and air quality; and



                                                 2
  c.   USDA regular government employees (RGEs), as selected by the Secretary.


7. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Secretary will:

       (1) Strengthen vital research efforts related to agricultural air quality;

       (2) Ensure, to the maximum extent practicable with respect to USDA and other Federal
           departments and agencies, intergovernmental cooperation in research activities
           related to agricultural air quality and avoid duplication of the activities;

       (3) Ensure, to the maximum extent practicable with respect to USDA and other Federal
           departments and agencies, that the results of any research related to agricultural air
           quality conducted by Federal agencies do not report erroneous data with respect to
           agricultural air quality; and

       (4) Appoint members to the Task Force.

  b.   The Chief of NRCS or their designee will:

       (1) Serve as Chair of the Task Force;

       (2) Serve as the primary point of contact to the Secretary, and be responsible for
           presenting Task Force recommendations to the Secretary;

       (3) Prepare the Task Force charter as established under section 9(c) of the Federal
           Advisory Committee Act (FACA), P.L. 92-463, October 6, 1972, as amended; and

       (4) Assign NRCS personnel to provide administrative support for the Task Force.

  c.   The Designated Federal Officer (DFO) for the Task Force will:

       (1) Approve the Task Force’s meetings;

       (2) Prepare and approve all Task Force meeting agendas;

       (3) Attend Task Force meetings;

       (4) Adjourn any Task Force meeting when the DFO determines adjournment to be in
           the public interest; and

       (5) Chair Task Force meetings when directed to do so by the Chief of NRCS or their
           designee.



                                                  3
  d.   The Task Force will develop recommendations for the Secretary as it pertains to his or
       her role in the oversight and coordination of issues related to agricultural air quality.

  e.   Other delegated USDA staff will assist the Secretary, the Chief of NRCS, and the DFO
       in planning and attending meetings of the Task Force, attending meetings of
       subcommittees of the Task Force, and other tasks as necessary to ensure efficient
       operation of the Task Force.


8. INQUIRIES

  Inquiries regarding this DR should be directed to the NRCS, West National Technology
  Support Center at 970-295-5621.


                                              -END-




                                                 4
                              APPENDIX A

                  ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


DFO        Designated Federal Officer
DR         Departmental Regulation
FACA       Federal Advisory Committee Act
FAIR Act   Federal Agriculture Improvement and Reform Act of 1996
NRCS       Natural Resources Conservation Service
RGE        Regular Government Employee
SGE        Special Government Employee
U.S.C.     United States Code
USDA       United States Department of Agriculture




                                   A-1
                                        APPENDIX B

                             AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Federal Advisory Committee Act, P.L. 92-463, as amended, December 21, 1982

Federal Agriculture Improvement and Reform Act of 1996 (P.L. 104-127), 7 U.S.C. 5405




                                             B-1
