                                    U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                       Washington, D.C. 20250


                                                                                               Number:
        DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                                1043-012

SUBJECT: The Food and Agriculture Council                            DATE:
                                                                     January 11, 1983

                                                                     OPI:
                                                                     Office of the Secretary




1.    PURPOSE

             Secretary's Memorandum 1043-2 dated April 2, 1982 established the USDA Food and
             Agriculture Councils. This regulation sets out FAC responsibilities and operating
             procedures and identifies the methods FAC's will use to report their activities and
             achievements.




2.    SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS

             a.       The Secretary's Policy and Coordination Council retains authority for
             establishing Departmental Policy and this regulation is set out in accordance with that
             authority.

             b.     The Department's advisory committees, subject to the Federal Advisory
             Committee Act, are unaffected by this regulation.




3.    POLICY

             It is the policy of the USDA to provide for effective and efficient coordination of Federal
             agricultural programs within each of the individual States and territories. The Food and
             Agriculture Council will serve as the single interagency forum for this purpose in each
             state.




4.    ABBREVIATIONS

             USDA - United States Department of Agriculture NFAC - National Food and Agriculture
             Council FAC - State or Territory Level Food and Agriculture Council
DR 1043-012                                                                            January 11, 1983


5.     RESPONSIBILITIES

              a The National Food and Agriculture Council will:

                                 (1)     Coordinate all activities identified by Under Secretaries,
                                Assistant Secretaries, and Agency administrators requiring the
                                cooperative involvement of the agencies at the State or Territory level
                                to achieve the Department's missions and objectives;

                                (2) Provide for liaison to the State FAC's; and

                                (3)      Issue revisions to this regulation.

              b. The State Food and Agriculture Council will:

                                (1)      Execute all tasks and functions issued by NFAC of the
                                Secretary's Policy and Coordination Council.

                                (2)      At the discretion of the State FAC, establish subcommittees as
                                deemed appropriate, to be responsive to the needs of the Secretary's
                                Policy and Coordination Council.

                                (3)     Insure that the rural development function in the state is
                                addressed and its progress monitored.

                                (4)      Issue State procedures to establish local (multicounty, county,
                                parish, burrough) FAC's that will provide an effective coordinated team
                                of USDA and other Federal agency personnel to be responsive to the
                                needs of the State FAC as well as local requests for assistance.




6.     OPERATIONS

              The FAC s are comprised of USDA officials who serve on them as part of the official
              duties of their respective agency positions. The FAC of each State and other locations
              representing territories shall consist of the respective senior USDA Agency officials of:
              The Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service, Animal and Plant Health
              Inspection Service, Economic Research Service, Extension Service, Farmers Home
              Administration, Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Food and Nutrition Service, Forest
              Service, Rural Electrification Administration, Soil Conservation Service, and the
              Statistical Reporting Service. Other USDA Agencies and Federal Agencies may be
              invited to be members at the discretion of the State FAC.

               a.      Officers. The State FAC members will elect as of October 1 of each year, a
              chairperson from among the Agencies responsible for implementing this regulation. The
              FAC shall have a recording secretary who may be a member of the chairperson's agency.

              b.       Meetings. Each State FAC will meet on the call of the Chairperson, but not less
              than once each quarter-year to address the objectives and interests of the respective
              USDA activities. The meetings are executive meetings of Federal Officials. Other
              persons, agencies, or groups may be invited to attend specific meetings when deemed
              appropriate. The proceedings of each meeting will be recorded by the FAC secretary.


                                                 2
DR 1043-012                                                                              January 11, 1983


              Reporting. Each State FAC will provide two copies of the minutes of its meetings to the
              chairman of NFAC within two weeks after adjournment of such meetings. The Council
              will respond to all requests for information from NFAC provided they are in accordance
              with the responsibilities assigned in this regulation. Each council will be responsible for
              providing, not later than October 1 of each year, a current list of all its members, their
              addresses and phone numbers, to NFAC.




                                                  3
