                            U.S. Department of Agriculture
                               Washington, D.C. 20250




          DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                           Number:
                                                                                            1041-001

SUBJECT: Advisory Committee Management                       DATE:
                                                             February 8, 1993

                                                             OPI: Office of Personnel


      1       PURPOSE

              This regulation provides procedures for the establishment, operation, duration,
              and accessibility to the public of advisory committees under the jurisdiction of
              the Department.

      2       CANCELLATION

              This regulation supersedes DR 1041-1 dated November 13, 1989.

      3       POLICY

              All provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App 10.),
              Title XVIII of the Food and Agriculture Act of 1977, as amended (7 U.S.C.
              2281 et. seq.), regulations issued by the Committee Management
              Secretariat of the General Services Administration (41 CFR Part 101-6)
              and these regulations will apply to all advisory committees, as that term
              is defined in these regulations, unless otherwise provided by law. The
              Department will maintain control over the establishment and use of
              advisory committees.

              a        Unless otherwise provided by statute or Presidential directive, advisory
              committees shall be utilized solely for advisory functions. Decisions regarding
              actions or policies relating to matters dealt with by an advisory committee shall
              be made solely by an official of the Department.

      4       DEFINITIONS

              a        Act. The Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended.

              b         Advisory committee. A committee, subcommittee, board, commission,
              council, conference, panel, task force, or other similar group, or any
              subcommittee or subgroup thereof, established by statute, or established or
              utilized by the President or any Departmental official for the purpose of
              obtaining advice or recommendations on issues or policies within the scope of
              his/her responsibilities, which are not exempt from the Federal Advisory
              Committee Act. Refer to Section 6 for exclusions from the Act.

              c       Committee Management Officer (CMO). The Assistant Secretary for
              Administration.
DR 1041-001                                                                       February 8, 1993


                  d       Nonstatutory advisory committee. An advisory committee established
                  by Departmental authority, including those authorized by an Act of Congress.

                  e        Reestablishment of an advisory committee. The rechartering of a
                  previously established committee after its charter has expired.

                  f        Renewal of an advisory committee. The rechartering of a previously
                  established committee prior to the expiration of its current charter.

                  g        Secretariat. The Committee Management Secretariat of the General
                  Services Administration (GSA).

                  h        Staff member. An individual who serves in a support capacity to an
                  advisory committee.

                  i        Statutory advisory committee. An advisory committee established by
                  an Act of Congress. It includes an advisory committee established by the
                  Secretary where a statute allows no discretion as to whether the committee
                  should be established.

                  j        Utilized. A committee or other group, composed in whole or in part of
                  other than full-time Government officers or employees, which has an established
                  existence outside the Federal Government and is used as a preferred source to
                  obtain advice or recommendations in the same manner as from an established
                  advisory committee.

              5   RESPONSIBILITIES

                  a       The CMO will be responsible for:

                          (1)     Exercising control and supervision over the establishment,
                          procedures, and accomplishments of advisory committees;

                          (2)      Assigning responsibility for the assembly and maintenance of
                          the reports, records, and other papers of advisory committees; and

                          (3)      Carrying out, on behalf of the Department, the provisions of
                          Section 552 of title 5, United States Code, with respect to such reports,
                          records, and other papers.

                  b       The Office of Personnel (OP) provides staff support for the CMO by:

                          (1)      Maintaining systematic information on the nature, functions,
                          and operations of each advisory committee, including a complete set of
                          charters and annual reports for advisory committees;

                          (2)     Filing advisory committee charters with the appropriate
                          Congressional committees, the Library of Congress, and the Committee
                          Management Secretariat;

                          (3)      Maintaining membership lists for all advisory committees;




                                           2
DR 1041-001                                                                     February 8, 1993


                       (4)     Complying with advisory committee management reporting
                       requirements; and

                       (5)       Providing advice and guidance on the establishment, renewal,
                       utilization, management, and reporting of all advisory committees.

              c        The Office of Finance and Management (OFM) provides staff
              assistance in the preparation, implementation, and monitoring of all non-Forest
              Service advisory committee budgets by:

                       (1)       Consulting with agencies regarding the presentation of
                       proposed committee budgets. A consolidated budget will be compiled
                       for all non-Forest Service agencies and presented to the CMO, the
                       Office of Management and Budget, and Congress;

                       (2)     Consulting with the CMO, once the appropriation for advisory
                       committees has been received, and then allocating funds to the
                       appropriate Under Secretary or Assistant Secretary for the operation of
                       committees within respective functional areas; and

                       (3)       Issuing instructions to agencies for the preparation of quarterly
                       reports indicating current rates of expenditure and forecasted fund
                       requirement projections. These reports will be consolidated, and
                       recommendations regarding reallocation of funds will be made to the
                       CMO.

              d        Agency heads are responsible for providing an orderly procedure for:

                       (1)     Establishing or terminating advisory committees and
                       providing guidance for the selection of members;

                       (2)      Adhering to the law and regulations governing the use of
                       advisory committees;

                       (3)      Designating for any advisory committee a central location for
                       the assembling and maintenance of the reports, records, and other
                       papers of the advisory committee for public inspection and copying;

                       (4)      Conducting periodic reviews of advisory committee activities;

                       (5)      Maintaining an adequate advisory committee control system,
                       including maintaining records of all advisory committees sponsored by
                       the agency;

                       (6)    Submitting Form AD-241, Committee Control Record
                       (Appendix A), and Form AD-742, Transfer and Adjustment Voucher
                       (Appendix B), for all advisory committees; and

                       (7)     Appointing a designated agency official for each advisory
                       committee.




                                        3
DR 1041-001                                                                      February 8, 1993


              6   EXCLUSIONS FROM PROVISIONS OF THE ACT

                  Excluded from coverage under these regulations are:

                          (1)    A committee composed wholly of full-time officers or
                          employees of the Federal Government;

                          (2)     Any advisory committee specifically exempted by an Act of
                          Congress;

                          (3)      Any local civic group whose primary function is to render a
                          public service with respect to a Federal program, or any State or local
                          committee, council, board, commission, or similar group established to
                          advise or make recommendations to State or local officials or agencies;

                          (4)       Any meeting initiated by the President or one or more Federal
                          officials for the purpose of obtaining advice or recommendations from
                          one individual;

                          (5)      Any meeting initiated by a Federal official with more than one
                          individual for the purpose of obtaining the advice of individual
                          attendees and not for the purpose of using the group to obtain
                          consensus advice or recommendations. Such a group would, however,
                          be covered by these regulations if the deliberations of the group are
                          accepted as a source of consensus advice or recommendations;

                          (6)      Any meeting initiated by a group with the President or one or
                          more Federal officials for the purpose of expressing the group's view,
                          provided the group is not used recurrently as a preferred source of
                          advice or recommendations;

                          (7)       Meetings of two or more advisory committee or subcommittee
                          members convened solely to gather information or conduct research for
                          a chartered advisory committee, to analyze relevant issues and facts, or
                          to draft proposed position papers for deliberation by the committee or
                          subcommittee; and

                          (8)      Any meeting with a group initiated by the President or one or
                          more Federal officials for the purpose of exchanging facts or
                          information.

              a   ESTABLISHMENT OR REESTABLISHMENT OF A NONSTATUTORY
                  ADVISORY COMMITTEE

                  b        Policy on establishment or reestablishment. The following policy shall
                  govern the establishment or reestablishment of nonstatutory advisory
                  committees. No such committee shall be established or reestablished unless:

                          (1)      It has been determined as a matter of formal record, by the
                          Secretary or appropriate Under or Assistant Secretary, to be in the
                          public interest;




                                           4
DR 1041-001                                                                 February 8, 1993


                  (2)      It has been established or reestablished in accord with these
                  regulations;

                  (3)      Prior consultation with the Secretariat has been accomplished;

                  (4)      Notice of the intent to establish or reestablish the committee
                  has been published in the Federal Register at least 15 days before the
                  committee's charter is filed, unless the Secretariat authorizes a shorter
                  period between publication and charter filing;

                  (5)      The purpose of the committee has been clearly defined;

                  (6)      The proposed membership of the committee represents a
                  balance in terms of the points of view represented and the functions to
                  be performed; and

                  (7)      The proposed budget of the committee reflects the reasonably
                  anticipated costs of performing the functions of the committee, and the
                  funds to support the committee's proposed activities are available
                  within the Congressional limitation, as indicated by OFM
                  appropriations.

              c   Procedure for establishment or reestablishment.

                  (1)       An agency desiring to establish or reestablish a committee or
                  utilize an outside committee shall first consult with and obtain the
                  approval of the appropriate Under or Assistant Secretary. If that official
                  approves, the agency shall prepare the following documents:

                           (a)      A letter for the signature of the CMO to the Director
                           of the Secretariat containing the following information:

                                       (i)       An explanation of why the committee is
                                       essential to the conduct of agency business and in the
                                       public interest;

                                       (ii)     An explanation of why the committee's
                                       functions cannot be performed by the agency, another
                                       existing advisory committee, or other means such as
                                       a public hearing;

                                       (iii)   A description of the agency's plan to attain
                                       balanced membership;

                                       (iv)     A request for concurrence of the Secretariat
                                       in the Department's decision; and

                                       (v)     Two copies of the draft charter must be
                                       forwarded with the letter.

                           (b)     A Departmental Regulation containing the following
                           information which will serve as the charter for the committee
                           (see Appendix C for an example):


                                   5
DR 1041-001                                                            February 8, 1993


                               (i)         Committee name;

                                  (ii)      Committee's objectives and the scope of its
                                  activity;

                                  (iii)     Period of time necessary for the committee
                                  to carry out its purposes;

                                  (iv)    Official of the Department to whom the
                                  committee reports;

                                  (v)      Agency responsible for providing necessary
                                  support for the committee;

                                   (vi)    Description of the duties for which the
                                  committee is responsible and, if such duties are not
                                  solely advisory, the authority for such functions;

                                  (vii)    Estimated annual operating costs in dollars
                                  and staff years;

                                  (viii)   Estimated frequency of committee meetings;

                                  (ix)     Termination date of the committee; and

                                  (x)      The following statement: "Equal opportunity
                                  practices, in line with USDA policies, will be
                                  followed in all membership appointments to the
                                  committee. To ensure that the recommendations of
                                  the committee have taken into account the needs of
                                  American citizens served by the Department,
                                  membership shall include, to the extent practicable,
                                  individuals with demonstrated ability to represent
                                  constituents served by the Department’s programs."

                      (c)      A notice for publication in the Federal Register of the
                      Department's intent concerning the committee (see Appendix
                      D for an example). The notice shall contain the name and
                      purpose of the committee, and a statement that the committee
                      is necessary and in the public interest. If desired, an agency
                      may solicit comments in the notice by including the name and
                      address of any agency official to whom the public may submit
                      comments. Notices for national committees shall be for the
                      signature of the CMO. Notices for regional, State, and local
                      committees may be signed by an agency official.

              (2)       Using the appropriate clearance forms, the letter to GSA,
              charter, and Federal Register notice shall be cleared within the agency
              and then forwarded, as a package, through the Office of the General
              Counsel (OGC) to OP. OP is responsible for obtaining all other
              Departmental clearances. AD-114 (pink jacket) shall be used for the
              letter (Appendix E); AD-116 (blue jacket) shall be used for both the
              Departmental Regulation and the Federal Register notice (Appendix F).



                              6
DR 1041-001                                                                        February 8, 1993


                           (3)      OP will notify the agency of the action taken by the Secretariat
                           and will forward the Federal Register notice to the CMO for signature.
                           The committee's charter will be forwarded for signature at the end of
                           the 15-day notice period

                           (4)       If an agency has not established or reestablished a committee
                           within a year of the concurrence of the Secretariat, the concurrence
                           shall be terminated unless the CMO grants an extension. In no case
                           shall the approval extend beyond two years from the date of the
                           concurrence.

                  d        Procedures for amending a committee charter.

                           (1)      When minor amendments to the charter are needed, the
                           agency providing support to the committee will prepare a revised
                           charter and forward it, through OGC, to OP. OP is responsible for
                           obtaining clearances and filing the revised charter.

                           (2)      When major amendments are necessary, the agency will, in
                           addition to the revised charter, prepare a letter to the Committee
                           Management Secretariat explaining the purpose of the changes and why
                           they are necessary. This letter will be prepared for the signature of the
                           CMO. The Secretariat will have 15 days to review the amendment,
                           after which the revised charter will be forwarded for signature and filed
                           with the appropriate committees of Congress.

              7   RENEWAL OF A NONSTATUTORY COMMITTEE

                  Procedure for renewal. Procedures in Sections 7a and 7b apply to the renewal of
                  nonstatutory committees. The Federal Register notice will not be filed until after
                  the charter has been filed, and will note that the committee has been renewed.
                  The renewal process begins no more than 90 and no less than 40 days before a
                  committee's scheduled termination date.

              8   TERMINATION OF A NONSTATUTORY ADVISORY COMMITTEE

                  a        A committee shall be terminated for the following reasons:

                           (1)     The charter has expired and the committee has not been
                           renewed or reestablished as provided in these regulations;

                           (2)      The committee has expended funds in excess of its estimated
                           annual operating costs by more than 10 percent or $500, whichever is
                           greater, without prior approval of the CMO;

                           (3)      The committee has not filed all reports required under
                           provisions of the Act or the Food and Agriculture Act of 1977, as
                           amended;

                           (4)      The committee has not met for two consecutive years;

                           (5)     The functions of the committee could or should be performed
                           by Federal employees; and



                                           7
DR 1041-001                                                                          February 8, 1993


                            (6)       The committee does not serve or has ceased to serve an
                            essential function.

              9    ESTABLISHMENT, REESTABLISHMENT, AND RENEWAL OF A
                   STATUTORY ADVISORY COMMITTEE

                   a         The filing of a charter is the only action required to establish,
                   reestablish, or renew a statutory advisory committee. The charter shall contain
                   the same information as required for a nonstatutory committee in Section
                   7b(1)(b), and shall be forwarded to OP, through OGC. OP is responsible for
                   obtaining Departmental clearances, signature, and filing.

                   b        For a statutory advisory committee whose duration is set by law for
                   more than two years, a new charter must be filed every two years after the date
                   of enactment of the law establishing the committee.

                   c        A statutory advisory committee whose duration is not otherwise
                   provided for by law shall terminate two years after the date of enactment of the
                   law establishing the committee. To reestablish such a committee, use the
                   procedures for nonstatutory committees listed in Section 7.

              10   MEMBERSHIP

                   a       General procedures. The following procedures apply to all advisory
                   committees:

                            (1)      The membership of a committee shall be fairly balanced in
                            terms of the points of view represented and the functions to be
                            performed. For purposes of obtaining balance, agencies shall consider
                            for membership a cross-section of interested persons and groups with
                            demonstrated professional or personal qualifications or experience to
                            contribute to the functions and tasks to be performed.

                            (2)      No member, other than an officer or employee of the
                            Department, shall serve on more than one committee at any one time
                            without the prior approval of the CMO. The Office of the Secretary will
                            notify the agency when a nominee is already serving on another
                            advisory committee. Requests for multiple memberships shall be
                            submitted through OP.

                            (3)      Not more than one officer or employee of any corporation or
                            other non-Federal entity, including its subsidiaries and affiliates, shall
                            serve on the same advisory committee at any one time without the prior
                            approval of the CMO. Requests shall be submitted through OP.

                            (4)       No member, other than an officer or employee of the
                            Department, may serve on an advisory committee for more than six
                            consecutive years without the prior approval of the CMO. Requests
                            shall be submitted through OP.

                            (5)      Appointments of members shall be for no longer than two
                            years or for the unexpired term of the member being replaced, as
                            appropriate.



                                             8
DR 1041-001                                                                   February 8, 1993


                    (6)      Committee appointments expire when the committee charter
                    expires except in those instances where length of membership term is
                    directed by law. The appointing authority, however, may terminate an
                    appointment at an earlier time. In this connection, agencies should
                    monitor the attendance and participation of committee members and
                    consider replacing any member who has missed a substantial number of
                    scheduled committee meetings.

              (7)   There shall be no discrimination on the basis of race, color, national
                    origin, religion, disability, age, or sex in the selection of members. If
                    the agency publishes a notice in the Federal Register soliciting
                    nominees for committee membership, the notice shall include the
                    following statement: "The USDA prohibits discrimination in all its
                    programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, age,
                    disability, and where applicable, sex, marital status, familial status,
                    parental status, religion, genetic information, political beliefs, reprisal,
                    or because all or part of an individual's income is derived from any
                    public assistance (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.).

                    Equal opportunity practices, in accordance with USDA policies, will
                    be followed in all membership appointments to the Committee. "

              (8)   In the event a committee is renewed or reestablished, new
                    appointments to the committee shall be necessary. New appointments
                    shall provide for rotation to the extent feasible and practicable.
                    Reappointments may be made to assure effectiveness and continuity of
                    operations consistent with the above restraints.

              (9)   It shall be the responsibility of the agency to insure that no person
                    selected as a member of a committee is engaged in employment or has
                    a financial interest which is deemed likely to affect the integrity of
                    his/her service on the committee.

              b     Compensation and expense reimbursement.

                             (1)       Unless specifically required by law or approved by
                             the CMO, agencies shall not compensate committee members
                             for their service on a committee.

                                         (a)       If compensation is mandated by statute, but
                                         the statute does not specify a rate of compensation,
                                         the agency shall recommend to the CMO the rate of
                                         pay for members. The recommendation shall be
                                         forwarded through OP. If approved, OP will notify
                                         the agency.

                                         (b)       If compensation is not mandated by statute
                                         and the agency desires to pay members, the request
                                         shall be forwarded to the CMO through OP. The
                                         request shall include justification for such payment
                                         and the proposed rate of pay. If approved, OP will
                                         notify the agency.

                                         (c)       The rate of pay in either (a) or (b) above
                                         shall not exceed the daily equivalent of the maximum
                                         rate of pay for GS-15.
                                     9
DR 1041-001                                                                    February 8, 1993


                                (2)       An agency may fix the pay of each committee staff
                                member at a rate of the General Schedule, General Merit
                                Schedule, or Senior Executive Service in which the staff
                                member's position is appropriately placed (see Chapter 51 of
                                Title 5 of the U.S. Code).

                                (3)      An agency may not fix the pay of a staff member at a
                                rate higher than the daily equivalent of the maximum rate for
                                GS-15, unless it has been determined by the CMO that the
                                position would be appropriately placed at a higher grade under
                                one of the above classification systems. Once such a
                                determination has been made, the agency shall annually
                                forward for review by the CMO documentation supporting the
                                higher pay rate.

                                (4)      In establishing rates of compensation, the agency
                                head shall comply with applicable statutes, regulations, and
                                Executive Orders.

                                (5)      A staff member who is a Federal employee shall
                                serve with the knowledge of the designated Federal official
                                and approval of the employee's direct supervisor. If a non-
                                Federal employee, the staff member shall be appointed in
                                accordance with applicable agency procedures, following
                                consultation with the committee.

              c         Consultants. An agency shall fix the pay of a consultant to an advisory
              committee after giving consideration to the qualifications required of the
              consultant and the significance, scope, and technical complexity of the work.
              The rate of compensation may not exceed the daily equivalent of the maximum
              rate for GS-15.

              d         Travel expenses. Committee members and staff members, while
              engaged in the performance of their duties away from their homes or regular
              places of business, may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of
              subsistence, as authorized by 5 U.S.C. 5703 for persons employed intermittently
              in Government service. Such payments for an alternate member of a committee
              shall be allowed only when the alternate member is attending a meeting in that
              capacity.

              e       Special services. While performing committee duties, a committee
              member who is blind or deaf, or who qualifies as a disabled individual, may be
              provided services by a personal assistant for disabled employees if the member:

                       (1)     Qualifies as a disabled individual as defined by Section 501 of
                       the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794); and

                       (2)     Does not otherwise qualify for assistance under 5 U.S.C. 3102
                       as an employee of an agency.




                                        10
DR 1041-001                                                                          February 8, 1993


              11   CLEARANCE OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS

                   a       Policy. A background clearance is required for all proposed committee
                   members to be appointed by the Secretary, except those who are Federal
                   employees.

                   b        Procedure.

                            (1)       Four copies of Form AD-755, Advisory Committee
                            Membership Background Information (Appendix G), shall be
                            submitted to the Office of the Secretary for each proposed committee
                            member. Clearance procedures will not be instituted if the biographical
                            data is insufficient to permit a background review. In particular, any
                            source of income in excess of $10,000 during the preceding year (other
                            than from the individual's primary employment), must be reported as a
                            major source of income.

                            (2)      The above procedures shall be used for both existing and
                            prospective members when an advisory committee's charter is being
                            renewed or reestablished, whether or not biographical information had
                            been submitted on the individual in the past.

              12   APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS

                   a       Authority. National and/or statutory committee members shall be
                   appointed by the Secretary. Regional, State and local committee members shall
                   be appointed by the agency official responsible for the committee unless
                   determined otherwise by the CMO.

                   b        Invitation to serve on a national committee. Letters of invitation shall
                   be prepared by the agency for the signature of the Secretary, and shall include:

                            (1)     Purpose, objectives, and expected accomplishments of the
                            committee;

                            (2)      Name of the chairperson;

                            (3)      Frequency of meetings, if known;

                            (4)      Location of meetings, if known;

                            (5)      Travel and per diem allowances, if applicable; and

                            (6)      Expiration date of appointment.

                            The agency shall provide appropriate follow-up where a letter of
                            invitation has been issued and no response is received within 21 days of
                            the date the invitation was mailed.

                   c        Certificates of appointment.




                                             11
DR 1041-001                                                                         February 8, 1993


                           (1)    For national committees, Form AD-580, Certificate of
                           Appointment, signed by the Secretary, shall be presented to each
                           member (see Appendix H).

                           (2)      The certificates may be requisitioned from the Consolidated
                           Forms and Publications Distribution Center. The agency shall arrange
                           for presentation of the certificates either by mail at the time of
                           appointment, or at the next meeting of the committee.

              13   MEETINGS

                   a        General. All committee meetings shall be subject to the following
                   provisions.

                            (1)    No meeting shall be held except at the call of, or with the
                           advance approval of, the designated Departmental official, and with an
                           agenda approved by that official.

                           (2)      Committees shall meet under the chairpersonship of, or in the
                           presence of, a designated Departmental official who shall have the
                           authority and be required to adjourn any meeting whenever he/she
                           considers adjournment to be in the public interest. No committee shall
                           conduct a meeting in the absence of the Departmental official
                           designated in the charter to chair or attend the meeting.

                           (3)       The Department shall maintain an open-door policy with
                           respect to meetings. Meetings will be open to the public except when a
                           determination is made by the Secretary, in writing, that any or all
                           portions of a meeting should be closed in accordance with 5 U.S.C.
                           552b(c).

                           (4)       If an agency seeks to have all or part of a meeting closed on
                           the basis of an exemption contained in 5 U.S.C. 552b(c), the agency
                           shall prepare a determination for the Secretary's signature. The
                           determination shall state that it is essential to close a portion(s) of the
                           meeting and the specific reasons for this action. The determination shall
                           be accompanied by an explanation of the reasons why the meeting
                           should be closed. The determination and accompanying explanation
                           shall be forwarded to the CMO, through OGC and OP, at least 45 days
                           before the scheduled meeting.

                           (5)     The closing of a meeting or any portion of a meeting may be
                           reviewed by the CMO after the meeting is held. If it is determined that
                           a meeting or any portion thereof was closed inappropriately, corrective
                           action may be taken.

                           (6)      Notice of all meetings, both open and closed, shall be
                           published in the Federal Register at least 15, but no more than 45
                           calendar days prior to the meeting. Shorter notice may be authorized by
                           the Secretariat for good cause or in emergency situations. The reasons
                           for such emergency exceptions shall be made part of the meeting
                           notice.




                                            12
DR 1041-001                                                           February 8, 1993


              (7)       The agency shall be responsible for preparation of the notice
              and submitting it to the Federal Register through OGC. The agency
              shall start processing a meeting notice at least 45 days before the
              scheduled meeting date to allow for clearance within the Department
              and handling time at the Federal Register. The notice shall contain:

                       (a)      The name of the advisory committee;

                       (b)      The time, date, place, and purpose of the meeting,
                       including a summary of the agenda or the name of the person
                       from whom it may be obtained;

                       (c)      The extent to which the public will be permitted to
                       attend or participate in the meeting;

                       (d)     A statement that the meeting is open or, if the
                       meeting is to be closed, an explanation of why it is closed; and

                        (e)   The name and address of the person to whom written
                       comments may be made.

              (8)       A press release announcing a national committee meeting
              shall be prepared by the agency and forwarded to the Office of Public
              Affairs at least 15 days prior to the meeting. That Office will make the
              release available to the media. Releases announcing regional, State, and
              local committee meetings will be furnished by the agency to the local
              media.

              (9)       With regard to an open or partially open meeting, the agency
              shall be responsible for the following:

                       (a)       The meeting shall be held at a reasonable time and at
                       a place that is reasonably accessible to the public;

                       (b)      The size of the meeting room shall be large enough to
                       accommodate the committee members, the staff, and members
                       of the public who could reasonably be expected to attend;

                       (c)      Any member of the public shall be permitted to file a
                       written statement with the committee before or within a
                       reasonable time following the meeting; and

                       (d)      Interested persons may be permitted by the
                       committee chairperson to speak at the meeting in accordance
                       with procedures established by the committee.

              (10)     Detailed minutes shall be kept of all meetings. The
              chairperson or designated Department official shall certify the accuracy
              of the minutes, which shall include at least the following:

                       (a)      The time, date, and place of the meeting;




                              13
DR 1041-001                                                            February 8, 1993


                       (b)    A list of committee members, committee staff, and
                       Department employees present;

                       (c)      An accurate description of each matter discussed and
                       the resolution, if any, made by the committee of such matter;

                       (d)      Copies of all reports or other documents received,
                       issued, or approved by the committee;

                       (e)      A description of the extent to which the meeting was
                       open to the public; and

                       (f)      A description of public participation, including a list
                       of members of the public who presented oral or written
                       statements, and an estimate of the number who attended the
                       meeting.

              (11)      The records, reports, transcripts, working papers, etc., of all
              open committee meetings shall be available for public inspection and
              copying. If a portion of a meeting is closed, the minutes of the open
              portion shall be available to the public. If meetings are entirely or
              partially closed, the agency shall prepare at least annually a summary
              report of its activities and such related matters as would be informative
              to the public. No later than December 31, the agency shall prepare a
              Federal Register notice of availability of the report, including
              instructions which allow the public access to the report.

              (12)     Committee records shall be maintained for the life of the
              committee and then disposed of in accordance with the agency's
              records disposal schedule.

              (13)     If transcripts are made of a meeting, they shall be available
              within a reasonable period of time following the meeting.

              (14)     Advice or recommendations of the committee shall be given
              only with respect to matters covered in the record of the committee's
              proceedings.

              (15)     If, in lieu of a meeting, recommendations of committee
              members are solicited by mail or telephone, the agency shall publish a
              notice in the Federal Register, no later than the date the
              recommendations are sought. The notice shall fully describe the matter
              to be considered. The notice shall also include:

                       (a)     Instructions to the public on how to file their views
                       on the matter with the agency;

                       (b)      A statement that the request and any responses
                       received will be available for public inspection and copying;
                       and

                       (c)      The location where these records will be maintained.




                               14
DR 1041-001                                                                          February 8, 1993


                            (16)      A report for each committee where members'
                            recommendations are solicited in this manner will be prepared at least
                            annually by the agency. No later than December 31, the agency shall
                            prepare a Federal Register notice of availability of this report, including
                            instructions which allow the public access to the report.

              14   DISCLOSURE OF OFFICIAL INFORMATION TO PUBLIC MEMBERS

                   Certain types of information classified under security regulations, or specifically
                   restricted by law or Presidential directive, may not be disclosed to members of
                   advisory committees. However, material otherwise restricted as "FOR
                   OFFICIAL USE ONLY" may, in some circumstances, be made available when
                   essential to the transaction of committee business. When making material
                   available to committee members, it must be clearly understood that all material
                   presented for review at an open meeting is available for public inspection and
                   copying. Therefore, good judgment must be exercised to assure that presentation
                   of information is essential and that risk of consequences adverse to the public
                   interest has been carefully weighed.

              15   REPORTING AND RECORDS

                   a        External reporting requirements.

                            (1)       The Department shall submit a report on each advisory
                            committee to the Secretariat in the manner and format required by the
                            Secretariat, for preparation of the annual report required by the Act.
                            Instructions and forms for preparing the report shall be issued by OP.

                            (2)       For each nonstatutory advisory committee, the Department
                            shall submit an annual report to the appropriate committees of
                            Congress and the Library of Congress as required by Title XVIII of the
                            Food and Agriculture Act of 1977, as amended. Data for this report
                            shall be prepared in accordance with guidelines furnished by OP.

                   b        Reports issued by committees.

                            (1)      All reports and recommendations issued by a committee shall
                            be in written form. The agency shall maintain copies of such reports
                            and/or recommendations, and a written record of any responses made
                            by the Department to the committee's recommendations.

                            (2)      When a report or recommendation is issued to the Secretary
                            by a committee, the agency shall forward eight copies to the Library of
                            Congress, Exchange and Gift Division, Federal Advisory Committee
                            Desk, Washington, D.C. 20540. Excluded from this requirement are
                            minutes of meetings, materials exempt under 5 U.S.C. 552b(c), reports
                            prepared for submission to the Secretariat, and the report prepared in
                            compliance with Title XVIII of the Food and Agriculture Act of 1977,
                            as amended. Background papers prepared for the committee's use may
                            also be provided to the Library of Congress, if deemed appropriate.




                                             15
DR 1041-001                                                                   February 8, 1993




              c       Committee control system.

                      1)        Each agency sponsoring a committee shall provide support
                      services for that committee. The Secretary shall designate the agency
                      that will provide support services for committees established or
                      authorized by law.

                      (2)      The agency head shall designate an official to be responsible
                      for maintaining central control records of all committees which the
                      agency sponsors or for which it provides support services. The
                      information shall be current at all times and agencies shall be prepared
                      to furnish such information upon request.

              d       Submission of Form AD-241, Committee Control Record.

                      (1)      Each agency, through its committee management official,
                      must submit one copy of Form AD-241 (Appendix A) to OP within 15
                      days of the initial appointment of a new committee. Changes in
                      members or related data must be reported on Form AD-241 within 15
                      days of the change.

                      (2)      OP shall maintain this information in a data base for use in
                      preparing the membership portion of the annual report referred to in
                      Section 15a above.

              e        Other records. In addition to Form AD-241, agencies shall maintain
              copies of the following:

                      (1)      Committee charter;

                      (2)      Minutes of committee proceedings;

                      (3)      Press releases and committee reports;

                      (4)     Secretarial determinations under 5 U.S.C. 552b(c) that
                      committee activities will be closed to the public; and

                      (5)    Any other working papers properly a part of committee or
                      subcommittee records.

              f       Financial recordkeeping and reporting.

                      (1)       Funds for non-Forest Service committees are included in the
                      Departmental Administration budget and are allocated by the CMO to
                      the appropriate Under or Assistant Secretary. That official is
                      responsible for distributing funds to the agencies within his/her
                      jurisdiction that sponsor committees.

                      (2)      Committee expenses shall not exceed the estimate in the
                      charter by the greater of $500 or 10 percent, without prior approval of



                                       16
DR 1041-001                                                           February 8, 1993


              the CMO. Agencies shall request approval by sending a written
              justification to the CMO through OP.

              (3)       Each agency, through the responsible official, shall maintain
              up-to-date records that disclose the disposition of funds made available
              to its advisory committees. The records shall be available for inspection
              and audit by the Department and/or the General Accounting Office.

              (4)     Agencies shall report amounts expended to OFM in
              accordance with instructions from that Office.




                              17
