                                       U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                          Washington, D.C. 20250


                                                                                               Number:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                                        1044-003

SUBJECT: Interagency, Departmental, Agency and                          DATE:
Liaison Membership Committees                                           August 24, 1984

                                                                        OPI: Grain Storage, Handling, and
                                                                        Processing Safety Program




1     PURPOSE

                This regulation provides procedures for the establishment, operation and duration of all
                committees, except advisory committees, under the jurisdiction of the Department. It also
                covers Department liaison members on other committees.




2     POLICY

                It will be the policy of the Department to maintain control over the establishment and use
                of all committees. The number of such committees will be held at the absolute minimum
                required for effective program operation and compliance with various provisions of law.




3 DEFINITIONS

                As used herein, terms are defined as follows:

                 a       Agency committee. Any committee composed exclusively of members from a
                single agency of the Department.

                b        Committee. Any committee, subcommittee, board, commission or body other
                than an advisory committee as defined in section 3 of this regulation.

                c        Departmental committee. Any committee composed exclusively of
                representatives of two or more agencies of the Department.

                d         Interagency committee. Any committee made up wholly of full-time Federal
                officers or employees of more than one department or agency.

                e        Liaison membership. Departmental representation by the Secretary or his/her
                designated representative on committees, councils, boards and similar bodies established
DR 1044-003                                                                              August 24, 1984


              by law, Executive Order or by Presidential direction and not sponsored by the
              Department. Such membership may relate to international, Government or
              nongovernment activities, but excludes association with professional, fraternal, civil or
              similar types of nongovernment groups.




4      RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE DEPARTMENT

              a        The Assistant Secretary for Administration is the Committee Management
              Officer of the Department who is responsible for:

                                (1)       Exercising control and supervision over the establishment,
                                procedures and accomplishments of all committees under the
                                jurisdiction of the Department.

                                (2)       Assigning responsibility for the assembling and maintenance
                                of the reports, records and other papers of committees during their
                                existence.

              b     The Office of Personnel provides staff assistance for the Committee
              Management Officer by:

                                (1)     Maintaining systematic information on the nature, functions
                                and operations of each Department committee.

                                (2)       Providing advice and guidance on the establishment,
                                utilization, management and reporting of all types of committees
                                throughout the Department.




5      RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE AGENCIES

              The head of each agency engaged in committee activity will be responsible for providing
              an orderly procedure for:

              a        Establishing or terminating committees and providing guidelines for the
              selection of members.

              b        Adhering to law and regulations governing the use of committees.

              c       Designating for each committee a central location for the assembling and
              maintenance of the reports, records and other papers of the committees. d Periodic review
              of committee activities.

              e        Maintenance of an adequate committee control system, including maintaining
              records of:

                                (1)      All interagency committees which the agency has established
                                or chairs.




                                                  2
DR 1044-003                                                                            August 24, 1984


                               (2)      All Departmental committees which the agency has
                               established or chairs.

                               (3) All agency committees.

                                (4)    All liaison memberships held by officials or employees of an
                               agency as designees of the Secretary for committees not established or
                               sponsored by the Department.




6      ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMITTEES

              a        Committees may be established which have public members but do not perform
              an advisory function (e.g., Honor Awards Committee). Agencies desiring to establish
              such a committee will consult with the Committee Management Officer and prepare a
              Secretary's Memorandum. Members are required to receive clearance (section 9 of this
              regulation). No charter is required.

              b       Interagency committees. Interagency committees will be established only after
              exchange of letters between the participating departments and/or agencies. A Secretary's
              Memorandum will be prepared to formalize or publicize committee activities of major
              importance. No charter is required.

              c        Departmental committees. Other Departmental committees may be authorized
              by the sponsoring agency in accordance with agency regulations.

              d       Agency committees. Agency regulations will provide for the establishment,
              conduct and termination of agency committees.




7      COMMITTEE CONTROL SYSTEM

              Each agency head will designate an official to be responsible for the maintenance of
              central control records of all Departmental, agency and interagency committees which the
              agency sponsors or provides support services for, including liaison memberships. Such
              records will be kept current at all times and will include:

              a       Minutes of committee proceedings.

              b       Copies of press releases and committee reports.

              c        Any other working papers properly a part of committee or subcommittee
              records. Agencies will be prepared to furnish information on these committees upon
              request. Each agency sponsoring a committee will provide the support services for that
              committee.




8      LIAISON MEMBERSHIP POLICY AND PROCEDURE




                                                 3
DR 1044-003                                                                               August 24, 1984


              a        The Secretary may, at his/her discretion, designate a representative and alternate
              representative to bodies on which the Department maintains liaison membership. Only
              such authorized representatives or alternates as the Secretary designates may attend
              meetings of such bodies for the Department. The delegation of authority to represent the
              Department provided to the Secretary's representative and alternate may not be
              redelegated.

              b        When it is impossible for either the representative or alternate to attend the
              regular meetings of these bodies, the Office of the Secretary should be notified in
              sufficient time to make necessary arrangements.

              c         When the Secretary's representative and alternate on a Government-wide
              council, commission or similar body are officials of the Office of the Secretary, the
              representative and the alternate will notify the Committee Management Officer of their
              designation. The Office of Personnel will provide the Committee Management Officer
              with all necessary staff assistance.

              d        When the Secretary's representative and alternate are agency officials, the
              representative's agency will carry out the following procedure:

                                (1)      Prepare a letter for the Secretary's signature informing the
                                chairperson, executive director or similar appropriate official of the
                                body in question of the designation of the Department's representative
                                and alternate.

                                (2)     Route the materials to the Office of Personnel for appropriate
                                review and clearance.

                                (3)      Maintain a current listing of all such liaison memberships held
                                by agency officials. If an agency official can no longer maintain such a
                                liaison membership, immediately inform the Office of Personnel so that
                                action to appoint. a new representative may be taken.




9      CLEARANCE OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS

              a        Policy. A background clearance is required for all proposed committee members
              to be appointed by the Secretary except those who are Federal employees.

              b        Procedures.

                                (1)       The agency will submit for each prospective appointee a
                                biographical sheet showing, at a minimum, the person's name, social
                                security number, residence address, place of birth, date of birth,
                                employer and occupation and/or title. Clearance procedures will not be
                                instituted if biographical data is insufficient to permit a complete
                                background review.

                                (2)      Four copies of the above information will be sent to the Office
                                of the Secretary.




                                                  4
