                             U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                   WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                           NUMBER:
                                                                   DR 1020-006
 SUBJECT: Public Access to Scholarly Publications and              DATE:
 Digital Scientific Research Data                                  April 7, 2026
 OPI: Office of the Chief Scientist                                EXPIRATION DATE:
                                                                   April 7, 2031



Section                                                                                       Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                     1
2.   Scope                                                                                       2
3.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                          3
4.   Background                                                                                  5
5.   Policy                                                                                      7
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                                 12
7.   Policy Exceptions                                                                          16
8.   Inquiries                                                                                  17

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                        A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                       B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                        C-1


1. PURPOSE

     a.   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of
          Agriculture (USDA) policy for public access to scholarly publications and digital
          scientific research data assets. The USDA will make all peer-reviewed, scholarly
          publications and digital scientific research data assets arising from unclassified scientific
          research supported wholly or in part by the USDA accessible to the public, to the extent
          practicable and in keeping with enhanced research security to protect our agricultural
          research enterprise from foreign influence.

     b.   Publicly accessible scientific research products contribute to opportunities for
          collaboration, innovation, and scientific progress. Public access to USDA-supported
          scholarly publications and digital scientific research data assets helps maintain the
          integrity, credibility, and transparency of the Department’s research findings and
          science-based public policymaking. This DR provides a policy for Departmental
          leadership and employees to ensure that scholarly publications and digital scientific
          research data assets are preserved, accessible by default, and citable.
2. SCOPE

  a.   This policy applies to:

       (1) All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices;

       (2) All USDA employees who engage in scientific research during official duties,
           where employee has the meaning given that term in 5 United States Code (U.S.C.)
           2105;

       (3) Former USDA employees who engaged in scientific research during official duties;
           and

       (4) Awardees, contractors, and individuals from non-USDA organizations who are
           engaged in USDA-supported scientific research. This includes but is not limited to
           states, localities, regulated parties, volunteer organizations, contractors, cooperative
           agreement holders, grantees, cooperating Federal Government agencies,
           intergovernmental organizations, and educational institutions.

  b.   This policy applies to all unclassified scientific research, including intramural research
       and extramural research, that is supported wholly or in part by the USDA, regardless of
       the USDA funding level or funding mechanism. This includes scientific research that is
       supported by:

       (1) Any direct funding from a USDA grant or cooperative agreement active in Fiscal
           Year 2023 or beyond;

       (2) Any direct funding from a USDA contract signed on or after October 1, 2022; or

       (3) Any direct funding or arrangement, including in-kind support, from any USDA
           intramural research on or after October 1, 2022.

  c.   Any express requirements will be set forth in individual agreements, contracts,
       statements of work, memoranda of understanding, terms and conditions, or established
       via issuance of a separate rule or other Departmental policy.

  d.   This policy governs access to the results of USDA-funded research approved for public
       release; it does not replace applicable requirements and restrictions on research awards,
       research conduct, or publication approvals.




                                                  2
3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This regulation supersedes DR 1020-006, Public Access to Scholarly Publications and
       Digital Scientific Research Data, dated July 20, 2022.

  b.   Relative to the previously issued version of DR 1020-006, this revision:

       (1) Removes the optional 12-month embargo period for accepted manuscripts. On or
           after April 7, 2026, accepted manuscripts must be submitted as soon as possible
           after acceptance, and no later than the date on which the publisher makes the article
           available online or publishes the book chapter;

       (2) Removes the optional 12-month embargo period for digital scientific research data
           assets. On or after April 7, 2026, digital scientific research data assets must be
           made publicly accessible on or before the date the associated publication is
           published online, or at the end of the performance or funding period, whichever
           comes first;

       (3) Removes the optional 12-month embargo period for making a standardized
           metadata catalog entry accessible on the Ag Data Commons. On or after April 7,
           2026, a standardized metadata catalog entry for data assets covered by this policy
           must be submitted to the Ag Data Commons no later than the date of publication of
           a data asset by a repository;

       (4) Changes the term “final peer‐reviewed accepted manuscript” to “accepted
           manuscript” to be consistent with standard terminology used by other agencies and
           industry;

       (5) Expands public access requirements to now apply to book chapters;

       (6) Changes the term “data management plans” to “data management and sharing
           plans” to align with terminology used by other federal agencies;

       (7) Reorganizes Section 5 to compile all digital persistent identifier requirements into a
           single subsection;

       (8) Adds digital persistent identifier requirements for peer-reviewed book chapters,
           preprints, and USDA-published scientific reports;

       (9) Updates list of associated scientific research products for which authors are
           encouraged to obtain digital persistent identifiers to include extension publications;

       (10) Adds requirement for researchers that in the profile for their digital persistent
            identifier (e.g., ORCID profile), works subject to this policy must be visibly listed
            for public review;



                                                  3
(11) Adds reference to data collected about Tribal nations’ citizens, lands, and resources
     that are not authorized by Tribal nations to be made publicly available to the list of
     digital scientific research data assets exempt from public access requirements;

(12) Adds requirements for custom-developed code assets in response to the 2024
     Source code Harmonization And Reuse in Information Technology Act (Public Law
     (P.L.) 118-187), also known as the SHARE IT Act;

(13) Adds reference to the following:

    (a) Executive Order (EO) 13960, Promoting the Use of Trustworthy Artificial
        Intelligence in the Federal Government (2020);

    (b) National Security Presidential Memorandum 33 (NSPM-33), Presidential
        Memorandum on United States Government-Supported Research and
        Development National Security Policy (2021);

    (c) EO 14117, Preventing Access to Americans' Bulk Sensitive Personal Data and
        United States Government-Related Data by Countries of Concern (2024);

    (d) Protecting Americans' Data from Foreign Adversaries Act (P.L. 118-50;
        2024);

    (e) 28 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 202, Preventing Access to U.S.
        Sensitive Personal Data and Government-Related Data by Countries of
        Concern or Covered Persons (2025);

    (f) EO 14292, Improving the Safety and Security of Biological Research (2025);

    (g) Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) memorandum, Agency
        Guidance for Implementing Gold Standard Science in the Conduct &
        Management of Scientific Activities (2025);

    (h) EO 14303, Restoring Gold Standard Science (2025); and

    (i) EO 14363, Launching the Genesis Mission (2025).

(14) Removes reference to the revoked Presidential Memorandum of January 27, 2021,
     Restoring Trust in Government Through Scientific Integrity and Evidence-Based
     Policymaking;

(15) Clarifies in Section 2 the meaning of employee and adds the word “individuals" to
     those in scope of this policy at non-USDA organizations who are engaged in
     USDA-supported scientific research;




                                          4
       (16) Adds statement to Section 2 to indicate that this DR does not replace other
            restrictions on research awards or activity;

       (17) Updates USDA Agency Administrators’ and Staff Office Directors’ roles and
            responsibilities to include providing guidance and training to agency employees
            who are covered by the scope of this DR, including in all applicable notices of
            funding reference to this DR along with relevant related requirements to be
            addressed in applications, and supporting accessible data-sharing platforms, and
            ensuring rigorous public release processes;

       (18) Adds information about using the waiver process for scholarly publications in
            journals that do not allow authors to meet the requirements of this policy;

       (19) Adds definitions of custom source code, preprint, scientific reports, and source
            code; and

       (20) Updates definitions of data management and sharing plan, digital persistent
            identifier, final published article, scholarly publication, scientific research, Tribal
            nation, and version of record.

  c.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their policies and procedures
       with this DR within 12 months of the publication date.

  d.   This policy will remain in effect until it is superseded or expires.


4. BACKGROUND

  a.   The White House OSTP directed Federal agencies that fund research to develop plans to
       make the results of federally funded unclassified research that are published in peer-
       reviewed publications and associated digitally formatted scientific data publicly
       accessible (Increasing Access to the Results of Federally Funded Scientific Research
       (2013). The objectives laid out in the OSTP memorandum was developed with input
       from the National Science and Technology Council and public consultation in
       compliance with the America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010 (P.L. 111-358).

  b.   The USDA Science Council established governing policies that all peer-reviewed
       scholarly publications (USDA Public Access Policy for Scholarly Publications) and
       digital scientific research data assets (USDA Public Access Policy for Digital Scientific
       Research Data) arising from unclassified scientific research and programs supported
       wholly or in part by the USDA be made publicly accessible to the extent practicable.
       This DR combines and promulgates the two USDA Science Council policies on public
       access, which are superseded by publication of this DR.

  c.   DR 1074-001, Scientific Integrity, documents the Department’s policy to make scientific
       findings or conclusions considered or relied on in policy decisions publicly accessible

                                                   5
     online and in open formats, to the extent practicable, consistent with the Memorandum
     on Transparency and Open Government (2009), the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA;
     1967), the Administrative Procedure Act (1946), and other applicable statutes,
     regulations or document-handling procedures and policies.

d.   Title II of the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018 (P.L. 115-
     435), also known as the OPEN Government Data Act, requires that Federal agencies
     publish their information online as open data, using standardized, machine-readable
     formats. USDA considers digital scientific research data assets published by Federal
     agencies to be subject to Title II.

e.   In alignment with Executive Order (EO) 13960, Promoting the Use of Trustworthy
     Artificial Intelligence in the Federal Government (2020), this policy ensures
     transparency of data and code associated with research involving AI.

f.   In alignment with the principles outlined in National Security Presidential Memorandum
     33 (NSPM-33; 2021), this directive recognizes the dual imperative of promoting open
     scientific collaboration and protecting the integrity of United States Government-
     supported research and development. NSPM-33 underscores the importance of securing
     federally funded research against foreign exploitation while preserving the transparency
     and accessibility that underpin American innovation.

g.   In alignment with 28 CFR part 202, Preventing Access to U.S. Sensitive Personal Data
     and Government-Related Data by Countries of Concern or Covered Persons, EO 14117,
     Preventing Access to Americans' Bulk Sensitive Personal Data and United States
     Government-Related Data by Countries of Concern (2024), and the Protecting
     Americans' Data from Foreign Adversaries Act (P.L. 118-50; 2024), this directive
     recognizes the lack of data reciprocity and national security risks posed by data
     repositories hosted, funded, or controlled by foreign countries of concern that must be
     balanced with public access to digital scientific research data.

h.   The 2024 Source code Harmonization And Reuse in Information Technology Act (P.L.
     118-187), also known as the SHARE IT Act (2024), requires that custom-developed
     code—meaning source code created under a federal contract, fully funded by the
     government, or created by federal employees as part of their official work—along with
     key technical elements like architecture and metadata, must be:

     (1) Owned by the agency;

     (2) Stored in a public or private repository; and

     (3) Accessible to federal staff following specific procedures.

i.   In alignment with EO 14292, Improving the Safety and Security of Biological Research
     (2025), this policy supports the federal government’s commitment to ensuring that
     publicly funded research does not compromise national security or public health. EO

                                               6
       14292 directs agencies to strengthen oversight of biological research, particularly gain-
       of-function studies, and to halt funding for high-risk projects conducted in foreign
       countries of concern. While this policy promotes transparency and public access to
       USDA-supported scientific outputs, it does so in a manner that is fully compatible with
       EO 14292’s safeguards.

  j.   The White House OSTP directed federal agencies in accordance with EO 14303,
       Restoring Gold Standard Science (2025), to implement nine tenets of Gold Standard
       Science (Agency Guidance for Implementation Gold Standard Science in the Conduct &
       Management of Scientific Activities (2025)). The OSTP guidance emphasizes the
       importance of “open, accessible, and comprehensive sharing of all components of the
       research process—methodologies, data, analytical tools, and findings—to enable
       stringent scrutiny, validation, and reuse by the scientific community and the public.”
       The Department issued SM-1078-013 (Responding to and Implementing Gold Standard
       Science at the U.S. Department of Agriculture) to direct employees accordingly.

  k.   USDA public access repositories can support Executive Order 14363, Launching the
       Genesis Mission (2025).


5. POLICY

  a.   It is USDA policy to provide public access to all scholarly publications and digital
       scientific research data assets that arise from USDA-supported scientific research
       meeting the criteria in Section 2b, to the extent practicable. USDA also encourages and,
       in many cases, requires the sharing of custom-developed code as described in Section
       5d. These requirements do not affect the assignment of copyright.

  b.   USDA-supported scholarly publications shall not be published in journals using
       predatory practices or whose publisher has editorial offices managed, owned, controlled,
       or physically or virtually located in, or operated out of, a foreign country of concern.

  c.   Accepted manuscripts must be made freely accessible to the public through the USDA
       public access archive system (PubAg, hosted by the National Agricultural Library
       (NAL)). A final published article may be submitted to PubAg in lieu of the accepted
       manuscript, provided the author has the right to submit the published version (e.g., open
       access articles). Scholarly publications should follow USDA’s Publications Review and
       Clearance Policy (DR 1410-001) by acknowledging and disclosing the public funding of
       the published work by USDA along with any other sources of funding.

       (1) Public access through PubAg must be established within 12 months of the date on
           which the publisher makes the final published article available online if published
           from October 1, 2022 to April 6, 2026.

       (2) On or after April 7, 2026, accepted manuscripts must be submitted to PubAg as
           soon as possible after acceptance, and no later than the date on which the publisher

                                                 7
         makes the final published article available online or publishes the book chapter, so
         that USDA can provide public access without embargo.

d.   For digital scientific research data assets that meet the criteria in Section 2b:

     (1) All scientific research expected to produce digital scientific research data assets
         must be accompanied by a reviewed and approved data management and sharing
         plan consistent with agency or staff office policies and procedures if they exist, or
         Departmental guidance if they do not. The data management and sharing plan must
         describe how digital scientific research data assets applicable under Section 5c(2)
         will be made publicly accessible and indicate any categories of digital scientific
         research data assets that are exempt from public access requirements.

     (2) Digital scientific research data assets should be made publicly accessible to the
         extent practicable. Computational models, such as artificial intelligence models,
         and computational model-related content (including but not limited to parameters,
         inputs, outputs, and other derived output products) are covered in Section 5d.
         Digital scientific research data assets that are not required to be made publicly
         accessible under this DR include:

         (a) Data from secondary sources (i.e., data that are not collected by or modified
             through USDA-supported research;

         (b) Data that would not be necessary for validation of scientific research findings
             (i.e., trivial data);

         (c) Data assets that include personally identifiable information or other
             information that could enable re-identification of individuals or businesses,
             alone or in combination with other publicly available information;

         (d) Proprietary data assets;

         (e) Data assets related to protecting critical infrastructure;

         (f) Data assets related to the physical location of threatened or endangered species
             or sensitive archaeological sites;

         (g) Data assets for which release would be inconsistent with U.S. national,
             homeland, or economic security or would have significant negative impact on
             intellectual property rights, innovation, and U.S. competitiveness, e.g. gain-of-
             function research;

         (h) Data assets for which public access is inconsistent with the agency or staff
             office mission (e.g., documents designated as Controlled Unclassified
             Information (CUI));



                                                 8
    (i) Other data assets whose release is limited by law, regulation, contract,
        agreement, national security requirements, or policy (e.g., classified data or
        dual-use research data);

    (j) Data covered by a FOIA exemption; and

    (k) Data that would violate Tribal nations’ data sovereignty including data
        collected about their citizens, lands, and resources that is not authorized by
        Tribal nations to be made publicly available, in accordance with any applicable
        Tribal codes or resolutions.

(3) Digital scientific research data assets covered by public access requirements must be
    published in a machine-readable format by a data repository that is recognized by
    reputable registries.

(4) Data repositories at a minimum must provide:

    (a) Public access for search, retrieval, and analysis;

    (b) A digital persistent identifier, such as a DOI;

    (c) Long-term preservation of the data asset; and

    (d) The above capabilities while not being hosted, funded, or controlled by a
        foreign country of concern or a foreign government-connected entity from a
        foreign country of concern.

(5) Digital scientific research data assets covered by public access requirements must be
    made publicly accessible as soon as possible. The timeline for making all digital
    scientific research data assets publicly accessible must be described in the approved
    data management and sharing plan. Public access to digital scientific research data
    assets must be achieved during this timeframe unless a waiver or extension has been
    obtained following the procedure described in Section 7b.

    (a) From October 1, 2022 to April 6, 2026, public access to digital scientific
        research data assets covered by this policy must be established within 12
        months of the date on which the publisher makes the associated article available
        online, or at the end of the performance or funding period, whichever comes
        first.

    (b) On or after April 7, 2026, public access to digital scientific research data assets
        covered by this policy must be established by the date on which the publisher
        makes the associated article available online or publishes the book chapter, or at
        the end of the performance or funding period, whichever comes first.




                                          9
     (6) A standardized metadata catalog entry (e.g., using a Project Open Data Metadata
         Schema) that is machine-readable, references the USDA funding source(s), and
         describes the digital scientific research data asset must be submitted to the publicly
         available USDA scientific data catalog system (Ag Data Commons, hosted by the
         NAL). The metadata catalog entry must include the digital persistent identifiers of
         the data authors, the published digital scientific research data asset, and any
         associated research products described in Section 5e(6) where available.

         (a) From October 1, 2022 to April 6, 2026, a standardized metadata catalog entry
             for data assets covered by this policy must be accessible within 12 months
             following the publication of a data asset by a repository.

         (b) On or after April 7, 2026, a standardized metadata catalog entry for data assets
             covered by this policy must be submitted to the Ag Data Commons no later
             than the date of publication of a data asset by a repository.

e.   For custom-developed code assets that meet the criteria in Section 2 and were developed
     or revised after June 21, 2025, or initially created under contracts awarded after June 21,
     2025, that are or will be deployed into a USDA information system:

     (1) All custom-developed code assets and other key technical components of the code
         (including documentation, data models, schemas, metadata, and architecture
         designs) must be stored or have an updated copy in a USDA-managed source code
         repository and made accessible at a minimum to federal employees, though USDA
         encourages sharing the source code publicly when practicable. Shared code within
         scope of this policy will not bear any requirement or responsibility for on-going
         support, updates, patching, or obligation to provide such to any entity that accesses,
         uses, or consumes the code shared within this policy.

     (2) All scientific research expected to produce custom-developed code assets should
         include the plan for those assets in the reviewed and approved data management
         and sharing plan described in Section 5c(1). The data management and sharing
         plan must describe how custom-developed code assets applicable under Section
         5d(3) will be made accessible at minimum to federal employees and indicate any
         categories of custom-developed code assets that are exempt from sharing
         requirements.

     (3) Custom-developed code assets should be made accessible at minimum to federal
         employees to the extent practicable unless they meet any of the following
         exemption criteria:

         (a) Custom-developed code assets that are outside the scope of this policy include:

                   Source code that is solely exploratory or disposable in nature, including
                   source code written by a developer experimenting with a new language or
                   library; or

                                               10
               1    Commercial computer software, commercial off-the-shelf software, or
                    configuration scripts for such software.

          (b) Custom-developed code assets that are not required to be made accessible to
              federal employees under this DR include:

               1    When sharing or discovery of source code is restricted by Federal law or
                    regulation;

               2    When sharing or discovery of source code would create an identifiable
                    risk to privacy, confidentiality, integrity, or availability of USDA data or
                    information systems; and

               3    Source code covered by a Freedom of Information Act exemption.

     (4) The timeline for making all custom-developed code assets accessible to federal
         employees must be described in the approved data management and sharing plan.
         Sharing of custom-developed code assets must be established by the date on which
         the publisher makes the associated article available online or publishes the book
         chapter, or at the end of the performance or funding period.

     (5) Metadata must be published for all custom-developed source code asset repositories
         as required by relevant OMB or USDA guidance. If made publicly accessible,
         metadata must adhere to Section 5c(5) metadata requirements.

f.   Digital persistent identifiers, such as DOIs and ORCID iDs, are required as follows:

     (1) Digital persistent identifiers are required for final published articles, i.e., version of
         record.

     (2) Digital persistent identifiers are additionally required for the following scholarly
         publications and related products if published, even if not required for submission
         to PubAg, on or after April 7, 2026:

          (a) Peer-reviewed book chapters;

         (b) Preprints; and

          (c) USDA-published scientific reports.

     (3) All authors (subject to this policy) of scholarly publications must have individual
         digital persistent identifiers, such as the Open Researcher and Contributor ID
         (ORCID iD), that are linked to the scholarly publications in scope for this policy.




                                                11
       (4) All authors of digital scientific research data assets (data authors) that meet the
           criteria in Section 5c(2) must have individual digital persistent identifiers (e.g.,
           ORCID iD) that are linked to their data assets and other research products.

       (5) Digital scientific research data assets covered by this policy must also receive a
           digital persistent identifier, such as a DOI.

       (6) Authors of scholarly publications and digital scientific research data assets are also
           encouraged to obtain digital persistent identifiers for other associated scientific
           research products if these products are not subject to statutory restrictions and
           would provide information that would help future users of the scholarly publication.
           Examples of optional but encouraged associated research products include:

           (a) Software (including code);

           (b) Methods/protocols;

           (c) Curricular materials;

           (d) Extension publications; and

           (e) Multi-media materials.

       (7) Scholarly publications, digital scientific research data assets, and custom-developed
           code should be linked with digital persistent identifiers when possible. For
           example, the DOI for digital data assets should be included in the data availability
           statement for scholarly publications.

       (8) In the author profile for their digital persistent identifier (e.g., ORCID profile),
           works subject to this policy must be visibly listed for public review.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Secretary of Agriculture will assign overall executive responsibility for establishing,
       managing, and implementing public access to scholarly publications and digital
       scientific research data assets to the USDA Chief Scientist.

  b.   The USDA Chief Scientist will oversee all aspects of this DR and have oversight
       authority for USDA proceedings to review and implement the policy. Specific
       responsibilities include:

       (1) Assuming Departmentwide authority, control, and management of this policy;

       (2) Consulting with the USDA Science Council on the implementation of this policy;



                                                  12
     (3) Coordinating a sustainable funding strategy to implement this policy;

     (4) Coordinating the implementation of this policy by agencies and staff offices,
         including coordination of the monitoring, measurement, auditing, reporting, and
         enforcement of agency and office compliance with policy provisions;

     (5) Liaising with other Federal agencies on public access policies and implementation;

     (6) Evaluating this policy and revising as necessary. Input may be sought from the
         broad community of stakeholders who include, but are not limited to, other federal
         science agencies, academia, scientific societies, the private sector, and the public;

     (7) Monitoring and coordinating the consistency of policy implementation with the
         Department’s uniform administrative requirements, cost principles, and audit
         requirements for Federal awards (Title 2 CFR Part 400, Uniform Administrative
         Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards); and

     (8) Establishing a process to review and approve requests for waivers and extensions to
         public access requirements for scholarly publications and digital research data
         assets.

c.   The USDA Chief Information Officer will:

     (1) Oversee Departmental investment in data management information technology
         infrastructure necessary for implementation of this policy; and

     (2) Assume responsibility for the implementation of cybersecurity and privacy controls
         as they apply to the implementation of this directive and covered digital scientific
         research data assets.

d.   The USDA Chief Data Officer will:

     (1) Provide recommendations on the alignment of this policy with other Departmental
         data policies and guidance;

     (2) Ensure Departmental open data initiative activities are coordinated with the
         implementation of this policy;

     (3) Review the impact of Departmental infrastructure on the accessibility of digital
         scientific research data assets and coordinate solutions that ensure appropriate
         public access;

     (4) Promote a culture of lifecycle data management and data management best
         practices; and




                                              13
     (5) Coordinate standardization of data and metadata formats, sharing, and publication
         across digital scientific research data assets.

e.   USDA Agency Administrators and Staff Office Directors will oversee the
     implementation of this DR through the establishment of appropriate policies and
     procedures within their units. Specific responsibilities, which may be delegated as
     appropriate, include:

     (1) Ensuring that their employees and the institutions and awardees receiving
         applicable grants, contracts, and agreements are aware of and comply with this
         policy and related policies;

     (2) Providing agency employees, who are covered by the scope of this DR, with any
         necessary guidance and training to understand and fulfill their responsibilities under
         this DR and any agency-specific guidance on public access to research results;

     (3) Including in all applicable notices of funding reference to this DR along with
         relevant related requirements to be addressed in applications;

     (4) Including the requirements of this policy as terms and conditions of awards for
         applicable grants, contracts, and agreements established after the effective date of
         this policy and updating active grants, contracts, and agreements to include the
         requirements of this policy to the extent practicable. This should include a
         statement that scholarly publications and digital scientific research data assets
         authored solely by USDA employees as part of their official duties are works of the
         United States Government and are therefore not subject to copyright protection in
         Title 17 of the United States Code (U.S.C.) Section 105, Subject matter of
         copyright: United States Government works, as well as acknowledge and disclose
         the public funding of the published work by USDA;

     (5) Ensuring that public access implementation by agency employees does not provide
         material or non-material benefit through the provision of funded or unfunded work
         to any foreign person or entity or any U.S. citizen or entity subject to foreign
         ownership, control, or influence by a country of concern or other foreign adversary,
         e.g., by maintaining rigorous public release approval processes;

     (6) Developing practical funding mechanisms to ensure the successful implementation
         of this policy;

     (7) Ensuring that reporting systems accommodate reporting on published scholarly
         publications and digital scientific research data assets;

     (8) Ensuring that research publications and digital scientific research data assets are
         linked using digital persistent identifiers and that authors obtain and use individual
         digital persistent identifiers;



                                               14
     (9) Ensuring that a policy or procedure exists for reviewing and approving data
         management and sharing plans, and that the agency or staff office has a clearly
         defined performance or funding period relevant to the public access timeline
         requirement described in Section 5c(4);

     (10) Reviewing requests for waivers and extensions to public access requirements, as
          described in Section 7, and forwarding approved waiver requests to the Office of
          the Chief Scientist;

     (11) Promoting the accessibility and use of published digital scientific research data
          assets by agency and staff office employees, the public, and contractors; and

     (12) Supporting accessible data-sharing platforms.

f.   The NAL Director will:

     (1) Oversee the maintenance of PubAg, which serves as the USDA public access
         archive system for scholarly publications;

     (2) Oversee the maintenance of the Ag Data Commons, which serves primarily as a
         catalog for metadata entries of published digital scientific research data assets and
         secondarily as a data repository for a limited number of digital scientific research
         data assets; and

     (3) Oversee the development and maintenance of additional resources to support the
         implementation of this policy.

g.   Individuals covered by this policy (Section 2a) who are authors of scholarly publications
     will:

     (1) Work with the journal publisher before any publication rights are transferred to
         ensure that all conditions of this policy can be met;

     (2) Avoid publishing in journals with predatory practices or whose publishers have
         editorial offices managed, owned, controlled, or physically or virtually located in,
         or operated out of, a foreign country of concern;

     (3) Not sign any agreements with journal publishers that do not allow the author to
         comply with the policy described in this DR;

     (4) Ensure that accepted manuscripts or final published articles are submitted to PubAg;

     (5) Ensure that their individual digital persistent identifier is associated with the
         publication and that their affiliation and acknowledgment information accurately
         reflect their relationship with the USDA;



                                               15
       (6) Ensure that the final published article is assigned a digital persistent identifier (e.g.,
           DOI) by the publisher, or by NAL when not provided by the publisher; OR

       (7) Request a waiver or extension if needed as described in Section 7.

  h.   Individuals covered by this policy (Section 2a) who are authors of digital scientific
       research data assets (Section 5c) will:

       (1) Prepare and follow data management and sharing plans consistent with agency or
           staff office policies and procedures if they exist, or Departmental guidance if they
           do not;

       (2) Ensure that digital scientific research data assets that are required to be made
           publicly accessible are published on a data repository that meets the requirements of
           this policy, following a timeline described in the associated data management and
           sharing plan and meeting requirements described in Section 5c(4);

       (3) Work with the data publisher to ensure that all conditions of this policy are met;

       (4) Ensure that a metadata catalog entry is submitted to the Ag Data Commons and
           work with relevant USDA metadata reviewers (e.g., support staff associated with
           the Ag Data Commons) to ensure that all conditions of this policy are met;

       (5) Not sign any agreements with journal publishers or data publishers that do not allow
           the author to comply with the policy described in this DR;

       (6) Ensure that their individual digital persistent identifier is associated with published
           digital scientific research data assets and that their affiliation and acknowledgment
           information accurately reflect their relationship with USDA;

       (7) Ensure that research publications associated with digital scientific research data
           assets covered by this policy receive digital persistent identifiers; and

       (8) Request a waiver for digital scientific research data assets they feel should not be
           made public but that are covered by the public access requirements of this policy, or
           for an extension of the timeline for making data publicly accessible, following the
           process described in Section 7.


7. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  It is Departmental policy to make accessible to the public all peer-reviewed, scholarly
  publications and digital scientific research data assets arising from unclassified scientific
  research supported wholly or in part by the USDA, to the extent practicable. However,
  circumstances may exist that would make adherence to the policy in this DR impractical or
  detrimental to the mission of the Department.

                                                  16
  a.   Data authors of digital scientific research data assets that are covered by public access
       requirements (Section 5c(2)) may submit a waiver request for data assets that they feel
       should not be made publicly accessible. Data authors may begin the waiver request
       process at any point, including after the project data management and sharing plan is
       reviewed and approved, and up until the required time of data publication (Section
       5c(4)). The waiver request must articulate and justify the policy deviation for any
       digital scientific research data asset collected or generated during a research project,
       including data assets listed in the approved project data management and sharing plan
       and unexpected data assets collected or generated during the project that were not
       included in the data management and sharing plan.

  b.   Data authors do not need to obtain a waiver for digital scientific research data assets that
       are exempt from public access requirements, as described in Section 5c(2). Instead,
       researchers must state in the associated data management and sharing plan the applicable
       exclusion from Section 5c(2) and explain how the proposed digital scientific research
       data assets meet the exclusion.

  c.   Data authors of digital scientific research data assets that are covered by the public
       access requirements (Section 5c(2)) may submit a request for an extension to the
       timeline for making digital scientific research data assets publicly accessible (Section
       5c(4)). The request should articulate the amount of additional time that will be required
       before a data asset can be published and provide a justification for the extension.

  d.   Authors of scholarly publications may request a waiver to publish in journals that do not
       permit them to meet the requirements of this DR. Authors should request a waiver prior
       to initial submission to the journal. The waiver request must articulate and justify the
       policy deviation.

  e.   Agencies and staff offices should process and review initial waiver or extension requests
       and forward approved requests to the USDA Office of the Chief Scientist for final
       approval.


8. INQUIRIES

  Questions about this DR should be directed to the Office of the Chief Scientist at
  OCSPolicy@usda.gov.


                                             -END-




                                                 17
                                 APPENDIX A


                    ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS



CFR        Code of Federal Regulations
CUI        Controlled Unclassified Information
DOI        Digital Object Identifier
DR         Departmental Regulation
EO         Executive Order
FOIA       Freedom of Information Act
NAL        National Agricultural Library
NSPM       National Security Presidential Memorandum
OMB        Office of Management and Budget
ORCID iD   Open Researcher and Contributor Identifier
OSTP       Office of Science and Technology Policy of the Executive Office of the
           President
P.L.       Public Law
U.S.C.     United States Code
USDA       United States Department of Agriculture




                                        A-1
                                          APPENDIX B


                                         DEFINITIONS



Accepted Manuscript. Also known as the author accepted manuscript or final peer-reviewed
accepted manuscript. An author's final version of a publisher-accepted, peer‐reviewed article or
book chapter that includes all modifications resulting from the peer-review process. It contains
the same content as the final published article or book chapter but does not include the
publisher’s copyediting, stylistic, or formatting edits that will constitute the final “version of
record” that appears in a peer-reviewed, scholarly journal, or peer-reviewed conference
proceedings.

Ag Data Commons. The USDA scientific research data catalog and repository maintained by the
NAL.

Arrangement. Term used to describe any and all forms of legally binding documents, whether
governed by domestic, foreign, or international law, and non-legally binding documents, signed
by representatives of the USDA, as in Section 2b(3).

Computational Model. The use of mathematics, statistics, physics, and computer science to
study the mechanism and behavior of complex systems in many domains by computer
simulation. A computational model contains numerous variables that characterize the system
being studied. Simulation is done by adjusting these variables and observing how the changes
affect the outcomes predicted by the model. Computational models are often implemented via
custom source code.

Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI). Information that requires safeguarding or
dissemination controls pursuant to and consistent with applicable law, regulations, and
governmentwide policies but is not classified under EO 13526, Classified National Security
Information, or the Atomic Energy Act, 42 U.S.C. § 2011, et seq., as amended (Source: EO
13556, Controlled Unclassified Information). CUI encompasses and replaces previous sensitive
information labels (e.g., For Official Use Only).

Custom Source Code. Source code that is produced in the performance of a contract with an
agency or is otherwise exclusively funded by the Federal Government; or developed by a Federal
employee as part of the official duties of the employee. It includes source code, or segregable
portions of source code, for which the Federal Government could obtain unlimited rights under
FAR Part 27 or any relevant supplemental acquisition regulations of an agency; and source code
written for a software project, module, plugin, script, middleware, or application programming
interface. It does not include source code that is solely exploratory or disposable in nature,
including source code written by a developer experimenting with a new language or library; or
commercial computer software, commercial off-the-shelf software, or configuration scripts for
such software. (SHARE IT Act)


                                                 B-1
Data. Observations that are measured, collected, and recorded; they can be quantitative or
qualitative in nature. Singular is datum, although the word rarely appears in science discussions.

Data Asset. Also commonly referred to as a dataset. A collection of factual information and
observations generally collected for analysis and interpretation to answer research questions. An
asset represents the outcome of Federally funded work and has potential future value.

Data Author. An individual who is credited as responsible for a digital scientific research data
asset covered by this policy. While a data asset may have many authors, one data author should
appear as the primary contact for a published digital scientific research data asset, as listed in the
standardized metadata catalog entry for the data asset in the Ag Data Commons.

Data Management and Sharing Plan. A written plan for managing data as an asset throughout
the scientific research life cycle, including information such as expected data types, data formats
and standards, data storage and preservation of access, data sharing and public access, roles and
responsibilities, and monitoring and reporting. A data management and sharing plan describes
how research data assets will conform to this policy for preservation and public access or
explains why this cannot be justified.

Data Publisher. An organization or entity that archives data, provides a digital persistent
identifier, and makes the data accessible for use by others.

Data Repository. A place that holds data, makes data available to use, and organizes data in a
logical manner. A data repository may also be defined as an appropriate, subject-specific
location where researchers can submit their data. Data repositories may have specific
requirements concerning subject or research domain; data re-use and access; file format and data
structure; and the types of metadata that can be used.

Digital Object Identifier (DOI). Globally unique character string that references a physical,
digital, or abstract object. A DOI provides an actionable, interoperable, persistent link to
information about the object it references (United States Geological Survey, Digital Object
Identifiers website).

Digital Persistent Identifier. A unique digital identifier that is long-lasting and unambiguously
identifies a digital object (e.g., DOI) or an individual (e.g., ORCID iD).

Digital Scientific Research Data Asset. A digitally formatted data asset resulting from
unclassified scientific research supported wholly or in part by the USDA. The digital recorded
factual material commonly accepted in the scientific community as necessary to validate
scientific research findings includes data used to support scholarly publications, but does not
include laboratory notebooks, preliminary analyses, draft manuscripts, plans for future scientific
research, peer review reports, communications with colleagues, or physical objects, such as
laboratory specimens. Data assets arising from routine analysis in support of program operations
are not considered digital scientific research data assets, even if they are related to intramural or
extramural scientific research supported by the USDA.



                                                   B-2
Extramural Research. Research conducted by any research institution other than the Federal
agency to which the funds supporting the research were appropriated. Research institutions
conducting extramural research may include Federal research facilities (USDA, Departmental
Guidebook (DG) 0100-002, USDA Departmental Directives Definitions Glossary).

Final Published Article. Sometimes referred to as the version of record. A publisher’s
authoritative copy of the article, including all modifications from the publishing peer-review
process, copyediting, stylistic edits, and formatting changes.

Foreign Country of Concern. The term "foreign country of concern" means the People's Republic
of China, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, or any other country determined to be a country of concern by the Department
of State (42 U.S.C. § 19221).

Intramural Research. Research conducted by a Federal agency to which funds were appropriated
for the purpose of conducting the research (USDA, Departmental Guidebook (DG) 0100-002,
USDA Departmental Directives Definitions Glossary).

Machine-readable Data. Data in a format that can be easily processed by a computer without
human intervention while ensuring no semantic meaning is lost.

Metadata. Information that describes the content, characteristics, format (e.g., numeric, date,
text), and attributes of a data asset. The metadata for structured data objects describes the
structure, data elements, interrelationships, definitions, and other characteristics of information,
including its creation, disposition, access and handling controls, formats, content, quality
(accuracy, completeness), and context, as well as related audit trails. For any particular datum,
the metadata may describe how the datum is represented, ranges of acceptable values, its
relationship to other data, and how it should be labeled. Metadata also may provide other
relevant information, such as the responsible steward, associated laws and regulations, and
access management policy.

Open Access Article. An article, made freely accessible at the time of publication without any
embargo period, typically supported by open access fees or higher article processing charges
paid by the author or their research institution to the publisher. Open access articles may appear
in hybrid journals or completely open access journals.

ORCID iD (Open Researcher and Contributor ID). An alphanumeric code digital persistent
identifier that uniquely identifies an individual scientist or researcher.

Peer Review. An assessment process widely used by scholarly journals to evaluate the quality of
manuscripts submitted for publication. The process commonly includes reviews by subject
experts who critique the methodology, assumptions, results, and interpretations underlying the
manuscript. In concert with reviewers, the editor-in-chief decides whether to accept or reject the
manuscript for publication or request further modifications.




                                                   B-3
Peer-reviewed Journal Article. An article published in a journal in which the manuscripts are
sent by editors to scientific experts in the field of research to determine acceptance for
publication.

Predatory practices. As applied to scholarly journals: lack of transparency in publishing, a peer-
review process that is not clearly defined or performed, peer-review feedback to authors is
minimal, publisher attempts to hide its actual location by using mail drops in countries other than
the actual location of the publisher, author fees are hidden or unstated, or publisher sends author
an unexpected or high bill prior to an article’s publication.

Preprint. A manuscript posted by the author(s) on a preprint server or website. Authors post
preprints for the purposes of sharing findings or information with the scientific community,
getting early feedback on the article before the peer-review process, and accelerating discovery
and scholarly communication. Preprint publications do not necessarily constitute scientific
research findings, which require validation through the widely accepted peer-review process
associated with academic journal publishing. Authors typically submit the manuscript to a peer-
reviewed journal at the same time or after they post the preprint. The preprint typically remains
available after a final version of the article is published in a peer-reviewed journal.

PubAg. The USDA public access archive system for scholarly publications maintained by the
NAL.

Public Access. Access to information that is available to the public. Public access does not
necessarily mean free for use, and restrictions for reuse or redistribution may apply.

Published Digital Scientific Research Data Asset. A digital scientific research data asset that has
a digital persistent identifier associated with it that is expected to persist over time and therefore,
is citable.

Researcher. Any USDA employee, contractor, awardee, or collaborator involved in the process
of scientific research, including those responsible for data asset design, collection, analysis, or
quality assurance to ensure data are fit for use.

Scholarly Publication. A peer-reviewed publication that disseminates scientific research findings
and communicates insights, intended for an audience of researchers, scholars, or scientists. For
the purposes of this DR, the term specifically applies to peer-reviewed journal articles and book
chapters published by nongovernmental organizations.

Scientific Report. Reports of research progress or of special program results that are in the public
interest.

Scientific Research. Systematic investigation, including development, testing, analysis, and
evaluation, that involves the application of scientific methodologies and is designed to develop
or contribute to generalizable knowledge. Scientific research activities include data collection,
inventorying, monitoring, statistical analysis, surveying, observations, experimentation, study,
research, analysis, integration, economic analysis, forecasting, predictive analytics, modeling,

                                                   B-4
scientific assessment, and technology development that involve the application of scientific
methodologies in a systematic manner. Research includes all basic, applied, and demonstration
research in all fields of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. This includes, but is
not limited to, research in economics, education, linguistics, medicine, nutrition, psychology,
natural sciences, social sciences, statistics, and research involving human subjects, animals, and
in vitro and in silico techniques. Activities which meet this definition constitute research for
purposes of this policy, whether or not they are conducted or supported under a program which is
considered “research” for other purposes. For example, some demonstration and service
programs may include research or scientific activities.

Source Code. A collection of computer commands written in a computer programming language
that a computer can execute as a piece of software. (SHARE IT Act)

Tribal Nation. A governing body of a tribe, band, pueblo, community, village, or group of
Native American Indians or Alaska Natives qualifies as an Indian tribal government upon
determination by the Internal Revenue Service that the governing body exercises governmental
functions. (26 CFR § 305.7701-1)

Version of Record. Sometimes referred to as the final published article. Final, authoritative
version of a scholarly article published by a scholarly publisher and intended to reflect any
corrections that occurred after original publication and to serve independent preservation and
archival purposes.




                                                 B-5
                                        APPENDIX C


                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES



2 CFR part 400, USDA’s implementation of 2 CFR part 200, Uniform Administrative
Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards

28 CFR Part 202, Preventing Access to U.S. Sensitive Personal Data and Government-Related
Data by Countries of Concern or Covered Persons

5 U.S.C. § 2105, Employee

5 U.S.C. § 552, Freedom of Information Act

5 U.S.C. Chapter 5, Subchapter II, Administrative Procedure

15 U.S.C. § 3710a, Cooperative Research and Development Agreements Act

17 U.S.C. § 105, Subject Matter of Copyright: United States Government Works

42 U.S.C. § 19221, Strategy and report on the nation's economic security, science, research, and
innovation to support the national security strategy

44 U.S.C. § 3501, The Paperwork Reduction Act

44 U.S.C. Chapter 31, The Federal Records Act

America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010, P.L. 111-358, January 4, 2011

Atomic Energy Act, 42 U.S.C. § 2011, et seq., August 1, 1946

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014, P.L. 113-283, December 18, 2014,
codified at 44 U.S.C. §§ 3551-3559, Information Security

EO 13526, Classified National Security Information, December 29, 2009

EO 13556, Controlled Unclassified Information, November 4, 2010

EO 13960, Promoting the Use of Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence in the Federal Government,
December 3, 2020

EO 14117, Preventing Access to Americans' Bulk Sensitive Personal Data and United States
Government-Related Data by Countries of Concern, February 28, 2024


                                                C-1
EO 14292, Improving the Safety and Security of Biological Research, May 5, 2025

EO 14303, Restoring Gold Standard Science, May 29, 2025

EO 14363, Launching the Genesis Mission, November 24, 2025

Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018, P.L. 115-435, January 14, 2019

National Security Presidential Memorandum 33 (NSPM-33), Presidential Memorandum on
United States Government-Supported Research and Development National Security Policy,
January 14, 2021

Office of Management and Budget (OMB), Circular A-130, Managing Information as a
Strategic Resource, July 28, 2016

OMB, Memorandum M-13-13, Open Data Policy – Managing Information as an Asset, May 9,
2013

OMB, Transparency and Open Government, January 21, 2009

OMB, United States Government-Supported Research and Development National Security
Policy, January 14, 2021

OSTP, Agency Guidance for Implementation Gold Standard Science in the Conduct &
Management of Scientific Activities, 2025)

OSTP, Increasing Access to the Results of Federally Funded Scientific Research, February 22,
2013

Protecting Americans' Data from Foreign Adversaries Act, P.L. 118-50, 2024

Source Code Harmonization and Reuse in Information Technology (Share IT) Act, P.L. 118-187,
138 Stat. 2638, 2024

USDA, DG 0100-002, USDA Departmental Directives Definitions Glossary, September 26,
2018

USDA, DR 1074-001, Scientific Integrity, November 18, 2016

USDA, DR 1410-001, Publications Review and Clearance Policy, January 14, 2021

USDA, DR 3440-001, USDA Classified National Security Information Program, June 9, 2016

USDA, DR 3440-002, Control and Protection of “Sensitive Security Information,” January 30,
2003



                                               C-2
USDA, DR 3440-003, Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) Program, September 13, 2021

USDA, DR 3445-001, Media Protection, October 30, 2019

USDA, DR 3515-002, Privacy Policy and Compliance for Personally Identifiable Information
(PII), October 30, 2020

USDA, SM-1078-013, Responding to and Implementing Gold Standard Science at the U.S.
Department of Agriculture, June 30, 2025

USDA, SM-1078-014, America First Memorandum for USDA Arrangements and Research
Security, July 8, 2025

USDA, NAL, Ag Data Commons website

USDA, NAL, PubAg website

United States Geological Survey, Digital Object Identifiers website




                                                C-3
