                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                               NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                       DR 1051-003
 SUBJECT: Citation of Science & Technology (S&T)               DATE:
 Agreements in USDA S&T Arrangements                           January 7, 2021
                                                               EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of the Chief Scientist (OCS)
                                                               January 7, 2026



Section                                                                                  Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                   1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                        1
3.   Scope                                                                                     2
4.   Background                                                                                2
5.   Policy                                                                                    3
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                                5
7.   Inquiries                                                                                 5

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                  A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                 B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                  C-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of Agriculture
     (USDA) policy for the proper citation of U.S. bilateral science and technology (S&T)
     agreements in USDA S&T arrangements with:

     a.   Foreign governments;

     b.   Foreign government instrumentalities; and

     c.   Domestic partners that intend to utilize foreign governments or foreign government
          instrumentalities as third parties.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     a.   This DR supersedes Interim Policy, Citation of S&T Agreements in USDA S&T
          Arrangements, dated October 1, 2019.
  b.   This DR will be in effect until superseded or the expiration date.

  c.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices (hereinafter “USDA agencies”) will align
       their policies and procedures with this DR within 3 months of the publication date.

  d.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may supplement this DR when
       developing their internal guidance. Modifications to the intent or purpose of this DR are
       not allowed. If USDA Mission Areas, agencies, or staff offices publish internal
       guidance that supplements this DR, forward one copy of each supplement to the Office
       of the Chief Scientist (OCS) at OCSPolicy@usda.gov.


3. SCOPE

  This DR applies to all USDA agencies and employees, and contractors. Such entities must
  comply with the terms of this DR relating to their S&T arrangements with domestic partners
  that intend to utilize foreign governments or foreign government instrumentalities as third
  parties.


4. BACKGROUND

  USDA is committed to promoting and protecting USDA investments in science, technology,
  and innovation. International S&T cooperation can accelerate discoveries that contribute to
  the health and well-being of the American people, while informing and working to solve
  global challenges. However, cooperation should be conducted in a manner that is mutually
  beneficial, while protecting USDA investments and, subsequently, U.S. economic and
  national security.

  S&T cooperation between the United States and foreign governments is undertaken using a
  variety of mechanisms, from formal arrangements between governments to informal
  scientist-to-scientist collaborations. The U.S. Department of State manages bilateral S&T
  agreements on behalf of the U.S. Government (USG). S&T agreements establish
  coordination and oversight of engagement across the USG with their foreign counterparts,
  and provide a range of benefits to U.S. businesses, academia, government, and the public, in
  support of U.S. economic and national security.

  Foreign governments often seek S&T agreements with the USG because the agreements are
  legally binding and negotiated on behalf of the USG. S&T agreements provide a multitude
  of benefits, including establishing a framework to foster international science collaboration
  while protecting intellectual property, establishing benefit sharing, and preventing taxation of
  research equipment. If properly cited in subordinate documents S&T agreements can reduce
  the burden on USG Departments and Agencies. Comprehensive citation of S&T agreements
  allows for consistent implementation of provisions across the USG and saves resources by
  avoiding renegotiation of terms already covered by S&T agreements. As such, USDA has



                                               2
  decided it is in the best interest of USDA investments to ensure comprehensive citation of
  S&T agreements in S&T arrangements when applicable.


5. POLICY

  a.   This policy is applicable to all USDA S&T arrangements (new and renewals) with:

       (1) Foreign governments;

       (2) Foreign government instrumentalities; and

       (3) Domestic partners that intend to utilize foreign governments or foreign government
           instrumentalities as third parties.

  b.   In addition to including the applicable citation language set out in Section 5.e below, the
       S&T agreements cited must accompany the documentation signed by the parties. Please
       contact OCS for the list of S&T agreements and files.

  c.   Prior to the beginning of negotiations, USDA agencies must notify OCS of any intent to
       enter into S&T arrangements that:

       (1) Will utilize citation text D (see below); or

       (2) Will be legally binding and subject to international law, as this type of engagement
           requires authorization from State Department under the Circular 175 procedure.

  d.   Citation Framework

       Language used in USDA S&T arrangements to cite the relevant S&T agreement will
       vary depending on the type of partner (foreign/domestic), type of arrangement
       (international law/U.S. law), and legal status of the arrangement (legally/non-legally
       binding). Citation language to be used in various scenarios is provided in Section 5e
       below. The following sequence of questions will determine the proper citation language
       to use:

       (1) Q1: Is the USDA arrangement with a foreign government/foreign government
           instrumentality?

            (a) Yes, proceed to Q2.

            (b) No, it is with a domestic entity that will utilize foreign governments or foreign
                government instrumentalities to conduct activities and it is legally binding (use
                citation text A).




                                               3
         (c) No, it is with a domestic entity that will utilize foreign governments or foreign
             government instrumentalities to conduct activities and it is not legally binding
             (use citation text B).

     (2) Q2: Is the arrangement legally binding?

         (a) Yes, it is subject to domestic law (use citation text C).

         (b) No, it is non-legally binding (use citation text D).

         (c) Yes, it is subject to international law (contact OCS).

e.   Citation Text Options

     (1) Citation Text A (Domestic Entity/U.S. law/Legally Binding)

         This [insert USDA document name] is governed by U.S. law.

         A Party that utilizes foreign governments or foreign government instrumentalities to
         conduct activities pursuant to this [insert USDA document name] shall conduct
         such activities consistent with the [insert S&T agreement reference].

         A Party shall notify foreign governments and foreign government instrumentalities
         that are conducting cooperative activities under this [insert USDA document name]
         for or on behalf of that Party that cooperative activities must be conducted
         consistent with [insert S&T agreement reference].

     (2) Citation Text B (Domestic Entity/Non-Legally Binding)

         Participants recognize that cooperative activities conducted under this [insert
         USDA document name] by foreign governments or foreign government
         instrumentalities fall within the scope and are subject to the provisions of the
         [insert S&T agreement reference].

         A Participant should notify foreign government instrumentalities that are
         conducting cooperative activities under this [insert USDA document name] for or
         on behalf of that Participant that the provisions of the [insert S&T agreement
         reference] apply to such activities.

     (3) Citation Text C (Foreign Government or Foreign Government Instrumentality/U.S.
         law /Legally Binding)

         This [insert USDA document name] is governed by U.S. law.

         The Parties shall conduct such activities under this [insert USDA document name]
         consistent with the [insert S&T agreement reference].



                                             4
           A Party shall notify entities that are conducting cooperative activities under this
           [insert USDA document name] for or on behalf of that Party that cooperative
           activities must be conducted consistent with [insert S&T agreement reference].

       (4) Citation Text D (Foreign Government or Foreign Government Instrumentality/Non-
           Legally Binding)

           Participants recognize that cooperative activities conducted under this [insert
           USDA document name] fall within the scope and are subject to the provisions of the
           [insert S&T agreement reference].

           A Participant should notify entities that are conducting cooperative activities under
           this [insert USDA document name] for or on behalf of that Participant that the
           provisions of the [insert S&T agreement reference] apply to such activities.

       USDA agencies should contact OCS to obtain copies of the relevant S&T agreements
       and for further guidance on properly referencing S&T agreements within the citations.

  f.   Derogations from Policy

       USDA agencies may derogate from this policy only after consultation with and upon
       receiving concurrence from OCS.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  OCS will manage and oversee the implementation of the specified policy in USDA agencies.


7. INQUIRIES

  Direct questions and comments concerning the requirements of this regulation to OCS at
  OCSPolicy@usda.gov.



                                            -END-




                                               5
                              APPENDIX A

                  ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


DR       Departmental Regulation
OCS      Office of the Chief Scientist
S&T      Science & Technology
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture
USG      U.S. Government




                                   A-1
                                          APPENDIX B

                                          DEFINITIONS


Arrangement. Term used to describe any and all forms of legally binding documents, whether
governed by domestic, foreign or international law, and non-legally binding documents, signed
by representatives of the USDA.

Foreign government instrumentality. Any agency, bureau, ministry, component, institution,
association, or any legal, commercial, or business organization, corporation, firm, or entity that is
substantially owned, controlled, sponsored, commanded, managed, or dominated by a foreign
government. Foreign states often act through instrumentalities, such as Universities.

Governed by domestic law versus international law. Arrangements entered into with domestic
partners are presumed to be subject to domestic law, unless the Participants have clearly evinced
an intention not to be legally bound. Arrangements entered into with foreign governments or
foreign government instrumentalities that contain language indicating an intent to be legally
bound are presumed to be subject to international law absent any provision in the arrangement
with respect to governing law. Arrangements entered into with foreign governments or foreign
government instrumentalities may be made subject to domestic law through inclusion of a
specific provision so providing. Such provision may, but does not need to, include citation to
applicable sections of the United States Code (U.S.C.). High-level USDA international S&T
arrangements such as memorandums of cooperation and S&T agreements are traditionally
governed by international law. Memorandums of understanding and letters of intent are non-
legally binding. Most project level documents are governed by domestic law and reference the
applicable U.S.C. section (common within USDA: 7 U.S.C.§ 3318(b) (ARS), 7 U.S.C. § 3291
(ARS), 7 U.S.C. § 7701 (APHIS), 16 U.S.C. §§ 2101-2114 (USFS), and 7 U.S.C. 3318(b)
(USFS)).

Legally binding. Parties have agreed that obligations under an arrangement are to be governed
by international or domestic law. The arrangement contains language evincing the Parties’
intention to be legally bound such as: will, shall, agree, commit, undertake, ensure, must,
commitment, agreement, treaty, convention, protocol, entry into force, and Parties. Legally
binding arrangements with foreign governments or foreign government instrumentalities are
presumed to be governed by international law unless specifically stated otherwise.

Non-legally binding. Participants have not agreed that an arrangement will be governed by law.
Failure to implement or conduct activities anticipated in such an arrangement will not result in
legal consequences. Participants may discontinue activties described in the arrangements at any
time, as neither Participant is legally bound to conduct the activities cited in the arrangement.
Terminology often used in non-legally binding documents include: recognize, intend, plan to,
may, should, expect, endeavor, reaffirm, understanding, statement, declaration, sides,
arrangement, mechanism, date activities commence, and Participants.




                                                B-1
                                         APPENDIX C

                             AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


7 U.S.C. § 3291, International agricultural research, extension, and teaching

7 U.S.C. § 3318(b), Contract, grant, and cooperative agreement authorities

7 U.S.C. § 7701, Plant Protection Act

16 U.S.C. §§ 2101-2114, Cotton Research and Promotion

Department of State, Circular 175 Procedure, Treaty Procedures

USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System, January 4, 2018




                                              C-1
