                      U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                            WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


                                                          NUMBER:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                   1044-7

     Coordination of USDA Activities Relating
SUBJECT:                                               DATE:   May 23, 1994
to Human Nutrition Research and Education

                                                         Office of the
                                                       OPI:
                                                       General Counsel


1 Purpose

            The United States Department of Agriculture
            (USDA) is committed to the mission of improving
            the nutrition of American consumers. USDA plays a
            leading role within the Executive Branch in the
            development and implementation of programs aimed
            at strengthening nutrition research and education
            efforts within the United States, and at
            improving the nutritional quality of foods
            produced and consumed and the nutritional status
            of the American people. USDA activities are
            focused on determining the nutritive value of
            foods, human nutritional needs, types and amounts
            of food consumed by Americans, and strategies for
            improving the food supply, individual diets, and
            the health and well being of Americans. Other
            major roles are to help individuals understand
            the relationship between food and health through
            sound research-based nutrition education programs
            and information, and to administer the domestic
            food assistance programs. Research-based
            information is also critical for food producers
            and processors, who recognize that consumers'
            demands drive the marketplace.

            Coordination mechanisms already exist between
            USDA and the Department of Health and Human
            Services and other Federal agencies with
            responsibilities in these areas. These are the
            Interagency Board on Nutrition monitoring and
            Related Research, and the Interagency Committee
            on Human Nutrition Research.
DR 1044-007                                             May 23, 1994


              The purpose of this regulation is to establish a
              coordinating structure within USDA which will
              assure that all activities addressing research
              and education relating to human nutrition,
              including scientific and economic research as
              well as public education and information
              programs, will be carried out within the
              Department in a fully integrated and coordinated
              manner.

2 Establishment of Council

              In order to strengthen policy and programmatic
              coordination within USDA in the nutrition
              education and research areas, there is hereby
              established within the Department a Nutrition
              Education and Research Coordinating Council
              (Council). The Assistant Secretary for Food and
              Consumer Services and the Assistant Secretary for
              Science and Education shall serve as Co-Chairs of
              the Council. The Council shall include as members
              the Administrators of the Agricultural Marketing
              Service, the Agricultural Research Service, the
              Cooperative State Research Service, the Economic
              Research Service, the Extension Service, the Food
              and Nutrition Service and the Food Safety and
              Inspection service, and the Director of the
              National Agricultural Library. The Assistant
              Secretary for Economics, the Assistant Secretary
              for Marketing and Inspection Services, and the
              Director, Office of Budget and Program Analysis,
              shall also serve as members of the Council. In
              the event of successor positions or
              organizations, the equivalent officials shall
              serve as members of the Council.

              The Council shall meet at the call of the Co-
              Chairs, and meetings shall be held at least
              quarterly. The Council will review agency
              planning documents and budget requests for
              functions related to human nutrition research and
              education. The Council will also review and
              advise the Secretary and other USDA officials
              with respect to nutrition research and education
              programs and priorities, and will evaluate the
              performance of agency functions related to



                                 2
DR 1044-007                                             May 23, 1994


              nutrition research and education. The Council
              shall report to the Deputy Secretary.

3 Activities Covered

              The Council established under paragraph 2 shall
              coordinate all USDA activities addressing
              research, analysis, education and public
              information programs related to human nutrition.
              This coordinating mechanism will apply to all
              such activities and functions of the Department,
              including any such functions subsequently
              assigned to the Department, and will include
              specifically the following:

                        A USDA Scientific Research. Included
                        are all research activities conducted
                        by the Agricultural Research Service
                        including the nutrition research
                        activities conducted at the Beltsville
                        Human Nutrition Research Center,
                        Beltsville, Maryland; Children's
                        Nutritional Research Center, Baylor
                        College of Medicine, Houston, Texas;
                        Western Human Nutrition Research
                        Center, the Presidio, San Francisco,
                        California; Grand Forks Human Nutrition
                        Research Center, Grand Forks, North
                        Dakota; and Human Nutrition Research
                        Center on Aging, Tufts University
                        Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts.

                        B Research Grant Programs. Included are
                        all research grant programs related to
                        human nutrition research conducted by
                        the Cooperative State Research Service,
                        including the human nutrition component
                        of the National Research Initiative and
                        the fellowships program in Higher
                        Education.

                        C Information Collection and Economic
                        Analysis. This includes all functions
                        performed by the Agricultural Research
                        Service, the Economic Research Service
                        and the Food and Nutrition Service
                        relating to collection and analysis of


                                 3
DR 1044-007                                             May 23, 1994


                        information regarding market and
                        nutrition monitoring, food supplies and
                        prices, food demand and consumer
                        behavior, socio-economic barriers to
                        improving nutrition, nutrition
                        education evaluation, and evaluation of
                        food assistance programs.

                        D Education and Information Functions.
                        Included are the Department's education
                        and information functions related to
                        human nutrition, including activities
                        presently performed by the Agricultural
                        Marketing Service, the Food and
                        Nutrition Service, the Food Safety and
                        Inspection Service, the Expanded Food
                        and Nutrition Education Program and
                        other related activities carried out by
                        the Extension Service, and the
                        nutritionrelated programs of the
                        National Agricultural Library including
                        its Food and Nutrition Information and
                        Education Resources Center.

4 Report to the Secretary

              The Council shall submit to the Secretary
              annually, as of September 30 of each year, a
              report summarizing the accomplishments of the
              preceding year, problems encountered, and plans
              for the coming year for the Department's research
              and education functions related to human
              nutrition. Such report shall provide the
              Council's advice with respect to funding levels,
              accomplishments, and additional steps required,
              if any, to effect the full integration and
              coordination of the Department's functions in
              these areas.

5 Staff Support

              Such staff support as may be required, including
              necessary support in preparation of the Council's
              annual report, shall be provided jointly by the
              Administrators of the Agricultural Research
              Service and the Food and Nutrition Service, and



                                 4
DR 1044-007                                                May 23, 1994


              by the heads of such other participating USDA
              agencies as may be appropriate.

6 Implementation

              The provisions of this regulation shall be
              effective immediately.

                               -END-




                                 5
