                                 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                       WASHINGTON, D. C. 20250

                                                                                 Number:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION
                                                                                  1042-053
                  SUBJECT:                         DATE:
                                                   December 1, 2010
PLANT VARIETY PROTECTION BOARD                     OPI:
                                                   Agricultural Marketing Service

1.   PURPOSE

     Section 7 of the Plant Variety Protection Act of 1970 (the Act) (7 U.S.C. 2327) requires the
     renewal of a Plant Variety Protection Board (the Board). The Departmental Regulation
     1042-53 renews the Board to provide advice to the Secretary of Agriculture concerning the
     adoption of rules and regulations to facilitate the proper administration of the Act and make
     advisory decisions on all appeals from the examiner or Commissioner. The Board also
     advises the Secretary of Agriculture on any matters under the Regulations and Rules of
     Practice and on all questions under Section 44 of the Act, "Public Interest in Wide Usage" (7
     U.S.C. 2404). Renewal of this committee is in the public interest in connection with duties
     imposed on the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) by law.

2.   SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATION

     a.   Pursuant to an opinion of the Office of the General Counsel, dated July 19, 1974, this
          Board is an integral part of the Act and its program; and therefore, its duration is for the
          life of the program.

     b.   Departmental Regulation 1042-53, dated May 9, 2007, is hereby superseded. This
          regulation will terminate 2 years from the date of filing.

3.   OFFICERS AND MEMBERSHIP

     a.   The Secretary of Agriculture or his designee shall act as Chairperson of the Board
          without voting rights except in the case of ties.

     b.   The 14-member Board to be appointed by the Secretary of Agriculture will serve for a
          period of 2 years. Membership of the Board shall include farmer representation and
          shall be drawn approximately equally from the private seed industry sector and from the
          sector of the Government or the public.

     c.   Equal opportunity practices, in line with USDA policies, will be followed in all
          appointments to the Board. To ensure that the recommendations of the Board have
          taken into account the needs of the diverse groups served by the USDA, membership
          shall include, to the extent practicable, individuals with demonstrated ability to represent
          minorities, women, and persons with disabilities.

     d.   Pursuant to Section 10(e) and (f) of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA), the
          Deputy Administrator or a delegated representative of the Science and Technology
          program of the Agricultural Marketing Service (AMS), shall represent the USDA at
          each meeting and shall have the authority to adjourn the meeting whenever he/she
          considers adjourning to be in the public interest.

     e.    The Board determines whether to act as a full Board or by panels it selects and whether
          to review advisory decisions made by a panel. For service on appeals, the Board may
          select as temporary members experts in the area to which a particular appeal relates.

4.   DUTIES

     The duties of the Board are solely advisory. The Board advises the Secretary of Agriculture
     concerning adoption of rules and regulations to facilitate the proper administration of the Act
     and makes advisory decisions on all appeals from the examiner or Commissioner. The Board
     also advises the Secretary of Agriculture on all matters under the Regulations and Rules of
     Practice and on all questions under Section 44 of the Act, "Public Interest in Wide Usage"
     (7 U.S.C. 2404).

5.   ESTIMATED ANNUAL COSTS

     Members shall serve without pay, but with reimbursement of travel expenses and per diem
     for attendance at Board meetings. Annual operating costs are estimated at $18,000, with 0.2
     staff years. The costs of the Board are funded through user fees.

6.   NUMBER AND FREQUENCY OF MEETINGS

     The Board meets as often as the Secretary of Agriculture deems necessary.

7.   REPORTS AND SUPPORT

     a.    The Science and Technology program of AMS will provide administrative support for
           the Board.

     b.    The Board reports to the Secretary of Agriculture through the Under Secretary,
           Marketing and Regulatory Programs.
