                                U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                   Washington, D.C. 20250


                                                                                      Number:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                               1042-078

SUBJECT: Committee on Processed Foods                            DATE:
                                                                 October 30, 1984

                                                                 OPI:
                                                                 Commodity Operations Division, ASCS


1. PURPOSE

              To assign to existing Departmental agencies the functions previously
             assigned to the Committee on Processed Foods as reorganized by
             Secretary's Memorandum No. 1945.



2. CANCELLATION

             his regulation replaces Secretary's Memorandum No. 1945 dated April
             21, 1978.



3. RESPONSIBILITIES

             This regulation:

              a.  Assigns to the Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service
             (ASCS) the responsibility to:

                           (1)    Receive, screen, and coordinate the review of
                           proposals for any new food product for use in either
                           domestic or foreign commodity donation programs.

                           (2)    Advise the appropriate Departmental agencies of
                           the availability of acceptable products for donation.

             b.     Assigns to the Agricultural Research Service (ARS) the
             responsibility to:
DR 1042-078                                                             October 30, 1984


                            (1)     Evaluate the technical, economic, and program
                            suitability of proposed new food products forwarded by
                            ASCS for consideration. ARS may call on Departmental
                            personnel having appropriate expertise during the
                            investigation of such products.

                            (2)     Inform both ASCS and the appropriate
                            Departmental agencies of products acceptable for foreign
                            donation and for domestic donation. Key agency officials
                            are the General Sales Manager, Foreign Agricultural
                            Service (FAS), in the case of foreign donations, and the
                            Administrator, Food and Nutrition Service (FNS), in the
                            case of domestic donations.

                            (3)     Designate a person to provide technical and
                            economic assistance on matters which may arise
                            concerning commodity specifications but which do not
                            require formal consideration by ARS.

              c.     Requires that a person be designated from each of the following
              agencies as resource persons to be contacted when necessary during the
              evaluation and approval process: ASCS, FAS, FNS, Agricultural
              Marketing Service (AMS), and Food Safety and Inspection Service
              (FSIS), and requires FAS to request that the Office of Food for Peace,
              Agency for International Development designate an appropriate person to
              be contacted.




                                          2
