U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE 

WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250 

 

 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION 

NUMBER: 

1043-031 

SUBJECT: Advisory Committee on Animal Health 

DATE: June 11, 2010 

OPI: Animal and Plant Health Inspection 
Service 



 

1. PURPOSE 
This regulation establishes the Advisory Committee on Animal Health (Committee). 


 


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATION 


a. The duration of the Committee shall be 2 years. 


b. This regulation will expire 2 years from the date of filing. 






 


3. AUTHORITY 

The Committee is established by the Secretary of the Department of Agriculture in 
accordance with the Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA) as amended, 5 U.S.C. 
App.2. 




 


4. OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE 

The purpose is to advise the Secretary of Agriculture on means to prevent, conduct 
surveillance for, monitor, control, or eradicate animal diseases of national importance. In 
doing so, the committee will consider public health, conservation of natural resources, and 
the stability of livestock economies. 

 


5. DESCRIPTION OF DUTIES 

The duties of the Committee involve advising and counseling USDA on: 


a. USDA’s livestock disease management and traceability strategies. 



b. Engaging Tribal, small and minority farmers, and nontraditional livestock 
producers in safeguarding animal health. 



c. Prioritizing animal health initiatives. 


 







6. OFFICIAL TO WHOM THE COMMITTEE REPORTS 

The Advisory Committee on Animal Health makes recommendations to the Secretary 
of Agriculture. 

 



7. SUPPORT 

The National Center for Animal Health and Emergency Management will provide 
support to the Committee and to the Designated Federal Official (DFO) in the 
conduct of the official duties of the Committee. 




 


8. ESTIMATED ANNUAL COSTS AND STAFF YEARS 

Estimated annual operating expenses are $60,000 and .25 FTE staff years. 

 



9. DESIGNATED FEDERAL OFFICIAL 

The Chief Operating Officer of Veterinary Services, Animal and Plant Health 
Inspection Service shall serve as the DFO. As a full-time or permanent part-time 
employee, appointed in accordance with agency procedures, the DFO or the alternate 
DFO will approve or call all of the advisory committee’s meetings, prepare and 
approve all meeting agendas, attend all committee meetings, adjourn any meeting 
when the DFO determines adjournment to be in the public interest, and chair 
meetings when directed to do so by the official to whom the advisory committee 
reports. 

 



10. ESTIMATED NUMBER AND FREQUENCY OF MEETINGS 

The Committee will meet approximately one or more times annually as determined to 
be in the interest of USDA. All meetings will be open to the public. 

 



11. DURATION AND TERMINATION 

This committee will be established for 2 years from the filing date of the charter. If 
the work of the Committee is completed before that date, the committee will be 
terminated in accordance with FACA. 

 



12. MEMBERSHIP AND DESIGNATION 


a. The Committee shall consist of no more than 20 people appointed by the 
Secretary of Agriculture. 

 


b. Membership balance will be achieved by appointments to be composed of persons 
from a variety of geographic localities, representing a broad spectrum of farmers, 
scientists, trade association representatives, the university community, and 







representatives from other groups with related interests. Members shall include 
but not be limited to representatives from the following groups: 

 

(1) Cattle producers / cattle producer groups; 

(2) Poultry producers /poultry producer groups; 

(3) Swine producers / swine producer groups; 

(4) Sheep and goat producers / sheep and goat producer organizations; 

(5) Aquaculture producers / aquaculture producer groups; 

(6) Animal welfare organizations; 

(7) Wildlife/zoo biologists or veterinarians 

(8) Veterinarians / veterinary professional organizations; 

(9) Organic producers / organic producer groups; 

(10) Tribal and State animal health officials; 

(11) Livestock marketing and processing groups 






 

c. The Committee may require specialized expertise to advise the committee on 
complex scientific and/or technical matters. These members will serve as Special 
Government Employees (SGE). Appropriate consultation with ethics officials 
will be conducted and SGEs will follow appropriate ethics guidelines as required 
by the Office of Government Ethics. 

 


d. Members shall serve without compensation, but may receive reimbursement for 
travel expenses and per diem in accordance with USDA travel regulations for 
attendance at Committee functions. 

 


e. The DFO shall select a Chairperson and Vice Chair upon consultation with the 
members of the Committee. 


f. Equal opportunity practices, consistent with USDA policies will be followed in all 
appointments to the Committee. To ensure that recommendations of the 
committee take into account the needs of the diverse groups served by the 
Department, membership shall include, to the extent practicable, individuals with 
demonstrated ability to represent minorities, women, and persons with disabilities. 





 

13. SUBCOMMITTEES 

The DFO may form subcommittees for purposes consistent with this charter. Any 
subcommittee, workgroup or task force must report back to the parent committee and 
must not provide advice or work products directly to the Agency. 

 



14. RECORDKEEPING 

 

Records of the Committee, formally and informally established subcommittees, or 
other subgroups of the Committee, will be handled in accordance with General 
Records Schedule 26, Item 2 or other approved USDA records directives and 
disposition schedule. These records will be available for public inspection and 
copying, subject to the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552 and FACA. 





 


15. FILING DATE 

 

This charter will be filed with the Library of Congress and Congressional oversight 
committees as required by FACA. The filing date shall be the day the charter is filed 
by the USDA Committee Management Officer upon issuance via the USDA 
Departmental Regulations. 




 

 

 

 -END- 


