U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE 

WASHINGTON, DC 20250 

 

DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION 

NUMBER: 

DR 1010-001 

SUBJECT: Organization Planning, Review, and 
Approval 

DATE: 

January 4, 2018 

OPI: 

Office of Human 
Resources Management 



 

 

 

Section Page 

 

1. Purpose 1 

2. Special Instructions/Cancellations 2 

3. Scope 2 

4. Authority 2 

5. Policy 2 

6. Roles and Responsibilities 3 

7. Procedures 4 

8. Changes Requiring Incidental Transfer Agreements 6 

9. Revising Official and Functional Organization Charts 6 

10. Records Retention and Disposal 7 

 

Appendix A - Definitions A-1 

Appendix B - Acronyms and Abbreviations B-1 

Appendix C - Authorities and References C-1 

Appendix D - Summary of Changes D-1 

Appendix E - Sample: Official Organization Chart E-1 

Appendix F - Sample: Functional Statement F-1 

Appendix G - Sample: Incidental Transfer Agreement G-1 

Appendix H - Sample: Memorandum of Notification to the Chief Financial Officer H-1 

 

 

 

1. PURPOSE 


 

This Departmental Regulation (DR) describes the policy and actions for making changes to 
organizational structures within the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). It is 
intended to streamline and simplify the process of organizational change in order to 
facilitate the implementation of optimal organizational structures throughout the agency. 

 

 

 


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS 


 

a. This DR supersedes DR 1010-001, Organization, dated July 20, 2006, in its entirety. 


 

b. This DR only addresses organizational changes that require the Office of the 
Secretary’s (OSEC) prior approval. Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, and 
Departmental Management will maintain procedures consistent with this DR for 
planning, review, and approval through their leadership of any reorganization that 
does not require prior approval of OSEC. 


 

 

3. SCOPE 


 

This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices. 

 

 

4. AUTHORITY 


 

The authority to approve the creation, elimination, or transfer of an entire Mission Area, 
agency, or staff office is reserved to the Secretary pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 301 and 
Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1953. 

 

 

5. POLICY 


 

a. OSEC will approve organizational changes that require any or all of the following: 


 

(1) The realignment or reorganization of a function across or within Mission Areas, 
agencies, or Departmental staff office lines; 


 

(2) Any management-initiated reductions in staff; 


 

(3) The closure or of an entire office or the effective curtailment of office operations; 
or 


 

(4) The transfer of an entire office across congressional district lines. 


 

b. Approved reorganizations are to result in a reasonable and supportable grade structure. 
In addition, organization changes must provide balance among Mission Area, agency, 
or staff office needs, economy and efficiency of operations, sound skill and knowledge 
utilization, and maximum attraction and retention of employees. Any organizational 
change that impacts the official organization chart must be prepared in the required 
format and contain the appropriate signatures as defined by this DR (see Appendix E). 
A copy must be provided to the Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM) for 
the record. 


 


c. The requirements of this DR do not apply to organizational changes that are directed by 
statute, or are a result of the direction of other Federal organizations that provide 
funding to the Department to carry out activities on their behalf. This exception does 
not relieve Mission Areas, agencies, or staff offices from the requirements to notify 
relevant organizations within the Department, to seek approval prior to the use of 
workforce restructuring authorities, or to document the organizational changes. 


 

 

6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 


 

a. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices proposing a reorganization are 
responsible for: 


 

(1) Developing reorganization work plans in accordance with this DR; 








 

(2) Consulting with unions as appropriate; 








 

(3) Consulting with the servicing Human Resources Operations (HRO) organizations, 
budget officers/Chief Financial Officers (CFO), internal civil rights staffs, and other 
USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices potentially impacted by the 
reorganization; and 
















 

(4) Submitting approved documents for review and coordinating a meeting with 
OHRM, Office of Budget and Program Analysis (OBPA), Office of the General 
Counsel (OGC), and Office of Congressional Relations (OCR) to address, discuss, 
and resolve potential issues with effective implementation of the proposed 
reorganization. 
















 

b. Mission Area, staff office, and agency HRO organizations are responsible for: 


 

(1) Working with internal stakeholders on the development of the proposed 
reorganization and providing guidance on the classification, position management, 
and staffing implications; 


 

(2) Assisting internal stakeholders as needed on collective bargaining agreements and 
considering human capital planning requirements in the proposed change; 


 

(3) Coordinating the assignment of organizational structure codes in compliance with 
established data element standards that accurately reflect the functional placement 
of the organization within the hierarchy; and 


 

(4) Completing required payroll/personnel actions for implementation. 


 

c. Civil Rights Offices are responsible for ensuring that all actions covered by this DR are 
in compliance with current civil rights and Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) laws 



and regulations, and, if applicable, identifying any barriers to full compliance and 
actions to eliminate or mitigate those barriers. 


 

d. OHRM is responsible for: 


 

(1) Providing advice and assistance on organizational restructuring, position 
management, and span of control; 


 

(2) Ensuring coordination between the Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices and the 
Office of Personnel Management on the use of workforce flexibilities to implement 
organizational changes; and 


 

(3) Maintaining the repository for USDA official organization charts and ensuring that 
organizational charts on file are up-to-date. 


 

 

7. PROCEDURES 


 

a. Prior to implementing a reorganization or realignment, Mission Areas, agencies, and 
staff offices are to work with HROs, finance/budget officers, and other internal 
stakeholders to prepare the reorganization work plan and submit the document for 
concurrent clearance to OHRM, OBPA, OGC, and OCR through their Mission Area. 
Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should respond to the information requested 
in the reorganization work plan and identify the types of documentation to be prepared. 


 

b. After sufficient time for concurrent review of the work plan, the requesting organization 
must coordinate a meeting of representatives from the above-listed offices to discuss the 
work plan and address, discuss, and resolve any concerns with the work plan and 
implementation of the proposed reorganization prior to submitting the work plan to 
OSEC. 


 

c. OSEC can either inform a Mission Area, agency, or staff office to proceed with the 
reorganization work plan and delegate review and approval of future documentation to 
the Under or Assistant Secretary, inform a Mission Area, agency, or staff office to 
proceed and request future documentation be provided to OSEC for review and 
approval, or inform the Mission Area, agency, or staff office to not proceed with the 
proposed plan. 


 

d. The following documents are required, if applicable to the proposed change, as part of 
the review and approval process: 


 

(1) The completed and approved work plan; 
(2) A narrative describing the proposed changes and the rationale for those changes 
[required for all 1010 packages]; 


 


(3) A Summary of Changes, in the form and content set forth in Appendix D, that 
details the effect that the proposed changes would have on the budget, as well as 
one-time costs associated with the proposed changes including relocation costs, 
severance pay, buyouts, retraining, outplacement services, and/or lease 
termination costs. The budget analysis should explain how one-time costs would 
be absorbed [required for all 1010 packages]; 


 

(4) A statement acknowledging that all applicable labor relations 
organizations that represent affected employees have been notified of the 
proposal, and certifying that the proposing officials have met or will meet 
all applicable labor relations obligations [required for all 1010 packages]; 


 

(5) Copies of current and proposed staffing plans for all affected organizations. 
The proposed staffing plans must specify proposed changes in positions 
and/or funding and must show all titles, pay plans, series, grades, and duty 
stations affected by the proposed changes [required if the proposed change 
will result in a change in staffing plan(s)]; 


 

(6) A statement acknowledging that the proposed changes are in 
compliance with current civil rights and EEO laws and regulations, 
and, if applicable, identifying any barriers to full compliance and 
actions to eliminate or mitigate those barriers [required for all 1010 
packages]; 


 

(7) A current and proposed official organizational chart, in the form and 
content set forth in Appendix E, bearing the original signature of the 
appropriate Under Secretary, Assistant Secretary, Assistant to the 
Secretary, or staff office head [required if the proposed change will result 
in a change in the organizational chart]; 


 

(8) Revised functional statements, in the form and content set forth in 
Appendix F, for all impacted units [required if the proposed 
change will result in a change to the functional statements]; 


 

(9) If applicable, a description of changes that will be needed in the 
delegations of authority (per 7 CFR 2). If no change to the delegations is 
needed, a statement affirming that the delegations have been reviewed and 
that no changes are needed must be submitted; 


 

(10) If applicable, an Incidental Transfer Agreement (ITA); see Appendix G); 


 

(11) Signed notification from the Mission Area, agency, or staff office Chief 
Financial Officer indicating that all internal control requirements have 
been met (see Appendix H) [required for all 1010 packages]; and 


 

(12) A draft copy of a letter for the Secretary to the appropriate 



Congressional committee(s) notifying them of the proposed 
organizational change and mitigating factors [required for all proposed 
changes that trigger one of the notification requirements included in 
USDA’s annual appropriations language]. 


 

 

8. CHANGES REQUIRING INCIDENTAL TRANSFER AGREEMENTS: 

 

a. ITAs are only required if personnel, funds, property, space, or records transfer 
from one Mission Area, agency, or staff office to another. In such cases, a 
written ITA will be prepared subsequent to the approval of the organizational 
change to document which personnel, funds, property, space, or records will 
be transferred (see Appendix G). 




 

b. The losing Mission Area, agency, or staff office is responsible for preparing 
the ITA and circulating it for signature. The following officials must sign the 
ITA: 




 

(1) The head of each Mission Area, agency, or staff office involved in the 
transfer if the transfer is between agencies; 


 

(2) Each Under Secretary, Assistant Secretary, Assistant to the Secretary, or 
staff office head involved in the transfer; 


 

(3) The Director, Office of Operations; 


 

(4) The Director, OHRM; 


 

(5) The Director, OBPA; and 


 

(6) The Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA). 


 

c. The losing Mission Area, agency, or staff office must provide a copy of the 
ITA to OHRM after final approval by the ASA. 


 

 

9. REVISING ORGANIZATION CHARTS 


 

a. Any approved changes in an organization’s structure may also require a change to one or 
more titles of the organizational units impacted by the change. Mission Areas, agencies, 
and staff offices will revise internal working charts and the official organizational chart, 
as reorganizations are approved by the head of the organization. 


 

b. Functional (working) charts reflect lines of reporting and oversight for organizational 
functions and activities. These charts do not necessarily reflect the organizational 
structure codes that were built to support the reporting relationships and the 



payroll/personnel reporting requirements; however, through a crosswalk, unit activities 
should correspond to what is approved in the official organizational chart. 


 

c. The official organizational charts reflect approved organizational structures and the 
codes that support the hierarchical lines of reporting as well as payroll/personnel 
reporting requirements. The hierarchy will reflect the Office of the Under Secretary, the 
Office of the ASA, or staff office Director down to the division or equivalent level of the 
organization. 


 

d. Proposed title changes of Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, or those offices and 
programs identified in statute can only be changed by statute, Executive Order, 
regulation, or Secretary’s Memorandum. 


 

e. OHRM, as the repository, maintains the current approved official organization charts in 
the required format (see Appendix E). 


 

 

10. RECORDS RETENTION AND DISPOSAL 


 

Organizational files are permanent records. All records should be maintained in accordance 
with the appropriate records retention period, and disposed of in accordance with the 
National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) approved disposition schedules and 
records keeping guidance. 

 

 

- END - 


APPENDIX A 

 

DEFINITIONS 

 

 

a. Agency: Organizational units of the Department, other than staff offices, whose heads 
report to officials within the Office of the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Under, and 
Assistant Secretaries. 




 

b. Branch: An organizational component of an agency that reports to a division or 
equivalent. 




 

c. Congressional Notification: A letter that is drafted for the Secretary’s signature notifying 
the Appropriations or other authorizing committee(s) of the proposed organizational 
change. 


 

d. Division: A major functional component within an agency or staff office. 


 

e. Function: An action, role or activity assigned to and performed by an organization. 


 

f. Functional (working) Organization Chart: For purposes of this DR, a graphic 
representation of an organization’s current or proposed structure at each level which is 
reflected from the Under Secretary’s level down to the lowest level impacted. This chart 
may reflect position titles. 


 

g. Interagency Transfer Agreement (ITA): A required document that provides information 
on personnel, funds, property, space, and records that are affected by functions and 
activities that transfer between Mission Areas or agencies. This agreement must 
accompany the reorganization proposal for a transfer of function. 


 

h. Mission Area: A group of agencies with related functions that report to the same Under 
or Assistant Secretary. Research, Education, and Economics (REE) is an example of a 
mission area. 


 

i. Office: A permanent facility in a state, county, city, or a National Forest that is 
recognized as a discrete entity by both members of the public and the agency, and to 
which Federal employees are permanently assigned. Offices are described by separate 
listings in public or agency phone books and Web sites. An ARS laboratory in Florida, 
and a Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) District Office in Colorado are 
examples of offices. 


 

j. Official Organizational Chart: A graphic representation of the organization’s proposed 
structure that reflects each level of the hierarchy from the Office of the Under Secretary, 
ASA, or Staff Office head down to the division level or equivalent. It must reflect the 
organizational structure codes that support the payroll and personnel system. It must bear 
the agency or organization’s mission statement, signature of the Under Secretary and the 



ASA, and the date of the last approved organization chart that is being superseded by the 
current organization chart. Official organizational charts should not have employee 
names listed. Official organizational charts are maintained by OHRM. 


 

k. Program: An activity within an organization primarily concerned with the delivery of 
food or agricultural services. 


 

l. Realignment: The movement of a group of employees in their position and the activity 
performed when an organization structure change occurs. Realignments do not result in a 
change to the employee’s position, pay or grade. 


 

m. Reorganization: The planned elimination, addition, or redistribution of functions or 
duties in an organization or the movement of a function/activity within a competitive 
area. 


 

n. Staff Office: Departmental administrative offices whose heads report to officials within 
the Office of the Secretary 


 

o. Staff Office Head: A general officer of a staff office who reports directly to the Secretary 
of Agriculture. The Director, OBPA is an example. 


 

p. Transfer of Function: Occurs when a function will cease in one competitive area and 
move to another competitive area that does not perform that function at the time of the 
transfer; or the movement of a competitive area in which the function is performed in a 
different local commuting area. 


 

q. Unit: Any component, subdivision, or group of employees that is directed by a 
supervisor. 


 


APPENDIX B 

 

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 

 

 

 

APHIS Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 

ARS Agricultural Research Service 

ASA Assistant Secretary for Administration 

CFR Code of Federal Regulations 

DM Departmental Management 

DR Departmental Regulation 

FS Forest Service 

FSIS Food Safety and Inspection Service 

FTE Full-time Equivalent 

FWS Federal Wage System 

GS General Schedule 

HRO Human Resources Operations 

ITA Incidental Transfer Agreement 

NARA National Archives and Records Administration 

NRE Natural Resources and Environment 

OBPA Office of Budget and Program Analysis 

OCR Office of Congressional Relations 

OGC Office of the General Counsel 

OHRM Office of Human Resources Management 

OSEC Office of the Secretary 

P.L. Public Law 

SES Senior Executive Service 

SL Senior Level 

ST Scientific (or Professional) 

U.S.C. United States Code 

USDA United States Department of Agriculture 

 


APPENDIX C 

 

AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES 

 

 

a. 5 CFR 351, Reduction in Force 


 

b. 5 U.S.C. Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1953, as amended (7 U.S.C. 2201 note). 


 

c. 5 U.S.C. 301, Departmental Regulations 


 

d. 5 U.S.C. 305, Systematic Agency Review of Operations 


 

e. 7 CFR 2, Delegations of Authority by the Secretary of Agriculture and General Officers 
of the Department 


 

f. 7 CFR 2.24, Agriculture, Delegations of authority by the Secretary of Agriculture and 
General Officers of the Department, Delegations of Authority to the Deputy Secretary, 
Under Secretaries, and Assistant Secretaries, Assistant Secretary for Administration 


 

g. 7 U.S.C. 2201, Establishment of Department 


 

h. 31 U.S.C. 1535, The Economy Act of 1932, as amended 


 

i. DR 3080-001, Records Management, August 16, 2016 


 

j. DR 3085-001, Vital Records Management Program, August 19, 2011 


 

k. Office of Management and Budget, Circular A-123, Management’s Responsibility for 
Enterprise Risk Management and Internal Control, July 15, 2016 (Note: Portions of 
this policy have been modified by M-17-26, Reducing Burden for Federal Agencies by 
Rescinding and Modifying OMB Memoranda, June 15, 2017) 
l. Public Law (P.L.) 103-354, Department of Agriculture Reorganization Act of 1994 


 


APPENDIX D 

 

SUMMARY OF CHANGES 

 

 

Instructions for Preparing the Summary of Changes Table 

 

i. Attach a table in the form and content of the one shown below. Report current annual 
costs, proposed annual costs, and the difference between current and proposed annual 
costs for the current fiscal year. 






 

ii. Categorize costs as either "Salary and Benefits" or "Other." "Other" costs include 
travel, supplies, and equipment costs related to the identified full-time equivalents 
(FTE). A reduction in FTEs and salary and benefit costs usually results in a reduction 
in "Other" costs. 






 

 

NAME OF MISSION AREA OR STAFF OFFICE 

SUMMARY OF CHANGES 

 

PAY PLAN AND 
GRADE/COSTS 

 

CURRENT FTEs 

 

PROPOSED FTEs 

 

DIFFERENCE 

SES, ST, or SL 

Positions 

 

 

 

GS-15 

 

 

 

GS-14 

 

 

 

GS-13 and below 

 

 

 

FWS Positions 

 

 

 

Other Positions 

 

 

 

Total FTEs1 

 

 

 

 

Annual Costs 

 

 

 

Cost of Salaries 
and Benefits 

 

 

 

Other Costs 

 

 

 

Total Costs 

 

 

 



 

1These numbers should equal the actual staff years before and after the proposed 
reorganization. Assume that all Senior Executive Service and Senior Level positions are 
filled when completing FTE information. 


APPENDIX E 

 

SAMPLE: OFFICIAL ORGANIZATION CHART 

 

1. All official organizational charts must be printable in landscape orientation on 8 ½” by 11” 
paper. 


 

2. Organizational charts must show clear lines of authority. Do not show “dotted line” 
reporting relationships. Dotted line relationships are only appropriate for temporary project 
teams and may not be included in official organizational charts. 


 

3. Include the Mission Area, agency, or staff office name and mission statement on the top lefthand 
corner of the chart immediately under “United States Department of Agriculture”. 


 

4. Include one or two signature lines on the top right-hand corner of the chart. Provide two 
lines: one for the recommending official to sign and date, and one for the approving official 
to sign and date. 


 

5. Include the date of the last approved organizational chart that is being superseded by the 
current organization chart at the bottom left corner of the new chart. 


 

6. Include the organization structure code for each structure. 


 

 

 

 




 


APPENDIX F 

 

SAMPLE: FUNCTIONAL STATEMENT 

 

 

Instructions for Preparing Functional Statements 

 

1. On each page of the functional statements, include the name of the Mission Area, 
agency, or staff office and the date of the revision. 


 

2. Group the major organizational components by office, division, branch, or other 
major organizational component designation. 


 

3. For each organizational component, list each of the major functions that will be 
assigned to that major organizational component, including its subcomponents (e.g., 
when describing the functions assigned to a division, include the functions for every 
branch that is a part of the division). 


 

4. Individual functions should be described succinctly. Functional descriptions must be 
consistent with the delegations in 7 CFR 2. An example of the required format is 
shown below: 


 

 

 

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE 

AGENCY NAME 

DATE 

 

Office of the Director of Strategic Planning -- Assignment of Functions 

 

1. Provides leadership, direction, coordination and assistance in the areas of: 
strategic planning for agency-wide strategic planning initiatives. 


 

2. Provides leadership on behalf of the agency Administrator to ensure that the agency’s 
strategic plans supports agency, Mission Area, and Departmental goals. 


 

3. Coordinates the preparation of annual updates to agency strategic and performance 
plans. 


 

4. Conducts special studies and reports to support the agency’s strategic planning and 
long-term workload forecasting efforts. 

 


APPENDIX G 

 

SAMPLE: INCIDENTAL TRANSFER AGREEMENT 

 

 

Instructions for Preparing Incidental Transfer Agreements 

 

The Incidental Transfer Agreement (ITA) should contain all the information necessary to 
identify the functions, employees, funding, property, space, and records that are being 
transferred. The ITA should contain the following information: 

 

Functions: The ITA should identify all of the functions to be transferred. 

 

Staff Year Ceilings and Personnel: The ITA should identify the FTEs to be transferred 
for the current fiscal year and any other years for which a ceiling has been assigned. 
Senior Executive and Schedule C FTEs should be listed separately. 

 

The ITA should also show the employees to be transferred by name, pay plan, title, 
grade, and type of position (e.g., full-time, part-time, seasonal). 

 

Funding: The ITA should identify all funds to be transferred for the balance of the 
fiscal year as well as for any future fiscal years for which funds have already been 
requested. 

 

Property, Space, and Records: The ITA should identify all records, personal property, and 
space that will be transferred. The losing organization can either itemize all items that will 
be transferred or make a blanket certification that all items associated with the function 
will be transferred. 

 

Regulatory Considerations: Any transfer of rulemaking responsibility or transfer of a 
current delegation of authority in 7 CFR 2 should be identified in the ITA. 

 




APPENDIX H 

 

SAMPLE: MEMORANDUM OF NOTIFICATION TO 

THE CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER 

 

 

To: xxxxx 

Chief Financial Officer, Department of Agriculture 

 

Re: Human Capital Reorganization Notification to the Chief Financial Officer 
Concerning Internal Controls 

 

 

As the Chief Financial Officer or the Acting Chief Financial Officer of the organization 
affected by the restructuring, I have reviewed the human capital adjustments and agree that: 

 

Both the manual and internal controls have been reviewed in accordance with the 
new processes and procedures of the adjusted structure. 

The internal controls have been adjusted to ensure that proper approvals for contracts 
and forms will be maintained. 

Internal controls have been adjusted to safe guard the assets of the government. 

Internal controls have been adjusted to ensure the proper accounting and reporting of 
income, expenditures, obligations, asset purchases, asset dispositions, and liabilities. 

A-123, Section A processes have been adjusted to accommodate change in processes 
and the new internal controls. The documentation for A-123 has been adjusted for the 
internal control procedures and testing. The adjusted documentation for A-123 has 
been delivered to the Office of the Chief Financial Officer. 

The adjustment will not negatively affect the opinion of the annual audit. 

 

 

The reorganization affects _______________________ (number adjusted) of staff with a total 
reduction of _________________________FTEs. The reorganization will affect the areas of 
_________________________________________________ (i.e. budgeting) of 
____________________________ (agency) in ____________________________ (location). 
The reorganization is expected to be implemented on ___________ (date) and be fully 
completed by ________ (date). 

 

_________________________________ (signed) 

 

_________________________________ (date) 

Mission Area/Agency/Staff Office Chief Financial Officer 

 


U. S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE 

WASHINGTON, D. C. 20250 

 

DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION 

 Number: 

1020-002 

 SUBJECT: USDA Soil and Water Conservation 
Program 

 

 DATE: 

October 6, 1983 

 OPI: 

SEC (NRE), SCS (APD) 



 1 PURPOSE 

This regulation assigns responsibility for administering the Soil and Water Resources 
Conservation Act of 1977 (Public Law 95-192, 16 U.S.C. 2000 et seq.). 

 

2 SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS 

This regulation supersedes Secretary's Memorandum 1930, dated December 30, 1977, which is 
canceled. 

 

3 POLICY 

The Assistant Secretary for Natural Resources and Environment has Departmental leadership for 
carrying out the provisions of the Soil and Water Resources Conservation Act of 1977. 

 

4 LEGISLATIVE REQUIREMENTS 

The Act requires the Secretary to appraise on a continuing basis the status, condition, and trends of 
the Nation's soil, water, and related resources. It also requires the Secretary to develop a national 
soil and water conservation program and to report annually to the Congress on progress in 
implementing the program. 

 

5 AUTHORITY 

The Assistant Secretary for Natural Resources and Environment may use the agencies of the 
Department as necessary to carry out the Department's functions under this Act. 

 


U.S. Department of Agriculture 

Washington, D.C. 20250 

 

DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION 

 Number: 

1020-004 

 SUBJECT: USDA Food and Nutrition Policy 
Statement 

 DATE: 

January 2, 1987 

 OPI: Science and Education 



 1 PURPOSE 

 To state the policy and responsibilities of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) 
with regard to food and human nutrition. 

 

2 POLICY 

It is a policy of the USDA to promote optimal human health and well-being through improved 
nutrition. The department recognizes the importance of coordination of its human nutrition-related 
activities with the agricultural/food industry, other governmental agencies, and private or public 
institutions. 

 

3 RESPONSIBILITIES 

USDA has the mission to encourage the production and availability of a sufficient, safe, and 
nutritionally adequate supply of wholesome food for Americans and help and encourage other 
countries to meet their food requirements. USDA, in support of this mission, will: 

a Conduct research in the area of human nutrition and food science, including human 
dietary requirements, nutritional status assessment, food composition, utilization of foods, and 
food safety. 

b Provide food and nutrition education and guidance based on research, thus helping to 
provide useful information to individuals to assist them in selecting diets to improve their health 
and well being. 

c Encourage the training of professionals with expertise in human nutrition and related 
fields and encourage action to assure the Nation of sufficient human capital in this area. 

d Assess the nutritional adequacy of domestic food supplies to identify nutrition and food 
related problems and to develop strategies for improving them. 

e Monitor food use and food consumption patterns among the Nation's population, in 
cooperation with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, to determine areas where 
nutritional guidance, food assistance, and food production programs may be focused. 


f Conduct domestic and international food assistance and distribution programs to improve 
the nutritional quality of diets. 

g Work cooperatively with governments and institutions of other countries and with 
international organizations to identify world food and nutrition related problems and to develop 
multilateral approaches for correcting them. 

 

 


