                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                 NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                         DR 1074-001
                                                                 DATE:
 SUBJECT: Scientific Integrity                                   May 2, 2024
                                                                 EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of the Chief Scientist                              May 2, 2029



Section                                                                                     Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                   1
2.   Scope                                                                                     2
3.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                        2
4.   Background                                                                                3
5.   Policy                                                                                    5
6.   Summary of Process for Handling Allegations of Compromised Scientific Integrity          10
7.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                               11
8.   Inquiries                                                                                17

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                     A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                    B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                     C-1
Appendix D –USDA Code of Scientific Ethics                                                  D-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s
          (USDA) Scientific Integrity policy and provides instruction and guidance to
          Departmental leadership and employees to ensure the highest level of integrity in all
          aspects of the Department’s and USDA Mission Area's, agency's, and staff office's
          involvement with (and use of) scientific and technological processes, research, analyses,
          and products.

     b.   This DR includes instructions and guidance for decision makers as they develop public
          policies informed by science and relevant to food, agriculture, natural resources, rural
          development, and related issues. This DR is intended to instill public confidence in
          USDA research, evidence-based, and science-based public policymaking by articulating
          the principles of scientific integrity and the roles and responsibilities of all USDA
          employees, including career staff and political appointees, in upholding these principles.
2. SCOPE

  a.   This DR applies to:

       (1) All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices;

       (2) All USDA employees, political and career, who:

           (a) Engage in, supervise, manage, or report on scientific activities (see Appendix
               B(ff));

           (b) Analyze or publicly communicate information resulting from scientific
               activities; and

           (c) Utilize information derived from scientific activities in policy and decision
               making.

  b.   All contractors, cooperators, partners, permittees, lessees, grantees, and volunteers, who
       engage or assist in the activities identified in Section 2a(2)(a) through (c) on behalf of
       USDA, are expected to uphold the principles of scientific integrity established by this
       DR. However, any express requirements will be set forth in documents, such as
       individual agreements, contracts, statements of work, or memoranda of understanding,
       or established via issuance of a separate rule or other Departmental policy.

       Research institutions that receive allegations of research misconduct involving USDA-
       funded extramural research should refer to Research Institutions Conducting USDA-
       Funded Extramural Research; Research Misconduct, 2 Code of Federal Regulations
       (CFR) Part 422.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This DR supersedes DR 1074-001, Scientific Integrity, dated November 18, 2016.

  b.   Relative to the previously issued versions of DR 1074-001 (2016) and associated
       guidance, this updated DR 1074-001 continues to:

       (1) Incorporate additional clarifications and provisions to ensure and promote scientific
           integrity in Departmental and USDA agency activities;

       (2) Implement robust and well-defined procedures for responding to allegations of
           compromised scientific integrity;




                                               2
       (3) Harmonize the procedures previously used for responding to alleged violations of
           the USDA Scientific Integrity Policy with those used for responding to allegations
           of research misconduct made against USDA employees (see Departmental Manual
           (DM) 1074-001, Procedures for Responding to Allegations of Compromised
           Scientific Integrity);

       (4) Clarify the roles of the USDA Chief Scientist, Departmental Scientific Integrity
           Officer (DSIO), and Agency Scientific Integrity Officers (ASIOs) in overseeing
           Departmental and USDA Mission Area, agency, and staff office responses to
           allegations of compromised scientific integrity; and

       (5) Ensure that the work and views of USDA scientists are accurately represented in
           USDA media communications by providing Departmental guidance on the
           acknowledgement of public funding and the harmonization of language used for
           disclaimers to clarify the status of outside scientific publications.

  c.   This DR will not be interpreted to conflict with the rights of an employee under the law,
       including:

       (1) The Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute (5 United States Code
           (U.S.C.) §§ 7101-7135);

       (2) Applicable collective bargaining agreements;

       (3) Those provisions of Employees statute (5 U.S.C. §§ 7101- 7901) relating to
           disciplinary action of employees;

       (4) The Whistleblower Protection Act of 1989 (WPA) Public Law (P.L.) 101-12; and

       (5) The Whistleblower Protection Enhancement Act of 2012 (WPEA) P.L. 112-199.

  d.   Additionally, this DR will not be interpreted to conflict with any rights accorded a union
       representative under the Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute when
       communicating as a union representative. Further, it is recognized that the
       implementation of this DR may be subject to collective bargaining.


4. BACKGROUND

  a.   On December 6, 2000, the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy
       (OSTP) published the Federal Policy on Research Misconduct in the Federal Register
       (FR) (65 FR 76260). The purpose of this Federal Government-wide policy was to
       enhance consistency in the responses to allegations of research misconduct that pertain
       to research conducted or supported by the Federal Government. The policy established:

       (1) A Federal-wide definition of research misconduct;



                                               3
     (2) Criteria required for making a finding of research misconduct;

     (3) A multi-phase process for responding to allegations of research misconduct; and

     (4) Guidelines for safeguarding the interests of informants (hereafter referred to as
         complainants) and the subjects of allegations. The policy directed Federal
         Departments and Agencies that conduct or support research to implement the
         policy.

b.   On March 9, 2009, the White House issued a Presidential Memorandum on Scientific
     Integrity for the Heads of Federal Departments and Agencies. This memorandum
     emphasized that the public must be able to trust the science and scientific process used
     to inform public policy decisions. As a follow-up to the Presidential Memorandum,
     OSTP issued a memorandum, Scientific Integrity, dated December 17, 2010, directing
     Federal Departments and Agencies to develop and implement scientific integrity policies
     to address:

     (1) The foundations of scientific integrity;

     (2) The public communication of scientific and technological findings;

     (3) The use of Federal Advisory Committees (FAC) tasked with providing scientific
         advice; and

     (4) The professional development of Federal Government scientists and engineers.

c.   On September 30, 1993, E.O. 12866, Regulatory Planning and Review, was issued.
     This E.O. directed Federal agencies to base their regulatory decisions on “the best
     reasonably obtainable scientific, technical, economic, and other information” concerning
     the need for, and consequences of, intended regulations. On January 18, 2011, E.O.
     13563, titled Improving Regulation and Regulatory Review, was issued. Section 5 of
     this E.O. indicated that “[c]onsistent with the President’s Memorandum for the Heads of
     Executive Departments and Agencies, “Scientific Integrity” (March 9, 2009), and its
     implementing guidance, each agency shall ensure the objectivity of any scientific and
     technological information and processes used to support the agency’s regulatory
     actions.” As further explained in a memorandum (Office of Management and Budget
     (OMB), Memorandum M-11-10, Executive Order 13563, “Improving Regulation and
     Regulatory Review”) issued on February 2, 2011, E.O. 13563 extends the President’s
     2009 Memorandum on Scientific Integrity to agency use of scientific and technological
     information relied upon to support regulatory actions.

d.   This DR is issued in response to, and is consistent with, the Federal Policy on Research
     Misconduct, the 2009 Presidential Memorandum on Scientific Integrity, and the 2010
     OSTP Memorandum on Scientific Integrity.




                                             4
5. POLICY

  Pursuant to the Federal Policy on Research Misconduct, the 2009 Presidential Memorandum
  on Scientific Integrity, the 2010 OSTP Memorandum on Scientific Integrity and in
  accordance with applicable statutes, regulations, trade agreements, or international protocols,
  Executive Orders, or Presidential Memoranda, the policy of the Department is to:

  a.   Promote a culture of scientific integrity. Science, and public trust in science, thrives in
       an environment that shields scientific data and analyses as well as their use in
       policymaking from political interference or inappropriate influence. Scientific findings
       and products must not be suppressed or altered for political purposes and must not be
       subjected to inappropriate influence. To help foster a culture of scientific integrity, the
       Department will:

       (1) Ensure that all employees and contractors receive training in scientific integrity
           when hired.

            (a) Employees and contractors (Section 2(b)), who have roles covered under
                Section 2(a)2, must receive role-based training.

            (b) All other employees and contractors (Section 2(b)) must receive awareness
                training.

       (2) Ensure that all covered employees and contractors (Section 5(a)1(a)) receive
           refresher training in scientific integrity biennially.

  b.   Select and retain candidates for scientific and technical positions at USDA based on the
       candidate’s scientific and technical knowledge, credentials, experience, and integrity,
       and hold them and their supervisors to the highest standard of professional and scientific
       ethics, including those described in the USDA Code of Scientific Ethics (see Appendix
       D).

  c.   Ensure the quality, accuracy, and transparency of all scientific information used to
       support policy and decision making, including to:

       (1) Use scientific information that is derived from well-established scientific processes;

       (2) Ensure that scientific data, scientific products, and research used to support policy
           decisions have undergone independent peer review by qualified experts, where
           feasible and appropriate, and consistent with law (See OMB, Memorandum M-05-
           03, Issuance of OMB’s “Final Information Quality Bulletin for Peer Review”);

       (3) Reflect scientific information appropriately and accurately (including OMB
           Guidelines for Ensuring and Maximizing the Quality, Objectivity, Utility, and
           Integrity of Information Disseminated by Federal Agencies); and



                                                5
     (4) Make scientific findings or conclusions considered or relied on in policy decisions
         publicly available online and in open formats, to the extent practicable, consistent
         with the Open Government Initiative, the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. §
         552, as amended by the OPEN Government Act of 2007, P.L. 110-175, the
         Administrative Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C. §§ 551-559 and other applicable statutes,
         regulations or document-handling procedures and policies. Where feasible and
         appropriate, the following will also be provided: information on the specific
         approach, data, and models used to develop such scientific conclusions, including a
         clear explanation of underlying assumptions and uncertainties; and, where
         appropriate, probabilities associated with a range of projections or scenarios.

d.   Continue to develop policies (in coordination with the General Services Administration
     and consistent with the Administration’s guidance on lobbyists serving on FACs) for
     convening FACs tasked with giving scientific advice, consistent with the following:

     (1) The recruitment process for new FAC members should be as transparent as
         practicable. When practicable and appropriate, FAC member vacancies will be
         announced widely, including notification in the Federal Register with an invitation
         for the public to recommend individuals for consideration and for self-nominations;

     (2) Professional biographical information of FAC appointees (including current and
         past affiliations) will be made widely available to the public (e.g., via a website)
         subject to the Privacy Act and other statutory or regulatory considerations. The
         information should clearly illustrate the appointees’ qualifications for serving on the
         committee;

     (3) The selection of members to serve on a scientific or technical FAC will be based on
         expertise, knowledge, and contribution to the relevant subject area. Additional
         factors for consideration will include the availability of the member to serve,
         diversity among members of the FAC, and the ability to work effectively on
         advisory committees. Committee membership should be fairly balanced in terms of
         points of view represented with respect to the functions to be performed by the
         FAC;

     (4) Except when prohibited by law, USDA will make all Conflict of Interest waivers
         granted to the committee members publicly available; and

     (5) Except when explicitly stated in a prior agreement between USDA and a FAC, all
         reports, recommendations, and products produced by FACs will be treated as solely
         the findings of such committees rather than of the U.S. Government, and will not be
         subjected to intra- or inter-agency revision.

     (6) FAC reports, recommendations, and other products are strictly advisory. The
         Department and USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are not obligated




                                             6
         to implement committee scientific recommendations, unless specifically provided
         by statute or Presidential directive.

e.   Facilitate the free flow of scientific and technological information, and support scientific
     integrity in the communication of scientific findings and products. The facilitation of
     the dissemination of scientific and technological information will be to the extent
     allowed by, and consistent with, privacy and classification standards, as well as with
     other applicable policies (for example, The United States Government Policy for
     Oversight of Life Sciences Dual Use Research of Concern, issued March 29, 2012 and
     the United States Government Policy for Institutional Oversight of Life Sciences Dual
     Use Research of Concern, issued September 24, 2014) and guidelines for
     communicating scientific information responsibly.

     (1) Accordingly, the Department will:

         (a) Encourage, but not require, USDA scientists to participate in communications
             with the media regarding their scientific findings (data and results). Scientists
             should coordinate media queries or opportunities (e.g., requests for interviews,
             requests for submissions of written commentary, etc.) with their immediate
             supervisors and public affairs offices in accordance with the applicable policies
             of their respective Mission Areas, agencies or staff offices. Agencies are
             expected to coordinate with the Office of Communications (OC), which
             provides a centralized operational direction for communications about the work
             of the Department. The OC’s role in communications regarding research and
             analysis done by USDA scientists is to assist with presentation, style, and
             logistics of the communications, and to advise on potential media requests or
             media outreach strategies. USDA agencies and staff offices may also identify
             and offer knowledgeable spokespersons, other than the scientist who originally
             received the media query, to respond to the query in an objective, non-partisan,
             and articulate manner.

         (b) Ensure that the work and views of USDA scientists are accurately represented
             in USDA media communications. Additionally, as required by section 5(f) of
             DR 1410-001, Publications Review and Clearance Policy, the additional
             requirements will be implemented to disclose the funding status, including
             potential conflict of interest, and, as necessary, to differentiate the status of
             products of scientific activity from official policy positions.

             1   All outside publications should continue to acknowledge and disclose the
                 public funding of the published work by USDA (and any other sources of
                 funding). Funding acknowledgement statements raise the visibility of
                 USDA-funded research efforts and allows the public to readily identify
                 publications from USDA scientists and employees.

                   A model funding acknowledgement statement is:




                                              7
              “This [research or work or presentation] was supported [in part] by
              the U.S. Department of Agriculture, [insert agency name].”

   2   Each agency within USDA will continue to use its own internal policies and
       discretion to determine when the inclusion of a disclaimer statement is
       warranted as part of any outside scientific and technical publication by
       USDA scientists and employees, who are appearing in their official capacity
       and whose work has not been formally disseminated by the Department as
       official government positions. When such a disclaimer is deemed necessary
       to identify the status of the publication, uniform language will be used that
       states:

              “The findings and conclusions in this [publication or presentation or
              blog or report] are those of the author(s) and should not be construed
              to represent any official USDA or U.S. Government determination or
              policy.”

(c) Ensure that USDA scientists can communicate their scientific findings (data
    and results) objectively without political interference or inappropriate
    influence, while at the same time complying with USDA policies and
    procedures for planning and conducting scientific activities, reporting scientific
    findings, and reviewing and releasing scientific products. This includes
    permitting scientists to communicate scientific information on social media
    platforms as is consistent with Departmental and Mission Area, agency or staff
    office policies. Scientific communications for non-USDA media (e.g.,
    manuscripts and presentations for scientific journals, workshops, conferences,
    and symposia) should adhere to agency technical review procedures.

   1   When reporting scientific findings or communicating with the media or the
       public in their official capacities as USDA employees, USDA scientists
       should refrain from making or publishing statements that could be construed
       as being judgments of, or recommendations on, USDA or any other Federal
       Government policy, unless they have secured appropriate prior approval to
       do so. Such communications should remain within the bounds of their
       scientific or technological findings, unless otherwise authorized.

   2   When communicating with the media or the public in their personal
       capacities, USDA scientists may express their personal views and opinions;
       however, they should not claim to officially represent the Department or its
       policies, or use the Department or other U.S. Government seals or logos.
       Personal or private activities must not violate Federal ethics rules.


(d) Ensure that scientific information is accurately represented in all external
    communications including responses to Congressional inquiries, testimony and
    other external publications.



                                   8
     (2) USDA officials, including public affairs officers, may not direct USDA scientists
         and technology experts to alter scientific and technological research findings for
         political or public relations purposes.

     (3) USDA officials, including public affairs officers, may neither ask nor suggest that
         USDA scientists and technology experts alter the presentation of their scientific
         findings in a manner that may compromise the objectivity or accurate representation
         of those findings.

         (a) USDA scientists and technology experts are free to express differing scientific
             opinions about scientific findings (data and results) and USDA officials may
             not retaliate against these employees for their differing opinions.

     (4) The provisions in this DR are not meant to limit the obligations of political
         appointees and agency leadership in setting research priorities or the priorities of
         other scientific activities. The provisions in this DR are also not intended to limit
         the ability of USDA public affairs staff to make decisions about whether or not the
         Department issues press releases or other external communications vehicles about
         research findings and other scientific activities.

f.   Encourage USDA scientists and other USDA employees involved in USDA scientific
     activities to interact with the broader scientific community, in a manner that is consistent
     with Federal rules of ethics, job responsibilities, and existing agency policies, and to the
     extent that is practicable given the availability of funding to support such interactions
     and any budgetary restraints. This includes:

     (1) Encouraging publication of research findings in peer-reviewed, professional, or
         scholarly journals;

     (2) Encouraging presentation of research findings at professional meetings;

     (3) Allowing service on editorial boards or as editors of professional or scholarly
         journals;

     (4) Allowing participation in professional societies, committees, task forces, and other
         specialized bodies of professional societies, including removing barriers to serving
         as officers or on governing boards of such societies, to the extent allowed by law;
         and

     (5) Allowing honors and awards to be received for contributions to scientific activities,
         discoveries, and products with the goal of minimizing, to the extent practicable,
         disparities in the potential for private-sector and public-sector scientists and
         engineers to accrue the professional recognition of such honors or awards.




                                              9
       (6) USDA employees who have general questions about financial conflicts of interest,
           activities involving foreign entities, Federal criminal ethics statutes, the Ethics in
           Government Act (5 U.S.C. Part IV), and the executive branch-wide Standards of
           Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch, 5 CFR Part 2635, should
           seek advice and guidance from USDA’s Office of Ethics (OE) at
           DAEO.ethics@usda.gov.

  g.   Ensure that mechanisms are in place to respond to allegations of compromised scientific
       integrity (See Appendix E and DM 1074-001).

  h.   Protect USDA employees who uncover and report allegations of compromised scientific
       integrity in good faith, as well as those USDA employees alleged to have compromised
       scientific integrity in the absence of a finding that the individual compromised scientific
       integrity, from prohibited personnel practices (as defined in Prohibited Personnel
       Practices, 5 U.S.C. § 2302(b)).

  i.   Continue to comply with the requirements of the WPA, and its expanded protections
       enacted by the act, To Reauthorize the Office of Special Counsel and for Other
       Purposes, P.L. 103-424, and the WPEA. The USDA will also continue to comply with
       all Department- and agency-specific WPA regulations, rules, and policies.

       (1) USDA employees, former USDA employees, and applicants for USDA
           employment who make allegations of compromised scientific integrity consistent
           with the WPA and the WPEA may seek redress for retaliation as provided under
           these Acts.

       (2) Those individuals who believe they have been improperly retaliated against may
           contact the USDA Office of Inspector General (OIG), the USDA Whistleblower
           Protection Ombudsman, the U.S. Office of Special Counsel or a combination of
           these points of contact.

  j.   Prohibit the compromise of scientific integrity, including research misconduct. (See
       Appendices B(dd) and B(hh)(1)).


6. SUMMARY OF PROCESS FOR HANDLING ALLEGATIONS OF COMPROMISED
   SCIENTIFIC INTEGRITY

  a.   The procedures for responding to allegations of compromised scientific integrity,
       including research misconduct, are described in DM 1074-001. The DM establishes a
       multi-phase framework for responding to allegations of compromised scientific
       integrity, including, as applicable, inquiry, investigation, adjudication, and appeal
       phases, consistent with the Federal Policy on Research Misconduct. The DM also
       establishes safeguards for those who make allegations of compromised scientific
       integrity (informants or complainants) in good faith and the subjects (respondents) of
       said allegations.



                                               10
  b.   To establish a finding that scientific integrity has been compromised:

       (1) There must be a loss or breach of scientific integrity (see Appendix B(9hh)(1)) in
           the conducting or reporting of scientific activities, or the use or application of the
           results of scientific activities; and

       (2) There must be a failure to comply with the policies set forth in this DR or a
           significant departure from accepted practices of the relevant research, scientific, or
           statistical community; and

       (3) The allegation must be proven by a preponderance of evidence.

  c.   Research misconduct is a subset of compromised scientific integrity.

       (1) To establish a finding of research misconduct:

           (a) The alleged behavior must fall within the definition of research misconduct
               (i.e., fabrication, falsification, or plagiarism in proposing, performing, or
               reviewing research, or in reporting research results); and

           (b) There must be a significant departure from accepted practices of the relevant
               research community; and

           (c) The misconduct must be committed intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly;
               and

           (d) The allegation must be proven by a preponderance of evidence.

       (2) Research misconduct does not include honest error or differences of opinion.

  d.   For the purposes of this DR, accepted practices of the relevant research or scientific
       community include, but are not limited to, those delineated in the USDA Code of
       Scientific Ethics.


7. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Under Secretary for USDA’s Research, Education and Economics (REE) Mission
       Area, as the Chief Scientist, will have responsibilities, which may be delegated as
       appropriate, that include:

       (1) Overseeing all aspects of this DR;

       (2) Having oversight authority for USDA proceedings to review and resolve allegations
           of compromised scientific integrity;



                                                11
     (3) Providing leadership for the Department on scientific integrity;

     (4) Ensuring Departmental compliance with this DR and DM 1074-001 for responding
         to allegations of compromised scientific integrity, including recognition of, and
         prompt action is taken to address and prevent, compromised scientific integrity;

     (5) Seeking consultation with the USDA Science Council in regard to implementation
         of this DR;

     (6) Reviewing USDA mission area, agency, and office compliance with this DR;

     (7) Updating this DR and any accompanying guidance, as appropriate; and

     (8) Designating the duties of the DSIO to a senior career staff person with scientific or
         scholarly credentials or both.

b.   The DSIO will:

     (1) Serve as the primary Department-level contact for questions regarding the policies
         of this DR;

     (2) Develop training and conduct outreach activities to facilitate USDA employee
         awareness and understanding of the policies of this DR;

         (a) Coordinate reporting of training compliance and training module availability;
             and

         (b) Report results to OSTP as required by the Framework.

     (3) Serve as the Scientific Integrity Officer for the Office of the Secretary;

     (4) Serve as the USDA Scientific Integrity Official;

         (a) Serve as the USDA representative on the NSTC Subcommittee on Scientific
             Integrity;

         (b) Keep ASIOs and USDA scientific integrity community aware of scientific
             integrity developments across the government.

     (5) Serve as a neutral point of contact (ombudsman) for receiving allegations of
         compromised scientific integrity that are made against USDA employees through
         the OIG hotline, directly from the public, or from other sources;

     (6) Refer allegations of compromised scientific integrity, if received by the DSIO, to
         the appropriate ASIO within 5 days of receipt, unless the ASIO is the individual



                                             12
    alleged to have compromised scientific integrity or has an identified conflict of
    interest;

(7) Provide oversight of Departmental and agency responses to allegations of
    compromised scientific integrity referred for an inquiry or investigation, including:

    (a) Reviewing ASIO-submitted reports of allegations and their disposition; and

    (b) Maintaining a status report of responses to allegations as a means of
        monitoring the progress toward resolution;

(8) Serve as the USDA Research Integrity Officer (USDA RIO) as described in
    Research Institutions Conducting USDA-Funded Extramural Research; Research
    Misconduct (2 CFR Part 422);

(9) Coordinate with the Office of the General Counsel (OGC), OIG, OE, Office of
    Human Resources Management, OC, the Office of the Chief Information Officer
    (OCIO), and other offices, as necessary, to ensure that scientific integrity-related
    policies are aligned and guidance is appropriate and consistent;

(10) Report any potentially criminal behavior to OIG that is uncovered during the course
     of responding to an allegation of compromised scientific integrity, and coordinate
     with the appropriate USDA entity to ensure that all records, documents, or other
     materials related to the allegation are provided to OIG;

(11) Keep the Chief Scientist and the Science Council informed on the status of the
     implementation of this DR and any compliance concerns, as warranted;

    (a) Lead formation and serve as chair of the Scientific Integrity Committee under
        the Science Council; and

    (b) Periodically report to the Science Council on the activities of the Scientific
        Integrity Committee.

(12) Maintain a publicly accessible website with the following or a link to the following:

    (a) This DR;

    (b) Procedures for reporting and responding to allegations of compromised
        scientific integrity;

    (c) Contact information for the DSIO and ASIOs; and

    (d) A summary of closed scientific integrity cases involving formal allegations
        referred for an inquiry or investigation. The summary will include a
        description of the nature and disposition of the allegations.



                                        13
c.   Assistant Secretaries and Under Secretaries will:

     (1) Ensure that their respective Mission Areas, agencies and staff offices comply with
         this DR and DM 1074-001; and

     (2) Ensure that applicable USDA Mission Area, agency, and staff office policies and
         guidance are consistent with this DR.

d.   USDA Agencies will:

     (1) Implement this DR as it pertains to their agency;

     (2) Develop agency-specific scientific integrity policies and guidance, as appropriate
         and necessary, including appropriate language in contracts, grants, permits, leases,
         and cooperative agreements;

     (3) Ensuring, to the extent practicable, that agency publications fairly and accurately
         assign authorship to contributing scientists and employees where applicable as
         described in the USDA Code of Scientific Ethics, Appendix D;

     (4) Coordinate, as necessary, with the appropriate employee relations and labor
         management staff, ethics officer, information integrity officer, peer review officer,
         public affairs officer, the DSIO, advisory committee Designated Federal Officers,
         contracting and grant personnel, and others to ensure that agency policies and
         guidance are consistent with this DR;

     (5) Ensure that agency employees, who are covered by the scope of this DR, are aware
         of the policies in the DR and the procedures for reporting allegations of
         compromised scientific integrity;

     (6) Provide agency employees, who are covered by the scope of this DR, with any
         necessary guidance and training to understand and fulfill their responsibilities under
         this DR and any agency-specific guidance on scientific integrity;

     (7) Ensure that contractors, cooperators, partners, permittees, lessees, grantees, and
         volunteers are aware of any applicable obligations (as specified in agreements,
         contracts, statements of work, memorandum of understanding, etc.) that they are to
         uphold, as applicable to the nature and scope of their work;

     (8) Monitor and report compliance with this DR to the DSIO, including activities
         undertaken to implement the DR;

     (9) Ensure that the DSIO is notified of all allegations of compromised scientific
         integrity referred for an inquiry or investigation, and that the DSIO receives
         periodic reports on the status of the responses to said allegations;



                                            14
     (10) Ensure that inquiry and investigation reports, decision memoranda, and other
          substantive documents generated in the course of responding to allegations of
          compromised scientific integrity are provided to the DSIO, if requested; and

     (11) Appoint an agency employee to serve as the ASIO. The appointee must be a career
          appointee (i.e., non-political appointee), and should have previous experience
          conducting scientific activities and sufficient institutional authority, stature, and
          credentials to be able to fulfill the required responsibilities.

e.   USDA Staff Offices:

     (1) Will apply the responsibilities delineated for agencies in Section 6d(1) through (11)
         to their staff offices and employees, as applicable;

     (2) May, but are not required to, appoint an office employee to serve as the Scientific
         Integrity Officer.

         (a) If an individual is appointed to serve as a Scientific Integrity Officer, the
             individual must be a career appointee (i.e., non-political appointee), and should
             have previous experience conducting scientific activities and sufficient
             institutional authority, stature, and credentials to be able to fulfill the required
             responsibilities. For the purposes of this DR, individuals appointed to serve as
             Scientific Integrity Officers for Departmental staff offices are considered to be
             ASIOs.

         (b) If a Departmental staff office does not appoint an individual, the DSIO will
             fulfill the ASIO responsibilities for that office as they apply to the receipt and
             handling of allegations of compromised scientific integrity;

f.   ASIOs will:

     (1) Keep agency or staff office leadership informed on the status of implementation of
         this DR;

     (2) Receive and process allegations of compromised scientific integrity in accordance
         with DM 1074-001;

     (3) Serve as a representative on the Scientific Integrity Committee of the USDA
         Science Council;

     (4) Conduct an initial assessment of allegations and submitted materials received from
         the DSIO, OIG, or other sources, following established procedures, to determine
         whether the allegations pertain to compromised scientific integrity and the
         appropriate handling of said allegations;




                                             15
     (5) Notify the DSIO of all allegations of compromised scientific integrity referred for
         an inquiry or investigation, including notifying the DSIO within 10 days of an
         ASIO’s initial assessment determination that an allegation should be referred for an
         inquiry;

     (6) Coordinate with the DSIO and appropriate employee relations or labor relations
         staff on responses to all allegations of compromised scientific integrity referred for
         an inquiry or investigation so as to facilitate the integrity of, and consistency in, the
         process used across the Department for responding to said allegations;

     (7) Provide oversight of proceedings to address allegations of compromised scientific
         integrity;

     (8) Provide records (e.g., inquiry and investigation reports, evidentiary exhibits,
         decision memoranda) if requested, and status reports to the DSIO of the disposition
         of allegations;

     (9) Notify immediately OIG and the DSIO if behavior that is or may be criminal in
         nature is discovered at any point during the agency or staff office response to
         allegations of compromised scientific integrity; and

     (10) Serve as, and fulfill the responsibilities of, the Agency Research Integrity Officer
          (ARIO) as described in 2 CFR 422, unless an agency specifically designates another
          individual to serve as the ARIO for handling allegations of research misconduct
          involving USDA-funded extramural research.

g.   Managers and Supervisors, who are covered under the scope of this DR or have
     management or supervisory responsibilities for employees covered under Section 2a(2)
     of this DR, will:

     (1) Be aware of and uphold the principles contained in this DR, including the USDA
         Code of Scientific Ethics (Appendix D);

     (2) Implement and comply with this DR and DM 1074-001 as it pertains to their area of
         management or supervision;

     (3) Abide by the USDA Code of Scientific Ethics and adhere to accepted professional
         values and practices of the relevant research or scientific communities so as to
         ensure scientific integrity;

     (4) Report any knowledge of compromised scientific integrity to the ASIO;

     (5) Ensure that their employees, who are covered under Section 2a(2) of this DR, are
         informed about and receive training on this DR; and




                                              16
       (6) Consult, as appropriate depending upon the nature of the allegation, with the ASIO,
           human resources officer, contracting and grant personnel, ethics officer, DSIO,
           OIG, OGC, and the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Civil Rights.

  h.   Employees who are covered under Section 2(a)(2):

       (1) Will participate in training to become aware of the principles contained in this DR,
           and the USDA Code of Scientific Ethics (Appendix D);

       (2) Must comply with this DR and any additional agency or office-specific policies and
           guidance pertaining to scientific integrity;

       (3) Must abide by the USDA Code of Scientific Ethics, and adhere to accepted
           professional values and practices of the relevant research or scientific communities
           so as to ensure scientific integrity; and

       (4) Are encouraged to report to the ASIO or DSIO any knowledge of compromised
           scientific integrity.

  i.   Contractors, cooperators, partners, permittees, lessees, grantees, and volunteers, who
       engage or assist in the activities identified in Section 2a(2) on behalf of USDA are
       expected to uphold the principles of scientific integrity set forth in this DR. However,
       any express requirements will be set forth in individual agreements, contracts,
       statements of work, memoranda of understanding, or established via issuance of a
       separate rule or other Departmental policy.

       Research institutions that receive allegations of research misconduct involving USDA-
       funded extramural research should also refer to Research Institutions Conducting
       USDA-Funded Extramural Research; Research Misconduct (2 CFR Part 422).


8. INQUIRIES

  Questions about this DR should be directed to the Office of the Chief Scientist and the DSIO
  at researchintegrity@usda.gov. Additional contact information can be found on the Office of
  the Chief Scientist (OCS) Scientific Integrity and Research Misconduct website.



                                            -END-




                                              17
                                   APPENDIX A

                       ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ARIO        Agency Research Integrity Officer
ASIO        Agency Scientific Integrity Officer
CFR         Code of Federal Regulations
DM          Departmental Manual
DR          Departmental Regulation
DSIO        Departmental Scientific Integrity Officer
E.O.        Executive Order
FAC         Federal Advisory Committee
FR          Federal Register
Framework   OSTP publication, A Framework for Federal Scientific Integrity Policy and
            Practice
IACUC       Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
IRB         Institutional Review Board
NSTC        National Science and Technology Council
OC          Office of Communications
OCS         Office of the Chief Scientist
OE          Office of Ethics
OGC         Office of the General Counsel
OIG         Office of Inspector General
OMB         Office of Management and Budget
OSTP        Office of Science and Technology Policy
P.L.        Public Law
REE         Research, Education and Economics
RIO         Research Integrity Officer
U.S.C.      United States Code
USDA        United States Department of Agriculture
WPA         Whistleblower Protection Act of 1989
WPEA        Whistleblower Protection Enhancement Act of 2012




                                       A-1
                                         APPENDIX B

                                         DEFINITIONS


a.   Accessibility. The design, construction, development, and maintenance of facilities,
     information and communication technology, programs, and services so that all people,
     including people with disabilities, can fully and independently use them. Accessibility
     includes the provision of accommodations and modifications to ensure equal access to
     employment and participation in activities for people with disabilities, the reduction or
     elimination of physical and attitudinal barriers to equitable opportunities, a commitment
     to ensuring that people with disabilities can independently access every outward-facing
     and internal activity or electronic space, and the pursuit of best practices such as
     universal design.

b.   Adjudication. The stage in response to an allegation of compromised scientific integrity
     when the outcome of the investigation is reviewed and a determination is made as to
     whether scientific integrity was compromised and what corrective actions are warranted.

c.   Advisory Committee. Any committee, board, commission, council, conference, panel,
     task force, or other similar group that is established by statute, or established or utilized
     by the President or by an agency official, for the purpose of obtaining advice or
     recommendations for the President or on issues or policies within the scope of an agency
     official’s responsibilities.

d.   Agency. An organizational unit of the Department, other than a staff office, whose head
     reports to an Under Secretary.

e.   Agency Scientific Integrity Officer (ASIO). The individual appointed by a USDA
     agency or staff office who is responsible for overseeing agency or staff office
     responsibilities and activities related to scientific integrity, including receiving and
     overseeing agency or staff office responses to allegations of compromised scientific
     integrity. NOTE: For allegations of research misconduct involving USDA-funded
     extramural research, ASIOs will also serve as, and fulfill the responsibilities of, the
     ARIO, as described in 2 CFR 422, unless an agency specifically designates another
     individual to serve as the ARIO.

f.   Allegation. A disclosure of a suspected compromise of scientific integrity through any
     means of communication. The disclosure may be by written or oral statement, or by
     other means of communication to a USDA official.

g.   Appeal. The stage in the response to an allegation of compromised scientific integrity
     when a respondent (i.e., the individual against whom the allegation has been made), who
     has been found to have compromised scientific integrity, may appeal the finding or
     corrective actions to restore scientific integrity.



                                             B-1
h.   Conflict of Interest. Any financial or non-financial interest that conflicts with the
     actions or judgments of an individual when conducting scientific activities because it
     could: (1) impair the individual’s objectivity; (2) create an unfair competitive advantage
     for any person or organization; or (3) create the appearance of either (1) or (2).

i.   Corrective Action. A corrective action is an administrative action that is recommended
     and implemented for the purpose of ensuring or restoring scientific integrity based on
     finding(s) that scientific integrity was compromised. For the purposes of this DR,
     corrective actions do not include adverse personnel actions or disciplinary actions.
     NOTE: Procedures for implementing adverse personnel actions or disciplinary actions
     are not covered by this DR or DM 1074-001. Such actions may be proposed and
     implemented as allowed by and in accordance with other USDA policy, procedure, or
     applicable collective bargaining agreement, separate from this DR, based on final
     findings that scientific integrity was compromised (i.e., those findings adjudicated by an
     agency or staff office and, if appealed, upheld by the USDA Chief Scientist).

     (1) The following is a non-exhaustive list of corrective actions, some or all of which
         may be recommended and implemented, based on findings that scientific integrity
         was compromised. The implementation of certain of these actions may require
         further proceedings as specified in other USDA rules, regulations, or policies.

         (a) Government-wide debarment;

         (b) Removal from a particular research project, or suspension or termination of an
             active research award;

         (c) Correction or retraction of published scientific products;

         (d) Correction or retraction of USDA media releases pertaining to scientific
             products;

         (e) Release of inappropriately suppressed scientific products;

         (f) Monitoring or supervision of future USDA scientific activities, use of scientific
             information, or dissemination of scientific information;

         (g) Required validation of data or sources (references and contributors); and

         (h) Training or mentoring.

j.   Decision-makers. Employees who may: (1) develop policies or make determinations
     about policy or management; (2) make determinations about expenditures of USDA
     funds; (3) implement or manage activities that involve, or rely on, scientific activities; or
     (4) supervise employees who engage in or report on scientific activities.




                                             B-2
k.   Designated Federal Officer. An individual designated by the agency head, for each
     advisory committee for which the agency head is responsible, to implement the
     provisions of sections 10(e) and (f) of the Federal Advisory Committee Act, P.L. 92-
     463, and any advisory committee procedures of the agency.

l.   Extramural Research. Research or scientific activities conducted by any research
     institution other than the Federal agency to which the funds supporting the activities
     were appropriated. Research institutions conducting extramural research may include
     Federal research facilities.

m. Fabrication. Making up data or results and recording or reporting them.

n.   Falsification. Manipulating research materials, equipment, or processes, or changing or
     omitting data or results such that the research is not accurately represented in the
     research record.

o.   Financial Interest. Any matter affecting a personal financial interest or a financial
     interest imputed to the individual (including, but not limited to, the individual’s spouse
     and any entity for which the individual serves in a personal capacity as an officer or
     board member, such as due to fiduciary duties to the organization under state law). (Acts
     Affecting a Personal Interest, 18 U.S.C. § 208)

     This definition will be applied consistently with any rule issued by the U.S. Office of
     Government Ethics permitting the appointment of Federal employees to serve in their
     official capacities on the boards of directors and as officers of nonprofit organizations,
     including scientific organizations, professional societies, and similar bodies that are
     actively involved in matters under the jurisdiction of the Department. (Government
     Employees Serving in Official Capacity in Nonprofit Organizations; Sector Unit
     Investment Trusts, 76 FR 24816)

p.   Inappropriate Influence. The attempt to shape or influence scientific activities or
     findings, objective communication about, or the production or use of a scientific product
     against the judgment of a non-partisan and apolitical scientific or statistical agency.
     More specifically, it includes, but is not limited to:

     (1) The suppression of an agency’s responsibility to offer its best judgment on how to
         most accurately and reliably study or measure a given phenomenon;

     (2) The decision to prevent an agency from using state-of-the-art science;

     (3) The insistence on the preclearance of a scientific product, which is based on state-
         of-the-art science, for purposes other than providing advance notification or an
         opportunity to review for technical merit; or




                                             B-3
     (4) The suppression, alteration, or delay of the release of a scientific product for any
         reason other than technical merit or providing advance notification, as determined
         through standard agency or staff office procedures.


q.   Inquiry. The stage in the response to an allegation of compromised scientific integrity
     when an assessment is made to determine whether the allegation has substance and
     whether an investigation is warranted.

r.   Intramural Research. Research or scientific activities conducted by a Federal agency to
     which funds were appropriated for the purpose of conducting the activities.

s.   Investigation. The stage in the response to an allegation of compromised scientific
     integrity when the factual record is formally developed and examined, leading to a
     recommendation to dismiss the allegation, make a finding that scientific integrity was
     compromised, or implement corrective actions to restore scientific integrity.

t.   Non-financial Conflict of Interest. Individual participation in a matter where one of the
     parties has, or is represented by someone with whom the individual has, a covered
     relationship (including, but not limited to, a spouse’s employer and any entity for which
     the individual is actively involved in a personal capacity) (5 C.F.R. 2635.502(b)).

u.   Office of the Secretary. The immediate office of the Secretary, the Deputy Secretary,
     and the Under and Assistant Secretaries.

v.   Plagiarism. The appropriation of another person’s ideas, processes, results, or words
     without giving appropriate credit. NOTE: The proposing and conducting of research
     often involves collaboration and may result in the joint development of products
     (e.g., concepts, methods, descriptive language, results, etc.). The ownership of such
     jointly developed products is often unclear, and a collaborative history may support a
     presumption of implied consent for individual collaborators to independently use jointly
     developed products. For these reasons, disputes among collaborators pertaining to
     subsequent independent use of products resulting from prior joint efforts may be
     determined to involve authorship or credit disputes rather than plagiarism.

w. Political Interference. To engage in Inappropriate Influence in an attempt to gain
   partisan or regional advantage. More specifically, it includes, but is not limited to:

     (1) The politically motivated suppression of an agency’s responsibility to offer its best
         judgment on how to most accurately and reliably measure a given phenomenon;

     (2) The politically motivated decision to prevent an agency from using state-of-the-art
         science;

     (3) The politically motivated insistence on the pre-clearance of a major scientific
         product that is based on state-of-the-art science; and



                                            B-4
     (4) The politically motivated suppression, alteration, or delay of the release of a
         scientific product for any reason other than technical merit or providing advance
         notification, as determined through standard agency or staff office procedures.

x.   Preponderance of the Evidence. Proof by information that, compared with that
     opposing it, leads to the conclusion that a particular matter or asserted fact is probably
     more true than not. (A “preponderance of the evidence” is a lower burden of proof than
     “by clear and convincing evidence” or “beyond a reasonable doubt.”)

y.   Recklessly. Compromising scientific integrity “recklessly” is characterized by a
     conscious or willful disregard for ensuring scientific integrity that a reasonable
     individual would take in like circumstances.

z.   Research. Research means a systematic investigation, including research development,
     testing, and evaluation, designed to develop or contribute to generalizable knowledge.
     Research includes all basic, applied, and demonstration research in all fields of science,
     technology, engineering, and mathematics. This includes, but is not limited to, research
     in economics, education, linguistics, medicine, nutrition, psychology, natural sciences,
     social sciences, statistics, and research involving human subjects, animals, and in vitro
     and in silico techniques. Activities which meet this definition constitute research
     (scientific activity) for purposes of this policy, whether or not they are conducted or
     supported under a program which is considered “research” for other purposes. For
     example, some demonstration and service programs may include research or scientific
     activities.

aa. Research Misconduct. Fabrication, falsification, or plagiarism in proposing, performing,
    or reviewing research, or in reporting research results. Research misconduct does not
    include honest error or differences of opinion.

bb. Research Record. The record of data or results that embody the facts resulting from
    scientific inquiry, and includes, but is not limited to, research proposals, laboratory
    records, progress reports, abstracts, theses, oral presentations, internal reports, and
    journal articles. Research records may exist in physical, electronic, or other forms.

cc. Scientific Activities. Activities, such as data collection, inventorying, monitoring,
    statistical analysis, surveying, observations, experimentation, study, research, analysis,
    integration, economic analysis, forecasting, predictive analytics, modeling, scientific
    assessment, and technology development, that involve the application of well-accepted
    scientific methodologies in a systematic manner. Activities which meet this definition
    constitute scientific activity for purposes of this policy, whether or not they are
    conducted or supported under a program which is considered “research” for other
    purposes. For example, some demonstration and service programs may include scientific
    activities




                                            B-5
dd. Scientific Assessment. Evaluation of a body of scientific, economic, or technical
    knowledge, which typically synthesizes multiple factual inputs, data, models,
    assumptions, or applies best professional judgment to bridge uncertainties in the
    available information. Scientific assessments include, but are not limited to, state-of-
    science reports; technology assessments; weight-of-evidence analyses; meta-analyses;
    health, safety, or ecological risk assessments; toxicological characterizations of
    substances; integrated assessment models; hazard determinations; and exposure
    assessments.

ee. Scientific Integrity. The adherence to professional practices, ethical behavior, and the
    principles of honesty and objectivity when conducting, managing, using the results of,
    and communicating about science and scientific activities.

   (1) For the purposes of this regulation:

         (a)   Scientific Integrity is also the condition resulting from such adherence.

         (b) This condition ensures objectivity, clarity, and reproducibility, while providing
             insulation from fabrication, falsification, plagiarism, bias, inappropriate
             influence, political interference, censorship, as well as from inadequate
             procedural and information security.

    (2) Compromise of Scientific Integrity. The loss or breach of scientific integrity in the
        conducting or reporting of scientific activities, or the use or application of the
        results of scientific activities. Compromised scientific integrity includes, but is not
        limited to:

         (a) Using scientific products that are not representative of the current state of
             scientific knowledge and research (for example because of a lack of
             appropriate peer review, poor methodology, or flawed analyses) to inform
             decision making and policy formulation;

         (b) Misrepresenting the underlying assumptions, uncertainties, or probabilities of
             scientific products, both USDA products and externally produced products;

         (c) Inappropriately influencing, or politically interfering with, funding, design,
             proposal, conduct, review, management, evaluation, or reporting of scientific
             activities or resulting scientific products (see Appendix B(r) and B(z));

         (d) Inappropriately influencing, or politically interfering with, the release of
             scientific products (see Appendix B(r) and B(z));

         (e) Inappropriately suppressing or censoring the objective communication of
             findings (i.e., data and results) resulting from scientific activities;




                                            B-6
          (f) Inappropriately altering or misrepresenting scientific products in public
              communications; and

          (g) Inappropriately restricting resources or capacity that would limit and reduce
              scientific activities or the availability of scientific products outside of normal
              budgetary or priority-setting processes or without scientific justification.

      (3) Compromised scientific integrity also includes research misconduct (see Appendix
          B(dd)).

      (4) For the purposes of this DR, compromised scientific integrity does not include
          ethical improprieties and regulatory non-compliance that do not constitute a loss or
          breach of scientific integrity as defined in Appendix B(hh)(1). Examples of such
          improprieties include but are not limited to: misallocation of funds, sexual
          harassment, discrimination, and breaches of human subject protections or animal
          welfare requirements. NOTE: Breaches of human subject protections or animal
          welfare requirements should be reported, respectively, to the appropriate
          Institutional Review Board (IRB) or Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
          (IACUC).

ff. Scientific Product. The results of scientific activities, including the analysis, synthesis,
    compilation, tool or translation of scientific, statistical, economic, and technological
    information and data into formats for the use of USDA or the Nation. Official policy,
    budget, or management documents are not considered scientific products. For the
    purposes of this DR, a regulatory impact analysis is also not considered to be a scientific
    product; however, the use and representation of scientific information in a regulatory
    impact analysis is covered by this DR (see Section 5c).

gg. Staff Office. A Departmental administrative office whose head reports to an official
    within the Office of the Secretary.

hh. Statistical Agency. A Federal statistical agency is a unit of the Federal Government
    whose principal function is the compilation and analysis of data and the dissemination of
    information for statistical purposes.

ii.   USDA Departmental Scientific Integrity Officer (DSIO). The individual designated by
      the USDA Chief Scientist who is responsible for implementing this DR under the
      direction of the Chief Scientist and the USDA Science Council, and who is responsible
      for providing oversight of, and consultation on, Departmental and agency responses to
      allegations of compromised scientific integrity. NOTE: For allegations of research
      misconduct involving USDA-funded extramural research, the DSIO will also serve as,
      and fulfill the responsibilities of, the USDA RIO, as described in 2 CFR Part 422.

      USDA Science Council. A group representing USDA Mission Areas and offices,
      chaired by the USDA Chief Scientist, to facilitate cross-Department coordination and
      collaboration among all USDA agencies.



                                             B-7
                                     APPENDIX C

                         AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES

2 CFR Part 422, Research Institutions Conducting USDA-Funded Extramural Research;
Research Misconduct
5 CFR Part 735, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct
5 CFR Part 2635, Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch
7 CFR § 2.21(a)(11), Office of the Secretary, USDA, Delegations of Authority to the Under
Secretary for Research, Education, and Economics Related to Scientific Integrity
7 CFR § 2.69, Office of the Secretary, USDA, Establishment of the Office of the Chief
Scientist
65 FR 76260-76264, Federal Policy on Research Misconduct, December 6, 2000
67 FR 8452-8460, Guidelines for Ensuring and Maximizing the Quality, Objectivity,
Utility, and Integrity of Information Disseminated by Federal Agencies, February 22, 2002
70 FR 2664-2677, Final Information Quality Bulletin for Peer Review, December 16, 2004
73 FR 12622-12626, Statistical Policy Directive No. 4: Release and Dissemination of
Statistical Products Produced by Federal Statistical Agencies, March 6, 2008
76 FR 24816, Government Employees Serving in Official Capacity in Nonprofit
Organizations; Sector Unit Investment Trusts, May 3, 2011
79 FR 71610-71616, Statistical Policy Directive No. 1: Fundamental Responsibilities of
Federal Statistical Agencies and Recognized Statistical Units, December 2, 2014
84 FR 14682-14684, Statistical Policy Directive No. 3: Compilation, Relevance, and
Evaluation of Principal Federal Economic Indicators, April 11, 2019
5 U.S.C. Part IV, Ethics in Government Act
5 U.S.C. § 301, Departmental Regulations
5 U.S.C. §§ 551-559, Administrative Procedure Act
5 U.S.C. § 552, Freedom of Information Act
5 U.S.C. § 2302(b), Prohibited Personnel Practices
5 U.S.C. §§ 7101-7135, Labor-Management Relations
5 U.S.C. §§ 7101- 7901, Employees
18 U.S.C. § 208, Acts Affecting a Personal Interest
E.O. 12866, Regulatory Planning and Review, September 30, 1993



                                        C-1
E.O. 13563, Improving Regulation and Regulatory Review, January 18, 2011
Federal Advisory Committee Act, P.L. 92-463, October 6, 1972, as amended
Federal Crop Insurance Reform and Department of Agriculture Reorganization Act of
1994, P.L. 103-354, October 13, 1994
HHS, The United States Government Policy for Oversight of Life Sciences Dual Use
Research of Concern, March 29, 2012
HHS, United States Government Policy for Institutional Oversight of Life Sciences Dual
Use Research of Concern, September 24, 2014
Information Quality Act, P.L. 106-554, Section 515, December 21, 2000
OMB, Guidelines for Ensuring and Maximizing the Quality, Objectivity, Utility, and
Integrity of Information Disseminated by Federal Agencies, October 1, 2001
OMB, Memorandum M-11-10, Executive Order 13563, “Improving Regulation and
Regulatory Review, February 2, 2011
OMB, Memorandum M-05-03, Issuance of OMB’s “Final Information Quality Bulletin for
Peer Review”, December 16, 2004
OPEN Government Act of 2007, P.L. 110-175, December 31, 2007
OSTP, Scientific Integrity, December 17, 2010
To Reauthorize the Office of Special Counsel and for Other Purposes, P.L. 103-424,
October 29, 1994
USDA, DR 1041-001, Advisory Committee Management, February 8, 1993
USDA, DM 1074-001, Procedures for Responding to Allegations of Compromised
Scientific Integrity, May 2, 2024
USDA, DR 1410-001, Publications Review and Clearance Policy, January 14, 2021
USDA, DR 1495-001, New Media Roles, Responsibilities, and Authorities, May 23, 2011
USDA, DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007
USDA, Ethics Issuance No. 09-1, Ethics Issues Related to USDA Scientists
Whistleblower Protection Act of 1989 (WPA), Public Law 101-12, April 10, 1989
Whistleblower Protection Enhancement Act of 2012 (WPEA), Public Law 112-199,
November 27, 2012
White House, Presidential Memorandum, Scientific Integrity, March 9, 2009
White House, website, Open Government Initiative




                                       C-2
                                             APPENDIX D

                               USDA CODE OF SCIENTIFIC ETHICS


1. I dedicate myself to the pursuit, promotion, and advancement of scientific knowledge.

2. I will design, conduct, manage, evaluate, and report scientific research honestly and
   thoroughly, and will disclose any conflicts of interest to my supervisor or other appropriate
   USDA official(s) for their determination as to whether a recusal, disclaimer, or other
   appropriate notification would be appropriate.

3. I will prevent abuse of all research resources entrusted to me, and will conduct research
   involving the participation of human subjects and the use of non-human animals in
   accordance with applicable, established, ethical standards.

4. I will not compromise scientific integrity.

5. I will make all reasonable efforts to ensure the accuracy of the research record and to correct
   identified inaccuracies that pertain to my contribution to the research reported in the research
   record.

6. I will not willfully hinder the research of others.

7. I will welcome constructive criticism of my scientific research and offer the same to my
   colleagues in a manner that fosters mutual respect amid objective scientific debate.

8. I will recognize, as appropriate (i.e., in accordance with accepted practices of the relevant
   research community), past and present contributors to my research and will neither accept
   nor assume unauthorized or unwarranted credit for another's accomplishments.

9. I will claim authorship for a research product only if I am willing to be held responsible for
   both the interpretation of the data and the conclusions as presented.

10. I will claim authorship for a research product only if I have made a major intellectual
    contribution (as part of conception, design, data collection, data analysis, or interpretation)
    and made significant contributions to its preparation (written, reviewed, or edited).

11. I will not publish or use the original ideas, unpublished research data, or unpublished
    findings of others without, as appropriate (i.e., in accordance with accepted practices of the
    relevant research community), securing written approval or providing acknowledgment.

12. I will refrain from duplicative publication of the same research findings as original.

13. I will show appropriate diligence toward preserving and maintaining research resources, such
    as records of data and results that are entrusted to me.



                                                 D-1
