                                        U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                           Washington, D.C. 20250

                                                                                                  Number:
          DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                                1020-001

SUBJECT: National Agricultural Library                                   DATE:
                                                                         March 23, 1990

                                                                         OPI:
                                                                         National Agricultural Library

    1   PURPOSE

        This regulation describes the organizational alignment and cites the mission, responsibilities, and
        functions of the National Agricultural Library




2       CANCELLATION

        This regulation supersedes Departmental Regulation 1020-1. dated October 27, 1981




3       ABBREVIATIONS

                 AGRICOLA -         Agriculture on Line Access

                 CALS               - Current Awareness Literature Service

                 CFR                - Code of Federal Regulations

                 NAL                - National Agricultural Library

                 PL                 - Public Law

                 USDA               - United States Department of Agriculture




4       FORMS

                 Form AD-245. Request for Publication Form Interlibrary Loan (unnumbered)
DR 1020-001                                                                               March 23, 1990


5      DEFINITIONS

              a         Agency Libraries and Information Centers. All library and information center
              installations operated by Department agencies other than NAL.

              b       AGRICOLA. A comprehensive computerized index to agricultural literature
              produced by NAL.

              c        CALS. Selective dissemination services from a wide variety of multi-
              disciplinary bibliographic data bases, including AGRICOLA, Chemical Abstracts and
              Biological Abstracts.

              d         Expendable Published Material. Published materials acquired for clipping.
              distribution, or other similar uses and whose usefulness is exhausted in a relatively brief
              period are classed as expendable.

              They include newspapers: reprints of articles; unbound periodical and serial publications:
              dictionaries, style manuals, reference aids and similar materials acquired for office use
              costing less than $500; published materials acquired for training purposes: and published
              materials purchased by contractors and grantees for their own use under USDA contracts
              and grants.

              e       Genomic Sequences. All of the genetic materials in the chromosomes of an
              organism.

              f        Non-Expendable Published Material. Publications in the NAL collection. the
              collections of agency libraries and information centers. reference aids. and all published
              materials not included under expendable published material are classed as non-
              expendable.

              g        Reference aids or working tools. Publications acquired by an agency for the
              constantly recurring or continual official use of administrative, technical. or professional
              personnel are classed as reference aids or working tools.

              h        Stack. Refers to NAL's collection of library materials. including books. journals,
              papers, audio visual. tapes, records. etc.




6      ORGANIZATIONAL ALIGNMENT

              a         The NAL, under pr of Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1953, and Title 7, CFR is
              organized to serve the research, extension, regulatory, and other programs of the
              Department and to serve others who require information which can be derived from
              specialized publications on agriculture and related fields. It is headed by a Director who
              reports to the Assistant Secretary for Science and Education.

              b       The basic operations of NAL are located in the NAL building at Beltsville,
              Maryland. specialized services are provided from 2 reference center in Washington, .G.
              and from USDA Agency Libraries and Information Centers.

              A list of agency libraries and their addresses can be obtained by writing to:




                                                  2
DR 1020-001                                                                              March 23, 1990




              USDA, National Agricultural Library

              Office of the Director

              10301 Baltimore Blvd., Room 200

              Beltsville, Maryland 20705




7      MISSION STATEMENT

              a        The Department of Agriculture was established by the Act of May 15, 1862, as
              amended (The Organic Act of 1862), which sets forth a mission, "to acquire and to
              diffuse among the people of the United States useful information on subjects connected
              with agriculture, rural development, aquaculture. and human nutrition in the most general
              and comprehensive sense of those terms." and places upon the Secretary the
              responsibility to "procure and preserve all information concerning agriculture. rural
              development, aquaculture. and human nutrition, which he can obtain by means of
              books..." In carrying out this Departmental charter, the National Agricultural Library
              (NAL) serves as the Nation's chief agricultural library information resource and service.
              Its mission is to facilitate access to and utilization of needed information in any medium
              by agricultural researchers, regulators, educators and extension personnel; those
              employed in agriculture; those living in rural areas and communities; consumers of
              agricultural products, and the public at large, insofar as they need agricultural
              information. As a national library, ft develops and provides agricultural information
              products and services not only to agencies of the JSCA and the Federal government, but
              to public and private organizations and individuals as well. The NAL coordinates a
              national network of public and private agricultural libraries and information centers.
              especially with libraries of the land-grant colleges and universities, and other state
              supported colleges and universities with agriculturally related programs, other public
              organizations, and industry and other private sector organizations.

              b        Tho NAL ensures the acquisition, organization (including cataloging and
              indexing), management, preservation, accessibility, and diffusion of information in all
              phases of the food and agricultural science, as defined in section 1404 of the National
              Agricultural Research, Extension, and Teaching Policy Act of 1977, as amended, a
              significant part of this mission is the development and coordination of a national
              agricultural science library information network. The NAL provides leadership for the
              management of agricultural information resources through products and services,
              including bibliographies, loans, photocopies, microforms, structured agricultural
              thesaurus, computerized data base repositories, Indexing of agricultural Information, and
              personal reference services Including on-line computerized literature searches. NAL
              works closely with other agencies In the Department, coordinates closely with the
              National Library of Medicine and Library of Congress, and cooperates with other groups
              In both the public and private sectors, to ensure that the results of research and other
              types of agricultural information are rapidly disseminated to the ultimate user. AL
              promotes the use of modern technology In support of library and information activities.

              c         The NAL provides a leadership role In U.S. participation in International
              agricultural library and Information systems an in efforts to promote worldwide
              availability of agricultural Information. In addition, the NAL serves as the Nation's major



                                                 3
DR 1020-001                                                                                    March 23, 1990


                source of agricultural information received from and relayed to other countries, as the
                agricultural Information liaison to International organizations and organizations outside
                of the United States, and as the U.S. agricultural representative in the settling of library
                and information standards internationally.




8      Responsibilities

                a         The Director of NAL will:

                          (l)      Assure the availability and preservation of relevant Information In
                          agriculture, working through the restructure of a coordinated network.

                          (2)      Serve as the Secretary's agent for carrying out USDA-wide
                          responsibilities relating to general direction of all libraries and bibliographic
                          lnformation services;

                          (3)      Formulate immediate and long-range library policies, procedures,
                          practices, and technical standards necessary to provide adequate loan,
                          bibliographic, reference and research services for scientific, technical research,
                          and administrative staffs of USDA, both In Washington and the field;

                          (4)      Provide consultative service In library and Information science.
                          Including systems for information storage and retrieval, and computer
                          processing of bibliographic information to USDA officials;

                          (5)      Evaluate special library programs developed by agencies of USDA,
                          offering assistance and advice as needed to coordinate library services In USDA
                          and to avoid duplication of effort;

                          (6)      Advise on the establishment, operation, and/or discontinuation of
                          agency libraries and Information centers and as necessary negotiate agreements
                          covering services or other Joint activities involving NAL and these libraries;

                          (7)      Establish or revise current services to meet changing needs. Reserve
                          substantive materials pertinent to agriculture and its related sciences which are
                          needed for effective library service;

                          (8)      Coordinate the collection policy and program of the NAL with the
                          Library of Congress and the National Library of Medicine;

                          (9)       Represent USDA on library and science information matters before
                          Congressional committees, professional societies, and international
                          organizations; and cooperate with other government agencies and educational
                          institutions on all matters relating to library services;

                          (l0)     Serve, as provided by law as an ex-official member of the Science
                          information Council of the National Science Foundation (42 U.S.C. 1877);

                          (ll)     Serve as USDA representative to Federal committees on scientific and
                          technical information and provide coordination of science information activities
                          for the Secretary;


                                                     4
DR 1020-001                                                                          March 23, 1990


                  (12)      Provide information products and services including copies of materials
                  in the library's collection, and copies of bibliographies prepared by the library;

                  (13)     Organize and coordinate 2 national agricultural science information
                  systems (networks) for procuring, preserving, and diffusing agricultural
                  information, and;

                  (14)      Provide a leadership role in U.S. participation in international
                  agricultural library and information systems and in efforts to promote worldwide
                  availability of agricultural information.

              b   USDA Agencies will:

                  (1)      Be responsible for the direction and operation of agency libraries and
                  information centers.

                  (2)      Consult with NAL on how their staffs can best be provided library and
                  information services, including establishment and operation of agency libraries
                  and information centers.

                  (3)      Advise the Director of NAL of new agency libraries and information
                  centers so that necessary networks and other communication links can be
                  established.

                  (4)      Advise the Director of NAL of changes in leadership at agency libraries
                  and information centers.

                  (Additional agency responsibilities are included in other sections of this
                  directive.)




9      GENERAL POLICY

              a   Requesting Service.

                  (1)      Washington Metropolitan Area EmPloYees. Request service from NAL
                  and other agency libraries and information centers. depending upon subject
                  matter. need and location.

                  (2)      Field employees will generally request services in; the following order:

                           (a)      From an agency library or information center if located-in the
                           area specifically designated to service then;

                           (b)      From land-grant institutions or other local libraries to the
                           extent practical or available;

                           (c)      From NAL.

              b   Publications.




                                             5
DR 1020-001                                                                          March 23, 1990


                  (1)     Two copies of all substantive publications should be forwarded to
                  NAL. Also, agency Journal articles prepared by or issued under the sponsorship
                  of USDA but printed outside the central USDA and Government Printing Office
                  channels, should be forwarded to the NAL:

                                    USDA. National Agricultural Library

                                    Head, Acquisitions & Serials Branch

                                    10301 Baltimore Blvd., Rm. 002

                                    Beltsville. Maryland 20705

                   (2)      Books or other published materials received by an employee as a result
                  of their official capacity or as a representative of USDA on an official tour
                  should be submitted to the Director of the NAL and if selected, shall become
                  NAL property. Employees of USDA are encouraged to obtain worthwhile
                  materials and submit them to NAL for inclusion in the collection.

              c   Genomic Sequences and Mapping Information

                  USDA agency scientists and USDA-funded scientists frequently publish
                  economic sequences or mapping information in the scientific literature. NAL
                  will work closely with appropriate parts of USDA or the scientists themselves,
                  to ensure that the resulting literature and data are included in appropriate data
                  bases and/or data banks.

              d   Translations.

                  (l)       All agencies of USDA, including field installations, should contact the
                  NAL before procuring or undertaking translations of scientific and/or technical
                  articles, pamphlets, or monographs. The NAL will promptly notify the agency
                  concerning the availability or non-availability of a translation.

                  (2)       Limited P.L. 480 funds are available for some translations. USDA
                  agencies should contact NAL when a translation is needed to learn whether the
                  translation can be handled under the P.L. 480 arrangement.

                  (3)       Three copies of each translation prepared by agency personnel or by
                  their arrangement should be forwarded by the agency to the NAL immediately
                  after completion (see (4) below).

                  (4)      The contact point in NAL for translation clearances and receipts is:

                                    USDA National Agricultural Library

                                    Head Lending Branch 10301

                                    Baltimore Blvd., Rm. 300

                                    Beltsville, Maryland 20705




                                             6
DR 1020-001                                                                                March 23, 1990


                e        Bibliographies

                         (1)    Upon request, NAL will provide advice and assistance to all agencies
                         of USDA. including field installations, on the development of bibliographies.

                         (2)      Upon completion, two copies of each bibliography shall be forwarded
                         to the NAL. The contact point in NAL for bibliographic information is:

                                           USDA National Agricultural Library

                                           Chief Technical Services Division

                                           10301 Baltimore Blvd.. Rm. 100

                                           Beltsville, Maryland 20705

                          (3)     Bibliographies and lists on specialized subjects are compiled by NAL,
                         subject to the availability of staff time, research and development in
                         Communication and Information technology.

                         The policy of NAL is to conduct and coordinate studies, surveys or projects on
                         advance information technology and to provide advice and consultation to other
                         agencies in these areas upon request.

                         Automated Bibliographic Files and Information Systems. All agencies of
                         USDA, including field installations, should notify the Director of the NAL in
                         advance of undertaking studies, surveys, or projects to automate bibliographic
                         files or catalogues developed or maintained within the agency.




10     LIBRARY LOANS AND PHOTODUPLICATION

       a.        Loans. Borrowers are responsible for the preservation and return of library material
       charged to them within the loan period designated, or upon request. The NAL will report to the
       agency any case where there may be employee negligence in connect on with unreturned library
       material.

       b       Loan Liability Replacement of library materials. if required by the library installation
       through which it was borrowed. as well as financial liability determination and recovery from
       employee, if any, will be the responsibility of the borrower's agency.

                (1)      Regular Loans.

                         (a)      USDA. Publications may be requested from NAL installations by
                         submitting an NAL Library Request Form AD-245. Oral requests will be
                         accepted when there is an immediate need for the materials. Publications not in




                                                   7
DR 1020-001                                                                           March 23, 1990


                    the collections of the NAL which are required to meet an employee's official
                    need will be borrowed when available.

                    (b)      Non-USDA. Publications may be borrowed from NAL by submitting a
                    standard interlibrary loan request. Limited oral or other written requests will be
                    accepted under certain circumstances.

              (2)   Copies in Lieu of Loan.

                    (a)    USDA. NAL provides copies instead of the original publication
                    whenever possible.

                    (b)       Non-USDA. NAL provides copies and/or microforms for a fee. instead
                    of the original publication whenever this is the most inexpensive and
                    advantageous method for filling a loan request.

              (3)   Indefinite Loans.

                    NAL materials are not given out for indefinite periods. When a USDA employee
                    has a need for library materials for a long period of time. NAL will help the
                    person purchase the materials. Requests for such materials and assistance should
                    be sent to:

                                        USDA. National Agricultural Library,

                                        Head Lending Branch Rm. 300

                                        10301 Baltimore Blvd.,

                                        Beltsville. Maryland 20705

              (4)   Return of Library Material.

                     A loan shall be renewed or returned to the NAL installation through which it
                    was borrowed on or before the due date. Any employee leaving or changing his
                    official station shall return any library material charged to him prior to his
                    departure.

              (5)   Recalls.

                    (a)       USDA. All NAL material is subject to recall, regardless of the type or
                    period of loan. Material recalled must be returned as promptly as possible to the
                    installation through which it was borrowed. Failure to comply within 48 hours
                    after receipt of recall request may result in suspension of loan privileges.

                    (b)        Non-USDA. Same as USDA.

              (6)   Photocopies and Microforms.

                    (a)     The Director of the NAL has authority to make and sell at cost
                    photocopies of all library material in the collections of the NAL in accordance
                    with copyright laws.



                                               8
DR 1020-001                                                                                   March 23, 1990


                          (b)      Photoduplication Sales.

                                   (1)      USDA. NAL provides free photocopies and microforms
                                   services to USDA employees for official purposes. However, a fee is
                                   charged for additional copies. Official requests for additional copies of
                                   non-copyrighted materials shall be cleared through agency procurement
                                   offices.

                                    (2)     Non-USDA. Libraries, commercial organizations, and
                                   information centers should use the standard interlibrary loan request
                                   forms. Individuals should use their local library to obtain interlibrary
                                   loan services from the NAL.




11     SECURITY

       To prevent the unauthorized removal of books, periodicals, and other materials, all briefcases,
       backpacks, suitcases, envelopes, cartons, or other packages are subject to inspection while within
       the confines of the NAL facilities.




12     STACK PRIVILEGES

       In order to provide the greatest assistance to the largest number of people, it is essential that the
       NAL have controlled access to the stacks.

       a        Stack Passes

                 (1) USDA

                           (a)     Requests for passes should be made In person or submitted in writing
                          to:

                                    USDA, National Agricultural Library

                                   Head Lending Branch

                                   10301 Baltimore Blvd.. Rm. 300

                                   Beltsville, Maryland 20705

                          (b)      The following information should be given:

                                    (1) Full name of requestor;

                                   (2) Agency (or other organization);

                                   (3) Business address;

                                   (4) Telephone number;


                                                     9
DR 1020-001                                                                                   March 23, 1990


                                   (5) Brief statement explaining necessity for stack access; and

                                   (6) Length of time permit is required.

                (2)      Non-USDA. Requests for stack passes by persons outside USDA are granted on
                a case-by-case basis and then only to those requesters who require access to large
                volumes of materials or specific subject areas. The procedures are the same as for USDA.

       b        USDA Instruction sheets for use of stacks are available to authorized users at the
       Information/Circulation Desk. Passes are valid for the period designated. Stack passes will be kept
       at the Loan Desk and must be returned after use each day. Failure to comply with the instructions
       and these guidelines may result in revocation of privileges.




       c        Renewal of Permit. Requests for renewals are the responsibility of the individual.




13     REFERENCE

       a         Within USDA. The NAL answers requests submitted in person, by telephone, by mail, or
       by electronic means for information in the field of agriculture or the related sciences which can be
       secured from published materials or relevant databases. Except for legislative reference questions
       relating to matters pending in the current Congress which should be referred to the Office of
       General Counsel's Library.

       b         Outside USDA. The NAL responds to requests submitted in person. by telephone, by
       mail or by electronic means in the fields of agriculture or the related sciences ff the requestor is
       not able to obtain the information from local resources. A fee may be involved for extended
       services.




14     ACQUISITION

       a        Ownership. All non-expendable published materials purchased or acquired by USDA
       agencies are the property of the NAL. When they are no longer needed by the agency. AL should
       be contacted regarding their disposition. Contact:

                         USDA. National Agricultural Library

                         Head. Gift & Exchange Unit

                         10301 Baltimore Blvd., Rm. 002

                         Beltsville. Maryland 20705

        b       Agency Publications and other materials. To assure acquisition by the NAL. and access
       by all employees of USDA. agencies should submit copies of all their publications. Translations
       and materials received at conferences and meetings to the NAL.




                                                    10
DR 1020-001                                                                                March 23, 1990




15     PURCHASES

       a       NAL. The NAL purchases. within available funds, on a priority basis. those publications
       necessary for the fulfillment of its mission.

        b       Department Agencies. USDA agencies should purchase reference publications necessary
       for journal routing and for use as reference aids. or working tools.

       c       Agency Libraries and Information Centers. These units should purchase reference an
       other materials necessary for carrying out their responsibility.




16     GIFTS

       The NAL accepts gifts of all forms. including paper materials software and audio-visual material,
       etc. While donation of publications is appreciated. it is generally-impractical to accept gifts under
       conditions which may restrict or limit their usefulness. or result in undue expense of upkeep unless
       such gifts are accompanied with adequate resources to support their special maintenance needs.




17     FOREIGN EXCHANGES

       a        Exchange Agreements. Before USDA publications may be sent free of charge to any
       foreign address. exchange arrangements must be made by the NAL Exchange Program.
       ExcePtions may be granted by the Director of NAL.

       b         Foreign Exchange Mailing Lists. The Director of the NAL is responsible for all additions
       to or revisions of foreign exchange mailing lists.




18     BOOKBINDING

       The Director of the NAL makes a contract on a fiscal year basis for bookbinding under a waiver
       granted by the Government Printing Office. This contract may be used by any agency.
       Specifications and other pertinent information concerning the contract may be requested from:

                         USDA, National Agricultural Library Head,

                         Acquisitions Serials Branch

                         10301 Baltimore Blvd.. Rm. 002

                         Beltsville, Maryland 20705




                                                   11
DR 1020-001                                                                                March 23, 1990


19     DISPOSITION OF LIBRARY MATERIALS

       a       Surplus Materials. The Director of the NAL, as authorized by law. may exchange surplus
       published materials for other publications (44 U.S.C, 1721).

       b        Expendable Publications. Disposition of expendable publications may be effected by
       agencies at their discretion.

       c        Non-expendable Publications. Non-expendable published materials surplus to the needs
       of an agency or agency field library shall be disposed of only upon authorization of the Director of
       the NAL. Washington Metropolitan area offices. agency field offices, and agency libraries and
       information centers shall send a list of surplus publications clearly identified as such to:

                         USDA, National Agricultural Library Chief,

                         Technical Services Division,

                         1001 Baltimore Blvd.. Rm. 100

                         Beltsville. Maryland 20705




                                                   12
