U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE 

WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250 

 

DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION 

NUMBER: 

1044-7 

SUBJECT: Coordination of USDA Activities Relating 
to Human Nutrition Research and Education 

DATE: May 23, 1994 

OPI: Office of the 
General Counsel 



1 Purpose 

The United States Department of Agriculture 
(USDA) is committed to the mission of improving 
the nutrition of American consumers. USDA plays a 
leading role within the Executive Branch in the 
development and implementation of programs aimed 
at strengthening nutrition research and education 
efforts within the United States, and at 
improving the nutritional quality of foods 
produced and consumed and the nutritional status 
of the American people. USDA activities are 
focused on determining the nutritive value of 
foods, human nutritional needs, types and amounts 
of food consumed by Americans, and strategies for 
improving the food supply, individual diets, and 
the health and well being of Americans. Other 
major roles are to help individuals understand 
the relationship between food and health through 
sound research-based nutrition education programs 
and information, and to administer the domestic 
food assistance programs. Research-based 
information is also critical for food producers 
and processors, who recognize that consumers' 
demands drive the marketplace. 

Coordination mechanisms already exist between 
USDA and the Department of Health and Human 
Services and other Federal agencies with 
responsibilities in these areas. These are the 
Interagency Board on Nutrition monitoring and 
Related Research, and the Interagency Committee 
on Human Nutrition Research. 


The purpose of this regulation is to establish a 
coordinating structure within USDA which will 
assure that all activities addressing research 
and education relating to human nutrition, 
including scientific and economic research as 
well as public education and information 
programs, will be carried out within the 
Department in a fully integrated and coordinated 
manner. 

2 Establishment of Council 

In order to strengthen policy and programmatic 
coordination within USDA in the nutrition 
education and research areas, there is hereby 
established within the Department a Nutrition 
Education and Research Coordinating Council 
(Council). The Assistant Secretary for Food and 
Consumer Services and the Assistant Secretary for 
Science and Education shall serve as Co-Chairs of 
the Council. The Council shall include as members 
the Administrators of the Agricultural Marketing 
Service, the Agricultural Research Service, the 
Cooperative State Research Service, the Economic 
Research Service, the Extension Service, the Food 
and Nutrition Service and the Food Safety and 
Inspection service, and the Director of the 
National Agricultural Library. The Assistant 
Secretary for Economics, the Assistant Secretary 
for Marketing and Inspection Services, and the 
Director, Office of Budget and Program Analysis, 
shall also serve as members of the Council. In 
the event of successor positions or 
organizations, the equivalent officials shall 
serve as members of the Council. 

The Council shall meet at the call of the Co- 
Chairs, and meetings shall be held at least 
quarterly. The Council will review agency 
planning documents and budget requests for 
functions related to human nutrition research and 
education. The Council will also review and 
advise the Secretary and other USDA officials 
with respect to nutrition research and education 
programs and priorities, and will evaluate the 
performance of agency functions related to 


nutrition research and education. The Council 
shall report to the Deputy Secretary. 

3 Activities Covered 

The Council established under paragraph 2 shall 
coordinate all USDA activities addressing 
research, analysis, education and public 
information programs related to human nutrition. 
This coordinating mechanism will apply to all 
such activities and functions of the Department, 
including any such functions subsequently 
assigned to the Department, and will include 
specifically the following: 

A USDA Scientific Research. Included 
are all research activities conducted 
by the Agricultural Research Service 
including the nutrition research 
activities conducted at the Beltsville 
Human Nutrition Research Center, 
Beltsville, Maryland; Children's 
Nutritional Research Center, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; 
Western Human Nutrition Research 
Center, the Presidio, San Francisco, 
California; Grand Forks Human Nutrition 
Research Center, Grand Forks, North 
Dakota; and Human Nutrition Research 
Center on Aging, Tufts University 
Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts. 

B Research Grant Programs. Included are 
all research grant programs related to 
human nutrition research conducted by 
the Cooperative State Research Service, 
including the human nutrition component 
of the National Research Initiative and 
the fellowships program in Higher 
Education. 

C Information Collection and Economic 
Analysis. This includes all functions 
performed by the Agricultural Research 
Service, the Economic Research Service 
and the Food and Nutrition Service 
relating to collection and analysis of 


information regarding market and 
nutrition monitoring, food supplies and 
prices, food demand and consumer 
behavior, socio-economic barriers to 
improving nutrition, nutrition 
education evaluation, and evaluation of 
food assistance programs. 

D Education and Information Functions. 
Included are the Department's education 
and information functions related to 
human nutrition, including activities 
presently performed by the Agricultural 
Marketing Service, the Food and 
Nutrition Service, the Food Safety and 
Inspection Service, the Expanded Food 
and Nutrition Education Program and 
other related activities carried out by 
the Extension Service, and the 
nutritionrelated programs of the 
National Agricultural Library including 
its Food and Nutrition Information and 
Education Resources Center. 

4 Report to the Secretary 

The Council shall submit to the Secretary 
annually, as of September 30 of each year, a 
report summarizing the accomplishments of the 
preceding year, problems encountered, and plans 
for the coming year for the Department's research 
and education functions related to human 
nutrition. Such report shall provide the 
Council's advice with respect to funding levels, 
accomplishments, and additional steps required, 
if any, to effect the full integration and 
coordination of the Department's functions in 
these areas. 

5 Staff Support 

Such staff support as may be required, including 
necessary support in preparation of the Council's 
annual report, shall be provided jointly by the 
Administrators of the Agricultural Research 
Service and the Food and Nutrition Service, and 


by the heads of such other participating USDA 
agencies as may be appropriate. 

6 Implementation 

The provisions of this regulation shall be 
effective immediately. 

-END- 

 

 


U.S. Department of Agriculture 

Washington, D.C. 20250 

 

 

DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION 

 

 NUMBER: 

 1051-002 

 

SUBJECT: 

INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES AND 
AGREEMENTS OF USDA AGENCIES 

 

DATE December 22, 2004 

 

OPI: Foreign Agricultural Service 



 

1 PURPOSE 

 

This regulation addresses the responsibilities of Departmental agencies regarding 
coordination of international activities and agreements and establishes the Intra- 
Departmental Coordination Committee on International Affairs. This regulation also 
establishes procedures within the Department to ensure compliance with the Case- 
Zablocki Act, 1 U.S.C. 112a and 112b, regarding consultation with the Secretary of State, 
reporting to Congress, and publication of international agreements. 

 

 

2 SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS 

 

 a This regulation is not intended to limit any agency’s authority to conduct 
international activities, to constitute a change in existing delegations of authority 
for any agency engaged in international activities, nor to constitute a delegation of 
authority to any agency to engage in international activities. 

 

b This regulation does not limit, or in any way supercede, DR 1051-1, 
“Coordination of USDA Activities with Foreign Countries” or regulations 
appearing at 7 C.F.R. part 2. 

 

 

3 POLICY 

 

 a A number of agencies within the Department have authority to conduct activities 
overseas. These activities increasingly involve a wide range of technical 
assistance responsibilities that are vital to United States foreign policy, trade, and 
international humanitarian goals. As such, their planning and implementation 
affect a number of other agencies within the U.S. Government, such as the 
Department of State and the U.S. Agency for International Development. In 
addition, a number of agencies in the Department are involved in international 
issues that affect various U.S. Government policies, including trade, economic 
development, food safety, natural resources, science and the environment. It is 
important that the Department’s international activities are coordinated and carry 
uniform messages, and that the Department ensure that its international activities 
are coordinated with overall U.S. policy goals. 


 

 b In many cases, the international activities of Departmental agencies involve 
entering into agreements with foreign governments or international organizations. 
Generally, under the Case-Zablocki Act, an "international agreement," regardless 
of its form, may not be signed or otherwise concluded on behalf of the United 
States without prior consultation with the Secretary of State. Further, the 
Secretary of State must transmit to Congress the text of any international 
agreement, other than a treaty, to which the United States is a party as soon as 
practicable after such agreement has entered into force. The Secretary of State 
has issued regulations that set forth the criteria to be used by governmental 
agencies in determining whether an agreement they are contemplating is an 
"international agreement." The Department must implement these responsibilities 
in a timely and consistent manner. 

 

c The Foreign Agricultural Service (FAS) has been delegated detailed 
responsibilities in the international arena. These include, but are not limited to, 
the responsibility to coordinate the carrying out by Department agencies of their 
functions involving foreign agriculture policies and programs and their operations 
and activities in foreign areas; acting as a liaison on these matters and functions 
relating to foreign agriculture with the Department of State, the United States 
Trade Representative, the U.S. Agency for International Development and foreign 
governments; conducting functions of the Department relating to the World Trade 
Organization, and legislation affecting international agricultural trade; and 
administering and directing the Department’s programs in international 
development, technical assistance and training carried out under the Foreign 
Assistance Act of 1961, as amended. 

 

4 RESPONSIBILITIES 

 

 a FAS shall keep other agencies informed of the Department’s international 
activities, policies and agreements, that may be of interest to, or have an 
implication for, other agencies’ domestic or international activities. FAS will also 
ensure that other agencies have opportunities for input and consultation on 
Departmental policies and positions relating to international affairs. 

 

 b Every agency of the Department shall keep the Administrator, FAS, timely and 
fully informed of its international programs and projects, whether or not such 
activities take place in the United States or another country. This coordination 
shall be undertaken in such manner as the Administrator, FAS, may determine is 
necessary to facilitate FAS in carrying out its responsibilities to coordinate 
Department functions involving foreign agricultural policies and programs and 
Departmental agencies’ operations and activities in foreign areas. 

 


 c Whenever an agency of the Department intends to enter into an agreement with a 
foreign state, foreign state agency, or intergovernmental organization, the head of 
such agency shall consult with the Office of the General Counsel to ensure that 
the agency possesses the requisite authority to enter into such agreement. After 
determining that such authority exists, the agency shall furnish the draft text of 
the agreement to the Administrator, FAS, prior to negotiations or, if that is not 
feasible, as soon as possible in the negotiation process. 

 

(1) FAS shall review the draft text to assure its compliance with U.S. foreign 
policy and to determine whether the agreement is subject to the 
requirements of the Case-Zablocki Act and further review by the Secretary 
of State. In order to ensure a coordinated Departmental position, FAS 
shall be the point of contact with the Department of State regarding these 
matters. In undertaking these responsibilities, agencies shall take 
cognizance of the fact that the Department of State generally requires that 
international agreements be submitted to it for review no later than 50 
days prior to the anticipated date for concluding such agreement. 

 

(2) FAS may exempt certain categories of agreements from this requirement 
as appropriate. 

 

 d Subject to exceptions made by FAS after consultations with affected agencies, 
agreements calling for the Department to furnish services on an advance of funds 
or reimbursable basis for international activities that are carried out under the 
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, or otherwise funded by the Department of State, 
U.S. Agency for International Development, a foreign state, foreign state agency, 
or intergovernmental organization, shall be entered into by FAS. 

 

(1) In granting exceptions, FAS must take into consideration existing 
agreements and existing statutory authorities delegated to other agencies 
to conduct international activities. 

 

(2) FAS, or in the case of an exception, another agency approved by FAS, 
will negotiate the details of these agreements, including establishing the 
indirect cost rates and providing technical services, with the funding 
entity. After entering into such agreements, FAS, or the FAS-approved 
agency, will coordinate the furnishing of such services with appropriate 
agencies of the Department through the Economy Act or other appropriate 
arrangements. 





(3) This paragraph does not apply to: 

 

 (a) Grants made to an agency of the Department; or 


 

 (b) Grants and cooperative agreements subject to the Federal Grant 
and Cooperative Agreement Act (FGCA), 31 U.S.C. 6301, et seq., 
and cooperative agreements statutorily exempt from the FGCA, 
that are entered into pursuant to statutory authority delegated to an 
agency. 

 

 e There is hereby established the “Intra-Departmental Coordination Committee on 
International Affairs” (the “Committee”) with representation from USDA 
agencies as determined appropriate by the Under Secretary for Farm and Foreign 
Agricultural Services. The Committee will be chaired, and meetings of the 
Committee will be called, by the Associate Administrator, or other official as 
designated by the Administrator, of FAS. The Committee shall meet at least 
quarterly. 

 

(1) The Committee will serve as a mechanism to assist in the coordination of 
USDA’s international activities as provided for in this Departmental 
Regulation and to review implementation of this Departmental Regulation. 
The Committee will report periodically to the Subcabinet on its 
deliberations and elevate any unresolved policy or coordination issues to 
the Subcabinet for resolution. 

 

(2) The permanent members of the committee will consist of representatives 
from the international offices, or Office of the Administrators, of such 
USDA agencies as the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, 
Agricultural Research Service, Agricultural Marketing Service, 
Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service, Economic 
Research Service, Farm Service Agency, Food and Nutrition Service, 
Food Safety and Inspection Service, Foreign Agricultural Service, Forest 
Service, Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards Administration, 
National Agricultural Statistics Service, Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, Risk Management Agency, Rural Business Cooperative Service, 
Rural Utilities Service, Rural Housing Service, the Office of the Chief 
Economist, the Office of the General Counsel, the Office of Budget and 
Program Analysis and others, as needed. 

 

- END- 


