U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE 

WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250 

 

 

DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION 

 

Number: 

1043-027 

 

SUBJECT: 

Reestablishment of the National Wildlife Services Advisory 
Committee 

DATE: 

February 7, 2011 

OPI:Animal and Plant 
Health Inspection Service 

 



 

1. Committee Designation 

 

The Committee’s official designated name is National Wildlife Services (WS) 
Advisory Committee (Committee). 

 

2. Authority 

 

The APHIS WS program operates under the Act of March 2, 1931, (7 U.S.C. 426 
– 426b) and the Act of December 22, 1987 (7 USC 426c). 

 

3. Objectives and Scope of Activities 

 

The purpose of the Committee is to advise the Secretary of Agriculture on 
policies and program issues necessary to manage damage caused by depredating 
wildlife to protect America’s agricultural, industrial, and natural resources and to 
safeguard public health and safety. The Committee is being established in 
accordance with the provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA), 
as amended, 5 U.S.C., App. 

 

4. Description of Duties 

 

The reestablishment of this Committee is in the public interest in connection with 
the duties and responsibilities assigned to the U.S. Department of Agriculture 
(USDA) by Public Law No. 99-190. The duties of the Committee involve 
advising the Secretary on: 

 

(a) overall policy and guidance for the operation of the WS program; 


(b) resources to accomplish the WS mission; 


(c) impacts of depredating wildlife; 


(d) public health and safety problems created by birds and other wildlife; and 


(e) research activities and priorities to address wildlife damage management 
needs. 




 

5. Agency or Official to Whom the Committee Reports 

 


The Committee will report to the Secretary of Agriculture through the Under 
Secretary, Marketing and Regulatory Programs. 

 

6. Support 

 

The Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) WS’ Operational 
Support Staff Office will provide the necessary support for the Committee. 

 

7. Estimated Annual Operating Costs and Staff Years 

 

The annual costs are estimated at $24,000 and .03 staff years. 

 

8. Designated Federal Officer 

 

The Deputy Administrator for APHIS WS will serve as the Designated Federal 
Officer (DFO) and will provide the necessary staff support for the Committee. 
The DFO will approve or call all of the advisory committee’s and subcommittees’ 
meetings, prepare and approve all meeting agendas, attend all committee and 
subcommittee meetings, adjourn any meeting when the DFO determines 
adjournment to be in the public interest, and chair meetings when directed to do 
so by the official to whom the advisory committee reports. 

 

9. Number and Frequency of Meetings 

 

Meetings will be held annually or more often if the Secretary of Agriculture 
deems it necessary. 

 

10. Duration 

 

This Committee is a continuing committee. 

 

11. Termination 

 

Termination shall occur two years from the filing date. 

 

12. Membership and Designation 

 

Membership will be composed of twenty (20) persons representing a broad 
spectrum of agricultural, environmental, conservation, academic, animal welfare, 
and related interests. Equal opportunity practices, in line with USDA policies, 
will be followed in appointing representative members to the Committee. To 
ensure that the recommendations of the Committee have taken into account the 
needs of a diverse group served by the Department, membership shall include, to 
the extent practical, individuals with demonstrated ability to represent minorities, 
woman, and persons with disabilities. 

 


 

13. Subcommittees 

 

The Committee may request establishment and use subcommittees which are 
created by the Agency or DFO. Subcommittees will report back to the 
Committee, and will not provide advice or work products directly to the 
Department or Agency. 

 

14. Recordkeeping 

 

The records of the committee, formally and informally established 
subcommittees, or other subgroups of the committee, shall be handled in 
accordance with General Records Schedule 26, Item 2 or other approved agency 
records disposition schedule. These records shall be available for public 
inspection and copying, subject to the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552. 

 

15. Filing Date 

 

 February 7, 2011 

 

 


