                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                        DR 1043-040
 SUBJECT: Assignment of Responsibilities for Review             DATE:
 and Oversight of Working Capital Fund Activities               November 22, 2021
 OPI: Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Working            EXPIRATION DATE:
 Capital Fund                                                   November 22, 2026



Section                                                                                   Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                  1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                       1
3.   Scope                                                                                    2
4.   Policy                                                                                   2
5.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                               3
6.   Inquiries                                                                                7

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                    A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                   B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                    C-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.   This Departmental Regulation (DR) identifies United States Department of Agriculture
          (USDA) individuals and organizations responsible for the financial health and efficient
          operation of activities supported by the Departmental Working Capital Fund (WCF).

     b.   The DR describes the roles and responsibilities of the Chief Financial Officer (CFO), the
          Chief Information Officer (CIO), the Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA), the
          WCF Advisory Committee (the “Committee”), the Controller of the WCF, and others as
          they relate to the financial management of the WCF and as they conform to statutory
          requirements and Departmental policy.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     a.   This DR supersedes DR 1043-040, Assignment of Responsibilities for Review and
          Oversight of Working Capital Fund Activities, dated March 5, 2021.
  b.   Policies, individuals, organizations, roles, and responsibilities described herein apply to
       the administration of the WCF under the authority of 7 United States Code (U.S.C.) §
       2235, Working capital fund established; use of central services by bureaus, etc., of the
       Department. They do not apply to Shared Cost Programs or Central Cost Distribution
       Programs.


3. SCOPE

  This directive applies to:

  a.   The CFO;

  b.   The CIO;

  c.   The ASA;

  d.   Under and Assistant Secretaries (Mission Areas);

  e.   The Director, Office of Budget and Program Analysis (OBPA);

  f.   Department-level General Officers;

  g.   The WCF Controller; and

  h.   Activity Centers.


4. POLICY

  a.   The WCF is the Department’s financing mechanism for the provision of centrally
       managed activities of a business-like nature. The recovery of all operating costs
       incurred by entities financed by the WCF must be via reimbursements from customer
       agencies unless there is a statutory exception.

  b.   All WCF financed activity centers must use full cost recovery methods based on
       customer agency use of services provided. The methods must reflect the cost and
       volume of services provided to each customer agency. Allocation methods (e.g., those
       based on Full Time Equivalent (FTE) employee counts) are to be used as a last resort
       and only with the approval of the WCF Controller.

  c.   The WCF has been designated as the Department’s information technology (IT) WCF
       under provisions of the Modernizing Government Technology (MGT) Act, Public Law
       (P.L.) No. 115-91, §§ 1076-1078. The WCF established a separate Technology Fund
       over which the CIO has sole authority. The Technology Fund supports IT




                                                2
       Modernization, Cybersecurity, and Cloud Migration efforts in accordance with the
       provisions of the MGT Act.

  d.   The WCF Advisory Committee, a high-level senior management group, has been
       established to provide the CFO with advice and counsel concerning the management of
       the WCF.

       The Committee consists of:

       (1) The CFO, who must serve as Chairperson of the Committee. The CFO may, at
           their sole discretion, delegate responsibilities under this section to the Deputy CFO;

       (2) The CIO, who must serve as Vice-Chairperson of the Committee. The CIO may, at
           their sole discretion, delegate responsibilities under this section to the Deputy CIO;

       (3) The ASA, who may, at their sole discretion, delegate responsibilities under this
           section to the Deputy ASA;

       (4) The Controller of the WCF. The WCF Controller may, at their sole discretion,
           delegate responsibilities under this section to the Office of the Chief Financial
           Officer (OCFO) WCF Division Director;

       (5) The Director, OBPA. The OBPA Director may, at their sole discretion, delegate
           responsibilities under this section to the OBPA Associate Director or a Deputy
           Director;

       (6) A WCF Work Group Chairperson and Work Group Vice-Chairperson. The WCF
           Advisory Committee will select a Work Group Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson
           from its full membership among the Mission Area representatives. The Work
           Group Chairperson serves as the principal point of contact between the Committee
           and WCF management; and

       (7) Department-level General Officers (Directors). These Directors may, at their sole
           discretion, delegate responsibilities under this section to their designated Deputy or
           Associate Director.


5. ROLES AND RESPONSABILITIES

  a.   General

       The CFO, the CIO, the WCF Controller, activity center managers, and the WCF
       Advisory Committee must cooperate to the greatest extent in carrying out all
       responsibilities, including studies, reviews, and other internal control processes aimed at
       improvement or oversight of the Fund's activities.




                                               3
b.   The CFO will:

     (1) Exercise overall management authority over financial aspects of the WCF activities,
         and those activity centers under the OCFO (or equivalent organizational unit)
         supported by the WCF;

     (2) Be ultimately responsible for the financial health of the WCF;

     (3) Approve the new or expanded centralized services financed under the WCF, before
         submission to the Secretary and transmittal to the Office of Management and
         Budget (OMB) per 7 U.S.C. § 2235. The WCF Controller will coordinate the
         submission of such requests with OBPA; and

     (4) Implement recommendations of the WCF Advisory Committee that the CFO deems
         to be in the best interests of the Department, its agencies, and its mission, subject to
         concurrence by the Secretary.

c.   The CIO will:

     (1) Serve as a member of the WCF Advisory Committee;

     (2) Develop programs to improve the performance of IT activities financed by the
         WCF;

     (3) Oversee aspects of service delivery and activity operation over IT activity centers
         under the Office of the Chief Information Officer (or equivalent organizational unit)
         supported by the WCF;

     (4) Oversee the preparation of proposals for new or expanded centralized IT services
         per 7 U.S.C. § 2235. The CIO works in partnership with the CFO to submit the
         requests through the WCF Controller, who is responsible for coordination with
         OBPA;

     (5) Ensure that all activities, products, analyses, and directives from the Committee,
         including those with budgetary impact, are compliant with prevailing IT statutes
         and regulations;

     (6) Conduct technical reviews of all IT investment proposals to be funded by the WCF,
         including those to be funded by the WCF as the Department’s IT WCF under the
         authority of the MGT Act; and

     (7) Have sole decision-making authority over the Technology Fund, including over its
         management and oversight. The Technology Fund supports IT Modernization,
         Cyber Security, and Cloud Migration efforts in accordance with the provision of the
         MGT Act.



                                              4
d.   The ASA will:

     (1) Serve as a voting member of the WCF Advisory Committee; and

     (2) Develop programs to improve the performance of administrative service activities
         financed by the WCF.

e.   The Associate CFO for Financial Policy and Planning will:

     (1) Serve as the WCF Controller;

     (2) Exercise day-to-day management responsibilities for the WCF, including, but not
         limited to:

         (a) Review of capital investment, operating, and WCF reimbursement estimates;

         (b) Preparation of periodic financial reports (e.g., agency cost-share estimates,
             status of funds reports) and financial statements;

         (c) Implementation of policies, procedures, mechanisms, and controls necessary to
             ensure the effective financial performance of the WCF; and

         (d) Review and approve all cost recovery methodologies employed by activity
             centers to recover operating costs;

     (3) Serve as the primary advisor to the CFO on matters of WCF financial operations
         and general management issues;

     (4) Serve as a member of the WCF Advisory Committee;

     (5) Serve as the Executive Secretary to the WCF Advisory Committee; and

     (6) Reflect WCF decisions in Departmental Estimates to OBPA as part of the budget
         formulation process.

f.   The Director, OBPA, will:

     (1) Serve as a member of the WCF Advisory Committee;

     (2) Coordinate with the WCF Controller on WCF budget submission timelines to
         ensure alignment with Department-level dates; and

     (3) In consultation with the CIO and CFO, ensure consistency between Departmental
         Budget estimates and Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act




                                            5
         (FITARA), P.L. No. 113-291, §§ 831-837 requirements for WCF IT budgeted
         amounts.

g.   Activity Center Managers must:

     (1) Oversee and administer activity center operations per their organizational
         delegations of authority;

     (2) Administer the delivery of goods and services to customer agencies;

     (3) Develop, subject to the approval of the WCF Controller, cost recovery methods that
         recover all costs of services provided to customer agencies;

     (4) Present, at the discretion of WCF management and the WCF Advisory Committee,
         reports, requests, or proposals for the following:

         (a) Annual estimates of operating budgets and staffing;

         (b) New activity centers, reorganization of existing activity centers, or expansion
             of services in current activity centers;

         (c) The financial position of the activity center (e.g., status of funds); and

         (d) Provide the CFO, the WCF Controller, the CIO, and the WCF Advisory
             Committee with any other information and help requested to the fullest extent
             possible.

h.   The WCF Advisory Committee will:

     (1) Serve as the primary representative body for Departmental Under and Assistant
         Secretaries whose agencies use goods and services financed by the WCF;

     (2) Serve as the primary representative body for Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
         offices benefitting from WCF-supported systems and services;

     (3) Provide recommendations to the CFO on the financial management of WCF
         activities, and reimbursements, including operating funding and staffing estimates;

     (4) Provide recommendations to the CFO on the management, administration, and
         oversight of WCF activities;

     (5) Provide, at the request of the CFO, recommendations on:

         (a) Proposals for new services in the WCF;

         (b) Proposals for the closing, consolidation, or transfer of existing activities;



                                             6
           (c) WCF policies and procedures; and

           (d) Other items that the CFO deems vital to ensure the effective management of
               the WCF;

      (6) Establish working groups to assist the Committee in fulfilling its responsibilities.
          The duties of the working groups may include, but are not limited to:

           (a) Select an individual from among its membership to serve as WCF Work Group
               Chairperson;

           (b) Conduct detailed reviews of activity center operating estimates, and proposals
               for new WCF services (at the request of the CFO);

           (c) Conduct special reviews of WCF financial and operational activities at the
               request of the WCF Advisory Committee (this does not prevent the CFO, CIO,
               or the WCF Controller from conducting reviews independently of the
               Committee in a manner consistent with their respective authorities and
               responsibilities for WCF management);

           (d) Conduct special reviews of proposals to reorganize, merge, or end WCF
               activity centers or services; and

           (e) Other such analytical and administrative support the WCF Advisory
               Committee deems necessary.


6. INQUIRIES

  All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should direct questions and inquiries
  regarding the DR 1043-040 to the WCF via email at USDAWCF@usda.gov.


                                           -END-




                                              7
                             APPENDIX A

                 ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ASA      Assistant Secretary for Administration
CFO      Chief Financial Officer
CIO      Chief Information Officer
DG       Departmental Guidebook
DR       Departmental Regulation
FITARA   Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
FTE      Full Time Equivalent
IT       Information Technology
MGT      Modernizing Government Technology Act
OBPA     Office of Budget and Program Analysis
OCFO     Office of the Chief Financial Officer
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
P.L.     Public Law
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture
WCF      Working Capital Fund




                                  A-1
                                           APPENDIX B

                                          DEFINITIONS


Activity Center. Activity Center is an entity financed, in whole or in part, under the WCF that
provides one or more related business services to agencies of the Department as a centrally
managed unit.

Agency. Organizational units of the Department, other than staff offices, whose heads report to
officials within the Office of the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Under Secretaries, Assistant
Secretaries, and Assistant to the Secretary. (Source: USDA, Departmental Guidebook (DG) 0100-
002, USDA Departmental Directives Definitions Glossary)

Customer Agency. A Customer Agency is any Mission Area, agency, or staff office of the
Department or a Non-USDA entity that will reimburse operating costs to the WCF Activity
Centers for its services.

Mission Area. A group of agencies with related functions that report to the same Under or Assistant
Secretary. Research, Education, and Economics (REE) is an example of a Mission Area. (Source:
USDA, DG 0100-002)

Staff Office. Departmental administrative offices whose heads report to officials within the Office
of the Secretary. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)




                                                B-1
                                         APPENDIX C

                             AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


7 U.S.C. § 2235, Working capital fund established; use of central services by bureaus, etc., of
the Department

Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), P.L. No. 113-291, National
Defense Appropriations Act for 2015, Title VIII, Subtitle D, §§ 831-837, December 19, 2014, as
amended

Modernizing Government Technology (MGT) Act, P.L. No. 115-91, National Defense
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018, Title X, Subtitle G, §§ 1076-1078, December 12, 2017

USDA, DG 0100-002, USDA Departmental Directives Definitions Glossary, September 26,
2018




                                               C-1
