                                U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                   Washington, D.C. 20250


            DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION
                                                                                    NUMBER:
                                                                                   1051-002
 SUBJECT:                                        DATE December 22, 2004
 INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES AND
 AGREEMENTS OF USDA AGENCIES                     OPI:      Foreign Agricultural Service

1     PURPOSE

      This regulation addresses the responsibilities of Departmental agencies regarding
      coordination of international activities and agreements and establishes the Intra-
      Departmental Coordination Committee on International Affairs. This regulation also
      establishes procedures within the Department to ensure compliance with the Case-
      Zablocki Act, 1 U.S.C. 112a and 112b, regarding consultation with the Secretary of State,
      reporting to Congress, and publication of international agreements.


2     SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS

      a      This regulation is not intended to limit any agency’s authority to conduct
             international activities, to constitute a change in existing delegations of authority
             for any agency engaged in international activities, nor to constitute a delegation of
             authority to any agency to engage in international activities.

      b      This regulation does not limit, or in any way supercede, DR 1051-1,
             “Coordination of USDA Activities with Foreign Countries” or regulations
             appearing at 7 C.F.R. part 2.


3     POLICY

      a      A number of agencies within the Department have authority to conduct activities
             overseas. These activities increasingly involve a wide range of technical
             assistance responsibilities that are vital to United States foreign policy, trade, and
             international humanitarian goals. As such, their planning and implementation
             affect a number of other agencies within the U.S. Government, such as the
             Department of State and the U.S. Agency for International Development. In
             addition, a number of agencies in the Department are involved in international
             issues that affect various U.S. Government policies, including trade, economic
             development, food safety, natural resources, science and the environment. It is
             important that the Department’s international activities are coordinated and carry
             uniform messages, and that the Department ensure that its international activities
             are coordinated with overall U.S. policy goals.
DR 1051-002                                                                    December 22, 2004



       b      In many cases, the international activities of Departmental agencies involve
              entering into agreements with foreign governments or international organizations.
              Generally, under the Case-Zablocki Act, an "international agreement," regardless
              of its form, may not be signed or otherwise concluded on behalf of the United
              States without prior consultation with the Secretary of State. Further, the
              Secretary of State must transmit to Congress the text of any international
              agreement, other than a treaty, to which the United States is a party as soon as
              practicable after such agreement has entered into force. The Secretary of State
              has issued regulations that set forth the criteria to be used by governmental
              agencies in determining whether an agreement they are contemplating is an
              "international agreement." The Department must implement these responsibilities
              in a timely and consistent manner.

       c      The Foreign Agricultural Service (FAS) has been delegated detailed
              responsibilities in the international arena. These include, but are not limited to,
              the responsibility to coordinate the carrying out by Department agencies of their
              functions involving foreign agriculture policies and programs and their operations
              and activities in foreign areas; acting as a liaison on these matters and functions
              relating to foreign agriculture with the Department of State, the United States
              Trade Representative, the U.S. Agency for International Development and foreign
              governments; conducting functions of the Department relating to the World Trade
              Organization, and legislation affecting international agricultural trade; and
              administering and directing the Department’s programs in international
              development, technical assistance and training carried out under the Foreign
              Assistance Act of 1961, as amended.

4      RESPONSIBILITIES

       a      FAS shall keep other agencies informed of the Department’s international
              activities, policies and agreements, that may be of interest to, or have an
              implication for, other agencies’ domestic or international activities. FAS will also
              ensure that other agencies have opportunities for input and consultation on
              Departmental policies and positions relating to international affairs.

       b      Every agency of the Department shall keep the Administrator, FAS, timely and
              fully informed of its international programs and projects, whether or not such
              activities take place in the United States or another country. This coordination
              shall be undertaken in such manner as the Administrator, FAS, may determine is
              necessary to facilitate FAS in carrying out its responsibilities to coordinate
              Department functions involving foreign agricultural policies and programs and
              Departmental agencies’ operations and activities in foreign areas.

                                               2
December 22, 2004                                                                   DR 1051-002

       c       Whenever an agency of the Department intends to enter into an agreement with a
               foreign state, foreign state agency, or intergovernmental organization, the head of
               such agency shall consult with the Office of the General Counsel to ensure that
               the agency possesses the requisite authority to enter into such agreement. After
               determining that such authority exists, the agency shall furnish the draft text of
               the agreement to the Administrator, FAS, prior to negotiations or, if that is not
               feasible, as soon as possible in the negotiation process.

               (1)    FAS shall review the draft text to assure its compliance with U.S. foreign
                      policy and to determine whether the agreement is subject to the
                      requirements of the Case-Zablocki Act and further review by the Secretary
                      of State. In order to ensure a coordinated Departmental position, FAS
                      shall be the point of contact with the Department of State regarding these
                      matters. In undertaking these responsibilities, agencies shall take
                      cognizance of the fact that the Department of State generally requires that
                      international agreements be submitted to it for review no later than 50
                      days prior to the anticipated date for concluding such agreement.

               (2)    FAS may exempt certain categories of agreements from this requirement
                      as appropriate.

       d       Subject to exceptions made by FAS after consultations with affected agencies,
               agreements calling for the Department to furnish services on an advance of funds
               or reimbursable basis for international activities that are carried out under the
               Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, or otherwise funded by the Department of State,
               U.S. Agency for International Development, a foreign state, foreign state agency,
               or intergovernmental organization, shall be entered into by FAS.

               (1)    In granting exceptions, FAS must take into consideration existing
                      agreements and existing statutory authorities delegated to other agencies
                      to conduct international activities.

               (2)    FAS, or in the case of an exception, another agency approved by FAS,
                      will negotiate the details of these agreements, including establishing the
                      indirect cost rates and providing technical services, with the funding
                      entity. After entering into such agreements, FAS, or the FAS-approved
                      agency, will coordinate the furnishing of such services with appropriate
                      agencies of the Department through the Economy Act or other appropriate
                      arrangements.

               (3)    This paragraph does not apply to:

                      (a)     Grants made to an agency of the Department; or
                                                3
DR 1051-002                                                                    December 22, 2004



                     (b)    Grants and cooperative agreements subject to the Federal Grant
                            and Cooperative Agreement Act (FGCA), 31 U.S.C. 6301, et seq.,
                            and cooperative agreements statutorily exempt from the FGCA,
                            that are entered into pursuant to statutory authority delegated to an
                            agency.

       e      There is hereby established the “Intra-Departmental Coordination Committee on
              International Affairs” (the “Committee”) with representation from USDA
              agencies as determined appropriate by the Under Secretary for Farm and Foreign
              Agricultural Services. The Committee will be chaired, and meetings of the
              Committee will be called, by the Associate Administrator, or other official as
              designated by the Administrator, of FAS. The Committee shall meet at least
              quarterly.

              (1)    The Committee will serve as a mechanism to assist in the coordination of
                     USDA’s international activities as provided for in this Departmental
                     Regulation and to review implementation of this Departmental Regulation.
                     The Committee will report periodically to the Subcabinet on its
                     deliberations and elevate any unresolved policy or coordination issues to
                     the Subcabinet for resolution.

              (2)    The permanent members of the committee will consist of representatives
                     from the international offices, or Office of the Administrators, of such
                     USDA agencies as the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service,
                     Agricultural Research Service, Agricultural Marketing Service,
                     Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service, Economic
                     Research Service, Farm Service Agency, Food and Nutrition Service,
                     Food Safety and Inspection Service, Foreign Agricultural Service, Forest
                     Service, Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards Administration,
                     National Agricultural Statistics Service, Natural Resources Conservation
                     Service, Risk Management Agency, Rural Business Cooperative Service,
                     Rural Utilities Service, Rural Housing Service, the Office of the Chief
                     Economist, the Office of the General Counsel, the Office of Budget and
                     Program Analysis and others, as needed.

                                                   - END-




                                              4
