                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                 NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                         DR 1110-002
 SUBJECT: Management’s Responsibility for Internal               DATE:
 Control                                                         March 5, 2021
 OPI: Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Internal            EXPIRATION DATE:
 Control Division                                                March 5, 2026



Section                                                                                     Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                      1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                           1
3.   Scope                                                                                        2
4.   Background                                                                                   2
5.   Policy                                                                                       2
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                                   3
7.   Reporting                                                                                    6
8.   Inquiries                                                                                    7

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                      A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                     B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                      C-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of Agriculture
     (USDA) policy for improving the accountability and effectiveness of Mission Area, agency,
     and staff office programs, operations, and reporting.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     a.   This regulation supersedes DR 1110-002, Management’s Responsibility for Internal
          Control, dated June 17, 2013.

     b.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their policies with this DR
          within 6 months of the publication date.

     c.   This DR is effective immediately when published. This DR will remain in effect until
          superseded or the expiration date.
3. SCOPE

  The DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices. It requires close
  collaboration from agency leadership across all agency mission and support functions.


4. BACKGROUND

  a.   The DR complies with requirements of the Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act of
       1982 (FMFIA), Public Law (P.L.) No. 97-255, and the Federal Financial Management
       Improvement Act of 1996 (FFMIA), P.L. No. 104-208.

  b.   The DR incorporates changes based on:

       (1) Government Accountability Office (GAO), GAO-14-704G, Standards for Internal
           Control in the Federal Government (Green Book), dated September 10, 2014;

       (2) Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular No. A-123, Management’s
           Responsibility for Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) and Internal Control, dated
           July 15, 2016; and

       (3) OMB Memorandum M-18-16, Appendix A to OMB Circular No. A-123,
           Management of Reporting and Data Integrity Risk, dated June 6, 2018.


5. POLICY

  This DR gives guidance on internal control over program and administrative operations,
  reporting, and compliance with applicable laws and regulations. It supports OMB’s
  expansion of responsibilities for Federal managers beyond the Chief Financial Officer (CFO)
  community. This policy ensures:

  a.   Continuous monitoring of internal controls as part of daily program and administrative
       operations;

  b.   Strengthening of management accountability and improvement of program performance
       and operations;

  c.   Integration of efforts to meet the requirements of FMFIA and FFMIA;

  d.   Compliance with the Department’s Data Quality Plan;

  e.   Systems of internal control are established, maintained, evaluated, improved and
       reported on;



                                              2
  f.   Controls are an integral part of the entire Department’s processes and systems;

  g.   Internal controls, including entity-level controls (ELC) are understood, encouraged, and
       carried out;

  h.   Deficiencies in key controls, when detected, are tracked, monitored, and promptly
       corrected;

  i.   Results of evaluations are documented, maintained, and made available upon request;
       and

  j.   USDA agencies comply with all internal control reporting requirements.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Secretary of Agriculture will:

       (1) Ensure the effectiveness of internal control systems throughout the Department; and

       (2) Report annually to the President, Congress, and OMB on the status of systems of
           internal control as well as plans and schedules for correcting any material
           weaknesses.

  b.   Under and Assistant Secretaries, Agency and Staff Office Heads will:

       (1) Establish and maintain a system of internal control based on GAO’s Green Book
           ensuring adequate controls for program and administrative operations, reporting,
           and compliance are in place;

       (2) Ensure agency coordination and accountability for identifying and correcting
           material weaknesses (MW), significant deficiencies (SD), and
           noncompliances/nonconformances;

       (3) Designate a senior executive to represent the agency as part of the Department’s
           oversight body;

       (4) Oversee and assign staff to perform annual internal control assessments and
           reviews;

       (5) Ensure that sufficient resources are available to correct MWs, SDs, and
           noncompliances and nonconformances;

       (6) Ensure that corrective action plans (CAP) address the root cause of MWs, and SDs;




                                              3
     (7) Determine when acceptance of risks associated with control deficiencies is
         appropriate;

     (8) Categorize MWs, SDs, and noncompliances/conformances for the purpose of
         prioritizing corrective action;

     (9) Periodically review MWs, SDs, and corrective action status reports and make sure
         that there is follow-up;

     (10) Establish a quality assurance process to support reasonable assurance that control
          objectives are being achieved;

     (11) Ensure that strategic or annual performance plans address MWs and SDs that
          impact key risks and objectives;

     (12) Designate a Management Control Officer (MCO) to coordinate the internal control
          program;

     (13) Ensure Departmental internal control guidelines are followed;

     (14) Ensure that managers and employees know the importance of internal controls as
          well as specific program risks and objectives;

     (15) Report the actions being taken to manage fraud risks to appropriate agency
          officials;

     (16) Ensure employees are being held accountable for their internal control
          responsibilities through the performance management process; and

     (17) Submit an annual certification statement to the CFO which forms the basis of the
          Secretary’s annual assurance letter.

c.   The Chief Financial Officer (CFO) will:

     (1) Plan and provide guidance and oversight and report on results of the Department’s
         annual assessment of internal control over reporting;

     (2) Manage, coordinate, consolidate and report on internal control efforts within the
         Department;

     (3) Work with senior leadership to establish an oversight body for the Department’s
         internal control program;

     (4) Establish and maintain systems for monitoring the timely correction of MWs
         reported to the President and Congress;




                                             4
     (5) Partner with Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to establish an internal
         control-conscious environment;

     (6) Issue internal control policies and procedures;

     (7) Provide oversight and guidance to agencies concerning the maintenance of effective
         controls; and

     (8) Keep the Secretary and Sub-Cabinet officials abreast of the status of newly
         identified and open material weaknesses.

d.   The Inspector General will:
             .
     (1) Evaluate internal controls within the scope of their delegated authority and overall
         program of audits and investigations;

     (2) Identify specific deficiencies in internal control, noncompliances with laws and
         regulations, and system noncompliances and conformances in audit reports; and

     (3) Provide recommendations to management to improve business/administrative
         operations and systems.

e.   MCOs will:

     (1) Coordinate the annual process to determine which programs or functions need a
         formal review;

     (2) Manage reviews of program and administrative operations and efforts to ensure
         compliance with applicable laws and regulations;

     (3) Coordinate the annual ELC assessment;

     (4) Coordinate the agency plan for evaluation of its internal control system;

     (5) Work to reduce duplicative efforts between audits, internal control reviews,
         compliance reviews, and other evaluations;

     (6) Identify programs and operations that may be susceptible to fraud or significant
         improper payments;

     (7) Plan, direct, and evaluate implementation of this DR;

     (8) Work with the Office of Inspector General to resolve material internal control
         deficiencies disclosed in audit reports;

     (9) Monitor timely correction and validation of identified weaknesses, deficiencies, and
         noncompliances/conformances ensuring senior level prioritization is met;



                                             5
       (10) Report to senior leadership MWs, SDs, noncompliances and nonconformances
            disclosed in audit reports, internal reviews, and other applicable documents; and

       (11) Maintain a system to track deficiencies and the status of corrective action
            milestones and ensure that CAPs address the root cause of deficiencies and
            noncompliances and conformances.

  f.   All employees are responsible for the effective operation of controls established by
       management.


7. REPORTING

  a.   General

       (1) FMFIA and FFMIA require USDA to provide an annual assurance statement to the
           President and Congress. The CFO will issue an annual data call following the
           requirements of OMB Circulars A-123 Financial Reporting Requirements, and
           implementing Appendices A and D and A-136, Financial Reporting Requirements,
           and implementing Appendix A.

       (2) Agency certification statements must be categorized as one of the following:

           (a) Unmodified Statement of Assurance (no material weaknesses or lack of
               compliance reported);

           (b) Modified Statement of Assurance, considering the exceptions explicitly noted
               (one or more material weaknesses or lack of compliance reported); or

           (c) Statement of no Assurance (no processes in place or pervasive material
               weaknesses).

  b.   Specific Requirements

       (1) Agencies and staff offices will:

           (a) Perform an annual ELC assessment;

           (b) Provide OCFO quarterly reports on the status of material weaknesses in
               internal control, and noncompliances and conformances; and

           (c) Submit an annual certification statement and bridge memo to OCFO.

       (2) The Secretary of Agriculture will provide an overall statement of assurance along
           with a report on identified material weaknesses and corrective actions.




                                               6
      (3) The CFO will include the assurance statement in the Agency Financial Report no
          later than 45 days after the end of each fiscal year.


8. INQUIRIES

  Direct all inquiries to the Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Internal Control Division
  at InternalControlTeam@usda.gov.


                                             -END-




                                               7
                             APPENDIX A

                 ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AICPA    American Institute of CPAs
CAP      Corrective Action Plan
CFO      Chief Financial Officer
CRO      Chief Risk Officer
DM       Departmental Manual
DR       Departmental Regulation
ELC      Entity Level Control
ERM      Enterprise Risk Management
FFMIA    Federal Financial Management Improvement Act
FMFIA    Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act
GAO      Government Accountability Office
GPRA     Government Performance Results Act
GPRAMA   Government Performance Results Act Modernization Act
MCO      Management Control Officer
MW       Material Weakness
OCFO     Office of the Chief Financial Officer
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
P.L.     Public Law
SD       Significant Deficiency
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                                  A-1
                                           APPENDIX B

                                          DEFINITIONS


Certification Statement. A direct conclusion as to whether an agency or staff office’s internal
controls are effective in meeting the objectives of the Federal Managers Financial Integrity Act
(FMFIA) and the Federal Financial Management Improvement Act (FFMIA). It is used to help
form the basis for the Department’s overall Statement of Assurance. It includes a summary of
reportable deficiencies that warrant reporting to the next level of management.

The certification statement includes management’s conclusion of:

a.   Whether its internal control system for each of the Government Accountability Office’s
     (GAO) Internal Control Components and Principles (has or has not) been designed and
     implemented and effectively or ineffectively operating in an integrated manner; and

b.   Whether the overall system of internal control (is or is not) operating effectively.

     (Source: Adapted from Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act of 1982 (FMFIA), P.L.
     No. 97-255)

Control Deficiency. Exists when the design, implementation, or operation of a control does not
allow management or personnel, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to
achieve control objectives and address related risks. (Source: OMB, Circular A-123,
Management’s Responsibility for Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) and Internal Control,
dated July 15, 2016)

Entity Level Controls (ELC). Controls that have a pervasive effect on an entity’s internal control
system and pertain to multiple components. ELCs are a part of the control environment, risk
assessment, information and communication, and monitoring components of GAO’s Standards
for Internal Control in the Federal Government (Green Book). ELCs also include controls
related to the entity’s use of service organizations, management overrides and managing fraud
risk. ELCs create a control-conscious environment within the organization. The ELC must
generally address all 17 principles established in the Green Book. (Source: GAO, Green Book)

Evaluation of an Internal Control System. A review of program, administrative and operational
processes and associated internal controls to determine compliance with laws, principles,
standards, and related requirements from GAO and the Office of Management and Budget. This
evaluation may be formal or informal. (Source: Adapted from GAO, Green Book, Page 15)

Fraud. Obtaining something of value through willful misrepresentation. (Source: GAO, Green
Book, Principle 8)




                                                B-1
Internal Control. A process effected by an entity’s oversight body, management, and other
personnel that provides reasonable assurance that the objectives of an entity will be achieved.
(Source: GAO, Green Book)

Management Control Officer (MCO). Line management officials designated by senior-level
management to establish, maintain, evaluate, and report on internal controls. (Source:
Departmental Manual (DM) 1110-002, USDA Management Control Manual)

Material Weakness (MW). A significant deficiency that the agency head determines to be
significant enough to report outside the Department as a material weakness:

a.   A MW in internal control over operations might include conditions that impact the operating
     effectiveness of ELCs; impairs fulfillment of essential operations or mission; deprives the
     public of needed services; or significantly weakens established safeguards against fraud,
     waste, loss, unauthorized use, or misappropriation of funds, property, other assets, or
     conflicts of interest;

b.   A MW in internal control over external financial reporting is a deficiency, or a combination
     of deficiencies, in internal control, where there’s a reasonable possibility that a material
     misstatement of the entity’s financial statements will not be prevented, detected, or
     corrected timely;

c.   A MW in internal control over reporting is a SD where the agency head determines it is
     significant enough to impact internal or external decision making and reports it outside of
     the Department; or

d.   A MW in internal control over compliance is a condition where management lacks a process
     that reasonably ensures preventing a violation of law or regulation that has a direct and
     material effect on financial reporting or significant effect on other reporting or achieving the
     Department’s objectives.

     (Source: OMB, Memorandum M-16-17, Table 6, Summary of OMB Circular No. A-123
     Reporting Requirements)

Noncompliance. A failure to follow requirements or a violation of prohibitions included in the
applicable law, regulation, contract, grant or agreement that is quantitatively or qualitatively
significant, either individually or when aggregated with other noncompliances. Significant,
when used in this context, refers to issues that merit attention by those charged with governance.
(Source: GAO, Green Book)

Reasonable Assurance. A satisfactory level (not absolute) of confidence in achieving program,
administrative, and financial management objectives effectively and efficiently, and
safeguarding Government resources under given considerations of costs, benefits, and risks.
(Source: Adapted from GAO, Green Book, and AICPA)

Risk Assessment. Assesses the risks facing the entity as it seeks to achieve its objectives. It



                                                B-2
provides the basis for developing appropriate risk responses. (Source: GAO, Green Book, Page
7)

Significant Deficiency (SD). A deficiency (or combination of deficiencies) in internal control
that is less severe than a material weakness yet important enough to merit attention by those
charged with governance. It is internal to the Department and not required to be reported
externally. (Source: OMB, Memorandum M-16-17, Table 6, Summary of OMB Circular No. A-
123 Reporting Requirements)

Statement of Assurance. Represents the Secretary’s informed judgment as to the overall
adequacy and effectiveness of internal control within USDA related to operations, reporting, and
compliance. (Source: OMB, Circular A-123)

System Noncompliance/conformance. Financial management systems do not substantially
conform to system requirements. Systems include both financial and financially related (or
mixed) systems.

a.   FMFIA system nonconformance – Systems do not conform to Federal Financial
     Management Systems Requirements for computer security and internal control.

b.   FFMIA system noncompliance – Systems do not comply with Federal Financial
     Management System requirements, applicable Federal Accounting Standards, or U.S.
     Standard General Ledger at the transaction level.

     (Source: OMB, Circular A-123)




                                              B-3
                                       APPENDIX C

                           AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, P.L. No. 104-106, February 10, 1996

Federal Financial Management Improvement Act of 1996 (FFMIA), P.L. No. 104-208,
September 30, 1996

Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act of 1982 (FMFIA), P.L. No. 97-255,
September 8, 1982

Government Accountability Office (GAO), GAO-14-704G, Standards for Internal Controls in
the Federal Government (Green Book), September 10, 2014

Government Management Reform Act of 1994, P.L. No. 103-356, October 13, 1994

Government Performance Results Act (GPRA) and Modernization Act (GPRAMA), P.L. No.
111-352, January 4, 2011

Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Act of 2010, P.L. No. 111-204, July 22, 2010

Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Improvement Act of 2012, P.L. No. 112-248,
January 10, 2013

Improper Payments Information Act of 2002, P.L. No. 107-300, November 26, 2002

OMB, Circular No. A-130, Management of Federal Information Resources, Appendix III,
Security of Federal Automated Information Resources, November 28, 2000

OMB, Memorandum M-18-16, Appendix A to OMB Circular No. A-123, Appendix A,
Management of Reporting and Data Integrity Risk, June 6, 2018

OMB, Circular No. A-123, Appendix B to Circular No. A-123, A Risk Management Framework
for Government Charge Card Programs, August 27, 2019

OMB, Memorandum M-18-20, Transmittal of Appendix C to OMB Circular No. A-123,
Requirements for Payment Integrity Improvement, June 26, 2018

OMB, Memorandum M-13-23, Appendix D to Circular No. A-123, Compliance with the Federal
Financial Management Improvement Act of 1996, September 20, 2013

OMB, Memorandum M-16-17, Circular No. A-123, Management’s Responsibility for Enterprise
Risk Management and Internal Control, July 15, 2016




                                            C-1
OMB, Circular No. A-136, Revised, Financial Reporting Requirements, August 27, 2020

Reports Consolidation Act of 2000, P.L. No. 106-531, November 22, 2000

USDA, DM 1110-002, USDA Management Control Manual, November 29, 2002; sunset on
February 21, 2018 (Note: cited as a source for a definition in Appendix B)




                                            C-2
