                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                        DR 1270-001
 SUBJECT: U.S. Department of Agriculture Customer               DATE:
 Experience Policy                                              June 17, 2022
                                                                EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of Customer Experience (OCX)
                                                                June 17, 2027



Section                                                                                    Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                  1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                       2
3.   Scope                                                                                    2
4.   Background                                                                               2
5.   Policy                                                                                   3
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                               6
7.   Inquiries                                                                                8

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                    A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                   B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                    C-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.   This Departmental Regulation (DR) permanently authorizes the United States
          Department of Agriculture (USDA) Office of Customer Experience (OCX) to facilitate
          and support cross-Department collaboration on issues pertaining to customer experience
          (CX).

     b.   The DR is in support of USDA’s commitment to provide the highest quality experience
          and trust for customers and employees. OCX works across the Department to
          coordinate and execute USDA’s CX vision, goals, and priorities. Additionally, OCX
          hardwires and institutionalizes insights and feedback from customers and employees
          into USDA’s strategy and decision-making.

     c.   The DR sets forth the objectives, policies, requirements, and responsibilities for USDA’s
          CX program to empower, enable, and collaborate with USDA’s customer base –
          farmers, scientists, children, families, foresters, state governments – to provide
          innovative and human-centered solutions that deliver services more efficiently with a
          focus on the actual experience of the individuals it is meant to serve.
2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This DR will be in effect until superseded or the expiration date.

  b.   This policy complements the following USDA Departmental directives:

       (1) Departmental Manual (DM) 3107-001, Management of USDA IT Enterprise
           Initiatives Procedures;

       (2) DR 1230-001, U.S. Department of Agriculture Evaluation Policy;

       (3) DR1496-001, Digital Strategy Governance;

       (4) DR1497-001, Approval of Communications/Information Products and Service;

       (5) DR3107-001, Management of USDA IT [Information Technology] Enterprise
           Initiatives;

       (6) DR3130-010, United States Department of Agriculture Enterprise Information
           Technology Governance; and

       (7) DR3430-001, Web Site Development and Maintenance.


3. SCOPE

  This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, employees, contractors,
  cooperative partners, and others working for, or on behalf of, the USDA.


4. BACKGROUND

  a.   USDA is committed to providing the best customer experiences in its Departmentwide
       delivery of programs and services to USDA’s customers. Ensuring a more positive
       experience for customers and employees alike increases the likelihood they will access
       products and services, increases trust in Government, and has the potential to decrease
       mission delivery costs all while improving service delivery. A customer’s experience
       interacting with the Federal Government directly contributes to their trust in
       Government itself.

  b.   The head of each Mission Area, agency, and staff office will take the responsibility to
       ensure that every interaction a member of the public has with their organization
       demonstrates competence and builds trust. The establishment or modification of USDA
       regulations and policies must reflect how each Mission Area, agency, and staff office
       will include positive customer experiences and service delivery as part of



                                               2
       their missions. To deliver upon this commitment, USDA has established CX as a core
       capability in the Department and charged OCX as USDA’s lead CX organization.

  c.   Improving CX in the Federal Government is both mandated by policy and motivated by
       the demand for more efficient services and positive experiences from customers,
       employees, and stakeholders. The policies highlighted in Appendix C, Authorities and
       References are a sampling of Governmentwide guidance supporting the ongoing need
       for developing an organized approach to improving USDA CX.


5. POLICY

  a.   USDA is committed to providing a world-class CX to its customers, employees,
       stakeholders, and partners. USDA recognizes that a positive CX leads to improved
       organizational performance, and therefore endorses the importance of hardwiring,
       scaling, and sustaining CX capabilities at USDA now and in the future. It is USDA
       policy to implement and sustain CX across the Department through three facets:

       (1) Apply a CX framework and core capabilities for service delivery and design;

       (2) Institute CX governance to hardwire customer insights into USDA strategy and
           decision-making; and

       (3) Implement CX accountability to ensure that metrics are tied to organizational and
           individual performance, budget decisions, and strategic planning.

  b.   Each of USDA’s Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices have a responsibility to
       manage the customer experiences of their customers and stakeholders. OCX, as the
       Departmentwide CX office, sets USDA’s CX vision, shares CX best practices and tools,
       elevates CX successes, and sets organizational policies and standards. USDA will
       incorporate CX into new and existing policies, perform strategic and tactical decision-
       making to deliver exceptional customer experiences to its customers, and empower
       employees with the tools to provide those experiences.

  c.   USDA CX Framework and Core Capabilities

       (1) CX Human-Centered Design Framework

            (a) Based on industry and other best practices, USDA should employ the Human-
                Centered Design (HCD) framework (Source: IDEO, IDEO Design Thinking)
                to serve as an interdisciplinary methodology of putting people, including those
                who will use or be impacted by what one creates, at the center of any process
                to solve challenging problems. This framework is built around two guiding
                principles: leverage industry and other CX best practices; and listen to and
                design service delivery around the customer.




                                               3
    (b) This CX framework, which begins with leveraging industry and other CX best
        practices, is coupled with qualitative customer insights captured through a
        HCD process and is enabled by the core CX capabilities of data and technology
        and is designed to drive improvements in service recovery and system-wide
        performance.

    (c) USDA will apply this framework to ongoing and future improvements to its
        programs, services, policies, and products.

(2) CX Core Capabilities

    (a) Data

        To maintain a view of USDA’s performance in CX, OCX has created a Voice
        of the Customer (VOC) program to baseline and measure CX. The VOC
        program allows USDA to understand customers’ overall trust, as well as the
        ease, effectiveness, and emotional resonance of customers’ interactions with
        any USDA Mission Area, agency, or office through the development and
        implementation of Departmentwide feedback capabilities based on real-time
        and in-depth surveys, data analysis, and quantitative research. It provides a
        global benchmark of the USDA brand and customers’ perspectives on their
        relationship.

    (b) Tools

        OCX implements tangible tools for collecting feedback from external
        customers and employees, and utilizes HCD practices in order to have the
        foundation necessary to leverage customer and employee insights to make
        data-driven decisions. These tools include employee training in CX, leadership
        best practices, and other concrete products and programs that address specific
        pain points identified by USDA’s customers through CX data and HCD
        insights.

    (c) Technology

        To enable the delivery of effective customer experiences across multiple
        communication channels that are on par with industry standards, USDA will
        drive an integrated platform and Departmentwide technology through OCX.
        Such initiatives include a unified strategy and implementation of Contact
        Center Modernization, Digital Modernization, and Enterprise Data
        Management which results in one singular point of entry for all USDA
        customers from multiple channels (e.g., phone, web form, chat, and email).




                                      4
e.   CX Governance

     (1) USDA is made up of more than 30 agencies and staff offices that serve an
         increasingly large customer base. Due to the wide variety of USDA’s programs
         and services, in order to institutionalize CX at USDA and hard-wire customers
         experience data and insights into USDA strategy and decision-making, and elevate
         customer pain points and needs to the Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices,
         OCX must serve as an aggregator and leverage existing governance structures that
         are chaired at the Office of the Secretary (OSEC), Mission Area, and Office of the
         Chief Information Officer (OCIO) organizational levels, such as the OSEC Sub-
         Cabinet, the Performance, Evaluation, and Evidence Committee (PEEC), the Chief
         Information Officer Council, and the IT Investment Review Board.

     (2) USDA’s existing governance structures enable USDA leadership to assess CX
         program progress, resolve performance problems, and focus on top priorities and
         problems while ensuring that USDA is infusing CX data and insights into how
         USDA addresses and resolves cross-cutting, Departmentwide issues. These
         solutions then must be incorporated into Departmentwide, Mission Area, agency,
         and staff office-specific governance structures.

f.   CX Accountability

     (1) Performance Planning

         USDA will incorporate CX performance into organizational and individual
         performance plans through enterprise and transactional metrics, and aligned to the
         USDA Evaluation Policy (DR 1230-001). The enterprise metric’s purpose is to
         provide an understanding of CX globally across USDA. The transactional metrics
         provide an understanding of CX that is specific to each Mission Area, agency, and
         staff office in order to perform individual service recovery and make actionable
         improvements system-wide.

     (2) Budget Implications

         USDA will also incorporate CX performance into budget strategy and prioritization.
         Specifically, in addition to balanced score card elements of operational, financial,
         and personal metrics, CX-related metrics such as ease, effectiveness, emotion, and
         trust, will have a more active role in USDA resource decision-making, ensuring
         resource allocation determinations are informed by what matters most to customers.

     (3) Strategic Planning

         Lastly, USDA will incorporate CX performance into strategic planning. In addition
         to providing real-time CX qualitative and quantitative data, the strategic re-design
         of back-end business processes will enhance both employees’ and customers’
         experiences. Efforts in this area ensure the CX data, and new real-time and



                                            5
           predictive capabilities this provides, are utilized for timely service recovery and
           system-wide performance improvements.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   USDA’s Chief Customer Experience Officer will:

       (1) Advise the Assistant Secretary on CX matters;

       (2) Implement this directive;

       (3) Develop USDA policy and procedures for CX in conjunction with USDA Mission
           Areas, agencies, and staff offices and ensure these policies and procedures are
           consistent and current with Federal law, regulations, and USDA strategic goals and
           plans;

       (4) Provide subject matter expert consultation and services on best practices of CX and
           provide necessary guidance and resources to support the execution of this directive
           across USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices;

       (5) Provide evidence-based CX data, tangible CX tools, integrated, multi-channel
           technology, and promote engagement to support USDA in improving CX;

       (6) Ensure CX is a driver in USDA strategic planning, performance improvement
           efforts, budget formulation, policy, and other initiatives to improve the experience
           with USDAs delivery of services;

       (7) Scale and sustain CX as a permanent, foundational, and cross-cutting capability at
           USDA, including through design and deployment of CX education, training
           programs, innovation, and communication by working in collaboration with USDA
           stakeholders and other partners; and

       (8) Review and assist in the development of CX action plans on CX programs,
           initiatives, and efforts. Effective action plans will clearly indicate goals, objectives,
           strategies, and measurements necessary to achieve the initiative or effort.

  b.   The Assistant Secretary for Administration will:

       (1) Provide executive leadership and oversight for the Department’s CX Program;

       (2) Provide Departmentwide coordination for efforts to improve customer service; and

       (3) Advise the Secretary on CX matters.




                                                6
c.   Under Secretaries, Agency Administrators and Heads, and Staff Office Directors will:

     (1) Deliver improved customer experiences by collecting, analyzing, and acting on
         qualitative and quantitative CX data, perceptions, and concerns;

     (2) Use CX data and insights to develop and implement action plans to improve the
         experience in coordination with OCX;

     (3) Promote the use of HCD methods and approaches to rapidly develop concepts and
         test them with users in order to ensure products, services, and systems meet user
         needs;

     (4) Support employees and empower them with the knowledge, skills, and tools to
         provide outstanding experiences to USDA’s customers; and

     (5) Incorporate CX performance metrics into employee performance plans.

d.   The Chief Information Officer (CIO) will:

     (1) Provide technical support for CX;

     (2) Support achievement of USDA’s CX goals by offering agile, world-class
         technology solutions to its stakeholders and apply innovative approaches to
         recruiting and developing a highly skilled workforce; and

     (3) Invite USDA’s Chief Customer Experience Officer to key governance meetings
         (i.e., the CIO Council and the Investment Review Board).

e.   The Director, Office of Budget and Program Analysis (OBPA) will:

     (1) Incorporate CX performance into budget strategy and prioritization;

     (2) Incorporate CX into Departmental strategic plans, policies, and procedures; and

     (3) Invite USDA’s Chief Customer Experience Officer to key governance meetings
         (i.e., the PEEC).

f.   The Director, Office of Human Resource Management (ORHM) will:

     (1) Incorporate CX performance metrics into employee performance plans; and

     (2) Incorporate CX performance metrics into performance plans for Senior Executives
         who oversee and manage USDA’s delivery of services to customers.




                                             7
  g.   USDA Supervisors will:

       (1) Support employees and empower them with the knowledge, skills, and tools to
           provide outstanding experiences to USDA’s customers; and

       (2) Support implementation of CX best practices and utilize CX data, tools, and other
           capabilities to deliver outstanding customer experiences.

  h.   USDA Employees will:

       (1) Provide the best experience possible to customers;

       (2) Demonstrate commitment to USDA’s Core Values;

       (3) Support implementation of CX best practices and utilizing CX data, tools, and other
           capabilities to deliver outstanding customer experiences; and

       (4) Understand of how their roles and responsibilities affect the customer’s experience.


7. INQUIRIES

  Please direct questions and comments concerning the requirements of this regulation to the
  OCX via email at CustomerExperience@usda.gov.


                                            -END-




                                              8
                            APPENDIX A

                  ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS



APG    Agency Priority Goal
CFR    Code of Federal Regulations
CIO    Chief Information Officer
CX     Customer Experience
DM     Departmental Manual
DR     Departmental Regulation
EO     Executive Order
FACE   Federal Agency Customer Experience
HCD    Human-Centered Design
HISP   High Impact Service Provider
IDEA   Integrated Digital Experience Act
IT     Information Technology
OBPA   Office of Budget and Program Analysis
OCIO   Office of the Chief Information Officer
OCX    Office of Customer Experience
OHRM   Office of Human Resource Management
OMB    Office of Management and Budget
OSEC   Office of the Secretary
PEEC   Performance, Evaluation, and Evidence Committee
P.L.   Public Law
PMA    President’s Management Agenda
RD     Rural Development
TIPS   Trust in Public Service
USDA   United States Department of Agriculture
VOC    Voice of the Customer




                                A-1
                                          APPENDIX B

                                          DEFINITIONS


Customer – Any individual, business, or organization (such as a grantee or State, local, or Tribal
entity) that interacts with an agency or program, either directly or through a federally-funded
program administered by a contractor, nonprofit, or other Federal entity. (Source: Executive
Order (EO) 14058, Transforming Federal Customer Experience and Service Delivery to Rebuild
Trust in Government)

Customer Experience (CX) – The public’s perceptions of and overall satisfaction with
interactions with a Mission Area, agency, staff office, product, or service. (Source: EO 14058)

Customer Life Experience – Each important point in a person’s life at which that person interacts
with one or more entities of Government – like turning 65, having a child, or applying for a small
business loan. (Source: Adapted from EO 14058)

Human-Centered Design (HCD) – The “How” – An interdisciplinary methodology of putting
people, including those who will use or be impacted by what one creates, at the center of any
process to solve challenging problems. (Source: Adapted from IDEO, IDEO Design Thinking
website)

High Impact Service Provider (HISP) – Federal entities, as designated by the Office of
Management and Budget (OMB), that provide or fund customer-facing services that have a high
impact on the public, whether because of a large customer base or a critical effect on those
served. (Source: EO 14058)

Journey Map – Forrester Research, Inc. defines journey maps as “documents that visually
illustrate customers’ processes, needs and perceptions throughout their relationships with a
company.” Journey maps are developed through HCD research and present a common set of
moments that matter most to customers in their experience and display bright spots and pain
points as they interest with USDA for care, services, and benefits. Journey maps should be used
in conjunction with quantitative data to prioritize CX initiatives and efforts. (Source: Forrester
Research, Inc., Mapping the Customer Journey web page)




                                               B-1
Service Delivery – Actions by the Federal Government related to providing a benefit or service
to a customer of a Federal Government entity. Such actions pertain to all points of the
Government-to-customer delivery process, including when a customer applies for a benefit or
loan, receives a service such as health care or small business counseling, requests a document
such as a passport or Social Security card, files taxes or declares goods, uses resources such as a
park or historical site, or seeks information such as notices about public health or consumer
protection. (Source: EO 14058)

Time Taxes – The cost associated with the lost time an individual faces when they interact with
the Government. For example, when a disaster survivor, single parent, immigrant, small
business owner, or veteran waits months for the Government to process benefits to which they
are entitled, that lost time is a significant cost not only for the individual but in the aggregate, for
the Nation as a whole.

Trust – Merriam-Webster defines trust as the “assured reliance on the character, ability, strength
or truth of someone or something.” Trust can be publicly reported USDA-wide through CX
metrics made up of the following components: ease, effectiveness, and emotion. (Source:
Merriam-Webster, Dictionary website, retrieved April 18, 2022)




                                                  B-2
                                         APPENDIX C

                               AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES



Improving CX in the Federal Government is both mandated by policy and motivated by the
demand for more efficient services and positive experiences from customers, employees, and
stakeholders. The policies highlighted below are a sampling of Governmentwide guidance
supporting the ongoing need for developing an organized approach to improving USDA CX.


7 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 2.24, Assistant Secretary for Administration

21st Century Integrated Digital Experience Act (21st Century IDEA), Public Law (P.L.) 115-336,
December 20, 2018

EO 13571, Streamlining Service Delivery and Improving Customer Service, April 27, 2011

EO 14058, Transforming Federal Customer Experience and Service Delivery to Rebuilt Trust in
Government, December 13, 2021

Forrester Research, Inc., Mapping the Customer Journey web page

Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018, P.L. 115-435, January 14, 2019

IDEO, IDEO Design Thinking website

Merriam-Webster, Dictionary website

Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-11, Preparation, Submission, and
Execution of the Budget, Section 280, Managing Customer Experience and Improving Service
Delivery, August 2021

The President’s Management Agenda (PMA) website

USDA, DM 3107-001, Management of USDA IT Enterprise Initiatives Procedures, May 18,
2016

USDA, DR 1230-001, U.S. Department of Agriculture Evaluation Policy, March 1, 2022

USDA, DR1496-001, Digital Strategy Governance, November 21, 2012




                                             C-1
USDA, DR1497-001, Approval of Communications/Information Products and Services, October
29, 2014

USDA, DR3107-001, Management of USDA IT Enterprise Initiatives, May 12, 2016

USDA, DR3130-010, United States Department of Agriculture Enterprise Information
Technology Governance, April 20, 2021

USDA, DR3430-001, Web Site Development and Maintenance, May 19, 2004

USDA, Strategic Plan Fiscal Years 2022-2026, Strategic Goal 6, Objective 6.3, Promote USDA
Operational Excellence Through Better Use of Technology and Shared Solutions




                                            C-2
