                                         U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                            Washington, D.C. 20250



                                                                                                     Number:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                                              1312-2

SUBJECT: Cooperation with the Office of the Special Counsel,              DATE: July 17, 1986
Merit Systems Protection Board
                                                                          OPI: Office of Personnel




1        PURPOSE

                  This regulation establishes policy, assigns responsibilities, and prescribes procedures for
                  assuring Departmental cooperation with the Office of the Special Counsel of the Merit
                  Systems Protection Board in fulfilling the responsibilities of the Special Counsel to
                  conduct investigations of alleged prohibited personnel practices and in the review of
                  alleged violations of law rule or regulation, mismanagement, gross waste of funds, abuse
                  of authority or a substantial and specific danger to the public health and safety. This
                  regulation provides internal guidance to Department officials and does not establish an
                  independent basis for any person or organization to assert a right, benefit or privilege.

2 ABBREVIATIONS

                  OSC - Office of the Special Counsel, MSPB

                  OGC - Office of the General Counsel

                  OP - Office of Personnel

                  OIG - Office of Inspector General

                  USC - United States Code

3 POLICY

It is Department policy that:

                  a        Personnel actions taken by management officials shall conform to laws and
                  regulations implementing merit system principles and must be free from any prohibited
                  personnel practices.

                  b        When prohibited personnel practices occur, corrective action, including
                  disciplinary measures where appropriate, will be taken.

                  c        Managerial and non-managerial employees will cooperate with the OSC by:
DR 1312-002                                                                                 July 17, 1986


                                (1)      Investigating, cooperating with investigations and reporting on
                                allegations of improper or illegal conduct forwarded to the Department
                                by the OSC pursuant to 5 USC 1206(b)(2) and (3).

                                (2)      Facilitating and cooperating with investigations by the OSC of
                                alleged prohibited personnel practices and other matters assigned for
                                investigation to the OSC by law.

                                (3)      Furnishing to OSC investigators copies of documents
                                requested in the course of ongoing OSC investigations.

              d        Close coordination between OP and OSC personnel during an OSC investigation
              is encouraged to avoid duplication of effort and to avoid unnecessary delay in initiating,
              when appropriate, corrective or disciplinary action.

              e        Nothing in this regulation shall be construed to limit in any way the authorities
              or responsibilities of the Inspector General.

4      REFERENCES

              a       Public Law 95-454, "Civil Service Reform Act of 1978" (Title 5, United States
              Code, Sections 1205, 1206, 1207, 2301 and 2302).

              b        Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 1200 through 1261.

5      DEFINITIONS

              a        Personnel Action

                                (1)       An appointment;

                                (2)       A promotion;

                                (3)      An adverse action under 5 USC 7501 et seq or other
                                disciplinary or corrective action;

                                (4)       A detail, transfer or reassignment;

                                (5)       A reinstatement;

                                (6)       A restoration;

                                (7)       A reemployment;

                                (8)       A performance evaluation under 5 USC 4301 et seq;

                                (9)      A decision concerning pay, benefits, or awards or concerning
                                education or training if the education or training may reasonably be
                                expected to lead to an appointment, promotion, performance
                                evaluation, or other personnel action; and




                                                  2
DR 1312-002                                                                                   July 17, 1986


                                (10)     Any other significant change in duties or responsibilities
                                inconsistent with the employee's salary or grade level.

              b        Prohibited Personnel Practice. Any action taken by an employee who has
              authority to take, direct others to take, recommend, or approve any personnel action:

                       (1)      That discriminates for or against any employee or applicant for
              employment on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, handicapping
              condition, marital status, or political affiliation, as prohibited by certain specified laws
              (see 5 U.S.C. 2302(b)(1));

                                (2)       To solicit or consider any recommendation or statement, oral
                                or written, with respect to any individual who requests, or is under
                                consideration for, any personnel action, unless the recommendation or
                                statement is based on the personal knowledge or records of the person
                                furnishing it, and consists of an evaluation of the work performance,
                                ability, aptitude, or general qualifications of the individual, or an
                                evaluation of the character, loyalty, or suitability of such individual;

                                (3)      To coerce the political activity of any person (including the
                                providing of any political contribution or service), or take any action
                                against any employee or applicant for employment as a reprisal for the
                                refusal of any person to engage in such political activity;

                                (4)      To deceive or willfully obstruct any person with respect to
                                such person's right to compete for employment;

                                (5)      To influence any person to withdraw from competition for any
                                position for the purpose of improving or injuring the prospects of any
                                other person for employment;

                                (6)       To grant any preference or advantage not authorized by law,
                                rule, or regulation to any employee or applicant for employment
                                (including defining the scope or manner of competition or the
                                requirements for any position) for the purpose of improving or injuring
                                the prospects of any particular person for employment;

                                (7)       To appoint, employ, promote, advance, or advocate for
                                appointment, employment, promotion, or advancement, in or to a
                                civilian position any individual who is a relative (as defined in 5 U.S.C.
                                3110 of the employee if the position is in the Agency in which the
                                employee is serving as a public official or over which the employee
                                exercises jurisdiction or control as an official;

                                (8)      To take or fail to take a personnel action with respect to any
                                employee or applicant for employment as a reprisal for being a
                                whistleblower, as defined in section 5c, below;

                                (9)      To take or fail to take a personnel action against an employee
                                or applicant for employment as a reprisal for the exercise of any appeal
                                right granted by law, rule, or regulation;




                                                  3
DR 1312-002                                                                              July 17, 1986


                            (10)    To discriminate for or against any employee or applicant for
                            employment on the basis of conduct that does not adversely affect the
                            performance of the employee or applicant or the performance of others;
                            or

                            (11)      To take or fail to take any other personnel action if the taking
                            of, or failure to take, such action violates any law, rule, or regulation
                            implementing, or directly concerning, the merit system principles
                            contained in 5 U.S.C. 2301.

              c     Whistleblower

                            (1)     A present or former Federal employee or applicant for Federal
                            employment who discloses information he or she reasonably believes
                            evidences:

                                              (a)       A violation of any law, rule, or regulation;

                                              (b)      Mismanagement, a gross waste of funds, or
                                              an abuse of authority; or

                                              (c)      A substantial or specific danger to public
                                              health or safety.

                            (2)       Such disclosure qualifies if it is not specifically prohibited by
                            statute and if such information is not specifically required by Executive
                            Order to be kept secret in the interest of national defense or the conduct
                            of foreign affairs.

                            (3)       Where the information disclosed affects only the personal
                            situation of the complainant, it is generally to be regarded as an
                            allegation of a prohibited personnel practice or violation of other civil
                            service law, rule, or regulation, and the complainant will not be
                            considered a whistleblower.




6      RESPONSIBILITIES

              a     The Department's Office of Personnel will:

                            (1)       Serve a central coordinating role on behalf of the Secretary in
                            all interaction with the OSC.

                            (2)      Receive and coordinate with OIG the investigation of, or make
                            other inquiry as appropriate into, allegations referred by OSC to the
                            Secretary pursuant to 5 USC 1206(b)(2), (b)(3), and (c)(3).

                            (3)      Prepare and obtain appropriate clearances of reports to the
                            OSC as required of the Secretary under 5 USC 1206(b)(3)(A)(ii), (b)(7)
                            and (c)(3).




                                              4
DR 1312-002                                                                                 July 17, 1986


                                (4)      Coordinate on behalf of the Secretary, the implementation of
                                any corrective action necessary as a result of inquiry or investigation
                                into a complaint filed with the OSC .

                                (5)     Ensure that consideration is given to disciplinary action when
                                warranted by findings on complaints.

                                (6) Request extensions of time where necessary.

              b        The Office of the General Counsel will:

              Provide overall legal guidance on all matters contained in this regulation.

              c        The Office of Inspector General will:

              Work cooperatively with OGC and OP to ensure that the Secretary's responsibilities are
              fulfilled. To that end, OIG will:

                                (1)     Investigate or cause to be investigated as appropriate,
                                complaints referred to the Secretary by OSC under 5 USC
                                1206(b)(3)(A).

                                 (2)     Investigate or cause to be investigated, as appropriate,
                                complaints referred to the Secretary by OSC under 5 USC 1206(b)(2),
                                b(7) and c(3) which do not lend themselves to inquiry by a means other
                                than formal investigation.

                                (3)      Promptly submit the results of any investigation conducted
                                under (1) or (2) above to OP for appropriate action.

                                (4)      Provide necessary liaison and coordination with the
                                Department of Justice with respect to all matters involving criminal law
                                violations.

7      PROCEDURES

              a       Allegations of improper or illegal conduct received from OSC under 5 USC
              1206(b)(2),(3) or (c)(3).

                                (1)      Allegations referred by OSC shall be forwarded to OP.

                                (2)       Upon receipt of such a referral, OP shall ensure compliance
                                with 5 USC 1206 through an investigation coordinated with OIG or
                                other inquiry as appropriate to the allegations, shall ensure timely
                                action in compliance with reporting requirements set forth in 5 USC
                                1206, and shall also ensure preparation of a report to OSC for the
                                personal review of and issuance by the Secretary when required.

                                (3)      When warranted by the results of the investigation or other
                                inquiry, OP will work with the Agency involved looking toward
                                implementation of appropriate corrective action.




                                                  5
DR 1312-002                                                                               July 17, 1986


                               (4)      OP will, where appropriate, make referrals for consideration
                               of disciplinary action and where appropriate, take action against
                               individuals believed to have engaged in inappropriate activities as
                               revealed by the results of the investigation or other inquiry.

                               (5)     Copies of investigation or inquiry results and reports sent to
                               OSC will be sent to the concerned Agency for information and action
                               where appropriate.

                               (6)      OP will promptly provide OIG with copies of final reports to
                               the OSC and with correspondence showing final disposition of each
                               OSC referral. OP will retain work papers and related correspondence
                               and will furnish them for review upon request by OIG.

              b      OSC Investigations of Prohibited Personnel Practices OP is designated as the
              Department's point of contact. In this capacity, OP will:

                               (1)     Provide any necessary coordination with and assistance to the
                               OSC in conducting investigations of alleged prohibited activities;

                               (2)       Ensure that appropriate Agency personnel are apprised of the
                               nature and basis for an OSC investigation as well as the rights and
                               duties of Agency personnel in regard to such investigations;

                               (3)      Refer legal questions raised by Agencies or Agency personnel
                               as to employee rights to representation to OGC;

                               (4)      Determine to the extent practicable by checks with OIG and
                               the Agency involved, whether an investigation is being or has beer
                               conducted that replicates in whole or in part the proposed or ongoing
                               investigation by the OSC and convey that information to OSC
                               whenever this may avoid redundant investigative effort;

                               (5)     Ensure that any corrective action considered appropriate
                               because of the facts disclosed in such an investigation is accomplished;
                               and

                               (6)     When deemed appropriate, seek OSC approval of authority to
                               propose disciplinary action against employees for an alleged prohibited
                               personnel practice or illegal or improper act under investigation by the
                               OSC when it is determined that such disciplinary action by the
                               Department may be warranted.




                                                6
