                                     U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                        Washington, D.C. 20250



                                                                                              Number:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                                       1340-002

SUBJECT: Consolidating USDA Agencies' Services                        DATE:
on Indian Reservations                                                August 6, 1991

                                                                      OPI: Office of Public Affairs, Office of
                                                                      Intergovernmental Affairs


1      PURPOSE

              The purpose of this regulation is to implement section 2501 (g) of the Food, Agriculture,
              Conservation, and Trade Act of 1990 by providing consolidated United States
              Department of Agriculture suboffices on American Indian reservations. This regulation
              applies to the Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service, the Soil Conservation
              Service, and the Farmers Home Administration. The Secretary reserves the right to
              include such other offices and functions as he may decide are appropriate.

2      POLICY

              The policy of USDA is to provide opportunities for all rural Americans by providing for
              effective and efficient coordination of USDA agricultural and rural development
              programs within each State, county, and tribal jurisdiction.

3      SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS

              Consolidated suboffices shall be established at the tribal headquarters of those Tribes that
              provide the necessary office space.

              Each suboffice must be staffed using existing staff.

              A USDA agency representative for each agency must staff the suboffice at least 1 day per
              week unless otherwise agreed by the agencies' State administrators and each Tribe.

              To avoid duplication of efforts, for reservations located in more than one county or State,
              the Secretary of Agriculture, the relevant county or State officials, and the Tribe shall
              enter into a cooperative agreement to provide the services needed.

4      RESPONSIBILITIES

              USDA agencies and interested Tribes have the responsibility for initiating certain actions
              to carry out the services specified here:

                                a        Affected agencies shall initiate the necessary actions to
                                establish consolidated suboffices at tribally designated locations.
DR 1340-002                                                             August 6, 1991


              b        The State administrators of the agencies affected by this
              regulation shall meet within 30 days of the date of this regulation to
              determine the specific actions necessary in each State, or among States
              involved with a Tribe, to extend and consolidate the agencies' services.
              Suggested actions include the following:

                                (1)      Request each Tribe seeking the additional
                                services to designate a specific tribal contact, such as
                                an individual or a tribal committee, to cooperate and
                                coordinate with the USDA staff at the consolidated
                                suboffices.

                                (2)      Request each Tribe to provide any
                                information, such as a specific plan of work which
                                includes priorities established by the Tribe, that
                                would make the planning and running of the
                                consolidated suboffice easier and more efficient.

              c        Tribal units shall:

                                (1)       Request the establishment of the suboffices
                                of the affected agencies by contacting the State office
                                of any one of the affected agencies.

                                (2)        Determine along with USDA personnel the
                                site for the consolidated suboffices.

                                (3)      Determine along with USDA personnel the
                                day or days each week that suboffices shall be staffed
                                by each agency.

END




                               2
