                               U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

                                     WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


Departmental Regulation                                                         Number:
                                                                                1490-002
                                                                Date: August 4, 2011
Subject: Creative, Media and Broadcast Policy                   OPI: Office of
                                                                Communications, Creative
                                                                Media and Broadcast Center




SECTION                                                                           PAGE
1   Purpose                                                                         2

2    Special Instructions/Cancellations                                              2

3    Policy                                                                          2

4    Authority                                                                       2

5    Applicability and Scope                                                         3

6    Responsibilities                                                                3

7    Definitions                                                                     7

8    Restrictions                                                                    7

9    Use of Private Sector                                                           8

10   Exceptions                                                                      8

11   Planning of Information Materials                                               8

12   Ownership of Originals                                                          8

13   Records Management Requirements                                                 9




                                                1
1. PURPOSE

  This regulation prescribes policies and procedures for graphic design, video, audio and
  video conferencing, multimedia, and broadcast activities for all agencies and staff offices
  in USDA. The purpose is to ensure that the communications products of USDA are
  produced in the most efficient and cost effective manner and provide the public with
  accurate and timely information. This regulation takes precedence over any agency
  regulations that are in conflict with the policies and procedures described herein.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  This regulation supersedes DR 1470-001, “Policy for Visual Communication Standards”
  and DR-1490-001, "Broadcast Media and Technology Policy."


3. POLICY

  The policy of USDA is to use print, exhibits, electronic/digital media, video, audio and
  video conferencing, radio, and new and emerging technologies in the most efficient and
  cost effective manner to communicate information about USDA and its programs to
  various audiences including farmers and ranchers, land-grant universities, agribusiness
  groups, the general public, and others. This policy also includes the application of
  standards to all information products regardless of media.

  The Creative Media and Broadcast Center (CMBC), Office of Communications,
  oversees, directs, coordinates, produces, and/or contracts for graphic design, video, audio
  and video conferencing, multimedia and broadcast activities of regional, national, and
  international importance for USDA and its agencies and staff offices to ensure that
  products are produced and disseminated in the most efficient and cost effective manner.

  All graphic design, video, audio and video conferencing, multimedia and broadcast
  services will be acquired using the principle of least cost to the taxpayer when all costs
  are considered regardless of funding means and operational procedures, as well as other
  appropriate contract evaluation criteria. As a Working Capital Fund (WCF) activity
  center at USDA, CMBC will recapture operational costs for hours worked on product
  development and production as defined by the WCF operation.
  All work will be performed in accordance with the Department’s Visual Management
  Manual, Visual Management Guides, and other guidance issued by the Office of
  Communications.


4. AUTHORITY

  The Director of the Office of Communications established this Departmental Regulation
  pursuant to the authorities delegated at 7 CFR 2.36.


                                           2
5. APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE

  This regulation applies to all agencies and staff offices of the USDA.

  This regulation applies to all graphic design, video, audio and video conferencing,
  multimedia and broadcast activities and all information products, regardless of media or
  production technology, developed to provide information to the public on topics of
  regional, national, or international significance. Information products may include, but
  are not limited to, video and audio products, static and interactive presentations,
  educational/advertising campaigns, print materials, exhibit/dimensional products,
  signage, visitor centers, electronic/digital materials, and products intended for distribution
  via the Internet.


6. RESPONSIBILITIES

  a. The Director, Office of Communications, will:

      (1)    Exercise final review and approval of all public information material prepared
             by the Department and its agencies and select the most effective method and
             medium for distributing information to the intended audience.

      (2)    Determine policy, procedures, and standards for the development of
             Department and agency strategic communications plans and provide
             centralized communication strategies for the Secretary and agencies, including
             the creation, production and oversight of communication products.

      (3)    Provide overall leadership, coordination, and centralized operational direction
             for USDA and agency communication activities using graphic design, video,
             audio and video conferencing, computer-based multimedia and radio so that
             materials and messages effectively support USDA policies and programs in
             the most efficient and cost effective manner.

  b. The Audiovisual Manager will:

      (1)    Provide general oversight, leadership, and coordination of audiovisual
             activities for the Department. The Director of the Creative Media and
             Broadcast Center serves as the Audiovisual Manager.

  c. The Creative Media and Broadcast Center will:

      (1)    Maintain a capability for in-house development of a variety of print, digital,
             and dimensional products; videos; radio/TV features; public service


                                            3
       announcements (PSAs); multimedia content; and audio and video
       conferencing. Such capability includes, but is not limited to, graphic design,
       video production and direction, sound recording, multimedia
       design/production, etc. The center procures and maintains appropriate
       equipment and assets to perform these tasks, including but not limited to stock
       footage library, graphics, animation, music library, and a production studio.

 (2)   Contract for graphic design, video, audio and video conferencing, multimedia
       and broadcast services when deemed necessary. Contracted services may
       include, but are not be limited to, directing, copy writing, script writing,
       translations, graphics, illustrations, actors, narrators, original music,
       captioning, and specialized production or fabrication services.

 (3)   Provide services and equipment needed for production of live teleconferences
       and news conferences, including satellite uplinking and downlinking,
       compressed videoconferencing, audio and video Web streaming.

 (4)   Provide services and equipment needed for the design and production of a
       broad range of information products including presentations,
       educational/advertising campaigns, print materials, exhibit and dimensional
       products, and electronic/digital materials.

 (5)   Use Federal Supply Schedules and other approved sources for mass videotape
       and multimedia (CD, DVD, etc.) duplication.

 (6)   Recapture operational costs for hours worked on print and exhibit design and
       production, video and audio production, multimedia design and production,
       and audio and video conferencing as prescribed for working capital fund units.

 (7)   Review and approve agency acquisitions of any video or audio production
       equipment costing $10,000 or more.

 (8)   Provide cost estimates for graphic design, video, multimedia and
       teleconference projects and provide periodic updates on actual expenses.

 (9)   Establish and maintain a library of master tapes or files representing every
       video produced by CMBC. A duplicate master may be kept by the sponsoring
       agency. After five years, CMBC will coordinate transfer to the National
       Archives.

(10)   Provide content for USDA's Video Network that includes an Employee
       Informational Channel and provides off-air and cable TV news channels for
       live viewing by selected locations throughout the USDA Washington
       downtown complex and Washington area offices connected to CMBC.

(11)   Operate and maintain the Department's on-line "streaming server" and provide


                                    4
          leadership and guidance to the Department in such use.

d. Agency Administrators and Staff Office Heads will:

    (1)   Ensure that graphic design, video and audio production, multimedia,
          broadcasting, and audio and video conferencing activities occurring in their
          respective agencies and offices comply with USDA regulations.

    (2)   Ensure that graphic design, video and audio production, multimedia,
          broadcasting, and audio and video conferencing planning in headquarters and
          field offices is done in cooperation with the CMBC Director.

    (3)   Ensure that broadcast-quality video products and footage originating in
          agency and staff offices, whether at headquarters or in field offices, is made
          available to CMBC for inclusion in USDA’s centralized video repository for
          possible use in other USDA video efforts.

    (4)   Work with the CMBC Director in complying with the policies for centralized
          leadership and acquisition for graphic design, video and audio production,
          multimedia, broadcasting, and audio and video conferencing services.

    (5)   Direct staff to consult with CMBC on the planning and production of all print,
          digital, and dimensional products, videos, multimedia productions, and
          teleconferences of regional, national, and international importance.

    (6)   Direct staff to meet with CMBC staff on each proposed project to formulate
          budget and to discuss project specifics such as medium, format, audience,
          purpose and message. Complete and submit form AD 652: Request for
          Creative Services, to initiate work with CMBC.

    (7)   Furnish qualified technical advisors or information experts to counsel CMBC
          regarding agency policies and technical accuracy of subject matter depicted in
          print, digital and dimensional products, videos, multimedia productions,
          broadcasts and teleconferences.

    (8)   Direct staff to organize information content per information product, allowing
          for adequate planning, scheduling and production time to reduce costs to the
          taxpayer.

    (9)   Direct staff to provide CMBC with fully edited and cleared manuscripts from
          the Office of Communication’s Brand, Events, Exhibits and Editorial Review
          Division prior to initiating print design and production.

   (10)   Direct staff to provide CMBC with cleared and approved photography from
          Office of Communication’s Photography Services Division prior to initiating
          product production.


                                       5
(11)   Direct staff to complete the review for accuracy of all text in all information
       products, regardless of media, submitted by CMBC, within the timeframes
       agreed upon, to maintain the already approved production schedules and avoid
       incurring additional charges to the agency for change orders, including
       schedule changes, author’s alterations, and modifications to contracts already
       finalized.

(12)   Provide sufficient funding and adequate production time per information
       product to ensure final product meets all applicable access requirements
       (including Architectural Barriers Act of 1968; Uniform Federal Accessibility
       Standards; Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board
       guidelines; and Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, Section 508:
       Electronic and Information Technology Accessibility Standards; and other
       access laws, standards, or guidelines).

(13)   Present a strategic communication plan or phase thereof to the Director of the
       Office of Communications at the beginning of each fiscal year. Meet with the
       CMBC Director in the last quarter of a fiscal year and review projected
       service requirements for the coming fiscal year.

(14)   Obtain written prior approval from the OC Director on promotions and new
       appointments at any grade level in any visual information, video or broadcast
       positions before personnel action is initiated. Visual information positions are
       predominantly covered under Job Series 1084, visual information specialist.
       Video positions are predominantly covered under Job Series 1071, audiovisual
       production specialist.

(15)   Ensure that Government employees will not appear as actors in Government
       productions, except as permitted by OMB Circular No. A-130.

(16)   Obtain written prior approval from the Director, CMBC for all proposed
       purchases of video and audio equipment costing $10,000 or more. Requests
       for exemption should be made in writing.

(17)   Grants and cooperative agreements should not be used for the procurement of
       multimedia and broadcast materials or services.

(18)   Request an exemption from the Director, CMBC, to use Government
       Schedules or other contracting mechanisms set up by USDA or other agencies
       such as GSA to create multimedia or broadcast products with a value of over
       $25,000. Requests for exemption should be in writing.

(19)   Request an exemption from the Director, CMBC, to use Government
       Schedules or other contracting mechanisms set up by USDA or other agencies
       such as GSA to create print, digital, and exhibit/dimensional products with a


                                    6
                                                                                     s, visitor
             center, or similar scope exhibit design and/or fabrication projects including
             signage include a CMBC member or appointee.

     (21)    If building construction contracts include visitor-center exhibit design and
             fabrication, ensure that the specifications for the visitor center related work
             are reviewed by CMBC staff prior to award.


7. DEFINITIONS

  Costs. Costs include personnel, material, and equipment, related overhead expenses as
  defined by the Working Capital Fund (WCF) board, as well as costs to expedite
  production of any or all of the elements of a project due to slippages in schedule.

  Audiovisual Manager. USDA's chief officer to manage the Department's audiovisual
  production and to provide general oversight, leadership, and coordination of audiovisual
  activities. The Director of the Creative Media and Broadcast Center serves as the
  Audiovisual Manager.

  Graphic Design. The art or profession of visual communication using various methods to
  combine images and words to create a visual representation of ideas and messages to
  convey information to an audience, especially to produce a specific effect.

  Multimedia. The combination of audio, video, graphics, and animation using various
  methods to convey information to an audience, especially to produce a specific effect.
  Multimedia can be distributed in many forms, including, but not limited to, CD, DVD,
  Flash, internet, computer, etc., and emerging technologies.

  Audio and video conferencing. Electronic communication among three or more people at
  two or more sites. This can be either through telephone line or satellite transmission.


8. RESTRICTIONS

  a. Influencing Legislation. USDA graphic design, video, audio and video conferencing,
     multimedia and broadcast activities and products may discuss the pros and cons of
     issues even after the issues have been introduced in bill form before either or both
     Houses of Congress. However, at no time will the materials produced be used for
     publicity or propaganda or to "lobby" by soliciting direct support of pending
     legislation. Also, care must be taken not to be in the posture of "selling" pending
     legislation. Every effort must be made to be sure content of print, exhibit,
     digital/multimedia, video, audio, and broadcast products provide information in as
     unbiased a manner as possible.


                                           7
  b. Endorsement, Commercial References, and Use of Brand Names. USDA's policy is to
     avoid endorsement, directly or indirectly, of any commercial enterprise or product
     whenever possible. However, it is recognized that occasions may arise when
     mentioning or picturing specific commercial enterprises or products is in the public
     interest or is difficult, if not impossible, to avoid. These occasions must be fully
     justified.


9. USE OF PRIVATE SECTOR

  a. Use of Private Commercial Sources. CMBC will contract to the private sector as
     needed for overflow work or for services not available in-house.

  b. CMBC will consult with agencies to determine when graphic design, video, audio and
     video conferencing, multimedia and broadcast products and services need to be
     procured in part or total. Such products and services will be procured by CMBC in
     accordance with OMB Circular A-76 and Office of Procurement and Property
     Management (OPPM) policy guidance.


10. EXCEPTIONS

  Any exceptions or variations to any part of these regulations must be requested in writing
  and approved prior to project initiation by the Director, Office of Communications.


11. PLANNING OF INFORMATION MATERIALS

  In planning the development of information materials, agencies will confer with the
  CMBC Director or his/her designee. Consideration will be given to alignment with the
  agency strategic communications plan and/or the Department's strategic communications
  objectives, cost effectiveness of proposed venture, desired objectives, adaptability of
  subject matter to the selected medium, distribution, shelf life, audience size, and
  coordination with other forms of communication. Agencies will schedule production
  needs with CMBC with as much advance notice as possible.


12. OWNERSHIP OF ORIGINALS

  The original materials embodying works of authorship produced to fulfill the


                                          8
  requirements of a given project and for which USDA and agency funds are use wil
  become the property of the Federal Government and will be under the care and
  management of CMBC.
  Copyright protection is not available for works prepared by an officer or employee of the
  U.S. Government as part of that person’s official duties, but the Government is not
  precluded from receiving copyrights from an outside source. When copyrighted subject
  matter is to be reproduced or otherwise used, rights of sufficient scope must be obtained
  to permit USDA to fulfill all program requirements. A copyright notice should be used
  with copyrighted subject matter included in an information product.



13. RECORDS MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS

  Nothing in this regulation will be construed as exempting the filing, controlling, and
  scheduling of official record copies of visual and audiovisual materials and documents
  from applicable records management requirements.


                                       -END-




                                          9
