                              U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                     WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                                    Number:
                   DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION
                                                                                    1496-001
SUBJECT:                                                           DATE: November 21, 2012
Digital Strategy Governance
                                                                   OPI: Office of Communications



        1.    PURPOSE

              This Department Regulation (DR) establishes policy and assigns responsibilities
              for the governance of digital services within the United States Department of
              Agriculture (USDA). In order to improve programs and information exchange
              with external customers, partners and employees, USDA seeks to provide
              mission and business program support through a digital strategy that is
              information and customer-centric, leverages existing resources to the greatest
              extent possible, and ensures that digital content incorporates adequate privacy
              and security controls. This policy establishes the framework to provide the
              public, entrepreneurs, and agricultural programs with the ability to better lever-
              age valuable USDA data to further advance innovative applications and
              beneficial services. It focuses on innovating with less to deliver better digital
              services, and specifically promotes an overall approach to increase returns on
              Information Technology (IT) investments, reduce waste and duplication, and
              improve the effectiveness of IT solutions through the use of shared services.

              The Office of Communications (OC) sponsors USDA’s digital services strategy
              in partnership with the USDA Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO),
              and component agency and office Web, information technology, and public
              affairs offices.

         2.   BACKGROUND

              In May 2012, the Federal Chief Information Officer (CIO) within the Office of
              Management and Budget (OMB) issued guidance instructing agencies and
              offices to develop a digital strategy to improve the management and delivery of
              digital services to their customers. An overall strategy was developed to
              promote the adoption of core principles to: share information in an open,
              accurate and more widely available manner; share resources in order to reduce
              costs and cycle time for service delivery; produce “user friendly” services that
              can be easily understood, accessed, and utilized by customers; and, ensure that
              adequate security and privacy controls are consistently and effectively
              incorporated into digital products and services. A major emphasis on
              innovation was also incorporated into the strategy to encourage agencies and
              offices to move beyond existing products, processes, and paradigms. USDA is
              committed to adopting these principles to perform USDA’s mission.
DR 1496-001                                                            November 21, 2012


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATION

         This policy will complement the following USDA regulations:

         a.   DR 1440-002, Communications Coordination and Review Policy
         b.   DR 1490-002, Creative Media and Broadcast Policy
         c.   DR 1495-001, New Media Roles, Responsibilities and Authorities
         d.   DR 3140-002, USDA Internet Security Policy
         e.   DR 3150-001, Internet Domain Name Policy
         f.   DR 3410-001, Information Collection Activities – Collection of
              Information From the Public
         g.   DR 3430-001, Web Site Development and Maintenance
         h.   DR 3515-001, Use of Web Measurement and Customization Technologies
         i.   DR 3600-000, USDA Information and Technology Transformation

4. AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES

          a. OMB “Digital Government: Building a 21st Century Platform to Better
             Serve the American People.” May 23, 2012.
          b. OMB Memorandum M-10-06 “Open Government Directive.” December
             8, 2009.
          c. 7 CFR Part 2 “Revision of Delegations of Authority.” Federal Register
             Vol. 76, No. 208, October 27, 2011.

5. DEFINITIONS

           a. Customer – For purposes of this document, customers may be internal to
              USDA, or external (e.g., individual citizens, academia, state, local and
              tribal governments, grant or loan recipients, media).

           b. Digital Information – Information that the government provides digitally.
              Information, as defined by OMB Circular A-130, is any communication or
              representation of knowledge such as facts, data, or opinions in any
              medium or form, including textual, numerical, graphic, cartographic,
              narrative, or audiovisual forms.

           c. Digital Services - The delivery of digital information (e.g., data or
              content), and transactional services (e.g., online forms, applications)
              across a variety of platforms, devices and delivery mechanisms (e.g.,
              websites, mobile applications, and social media).

           d. High-Value – Information or services are considered “high-value” as they
              can be used to increase agency accountability and responsiveness, improve
              public knowledge USDA and its operations, further our core mission,
              create or stimulate economic opportunity, or respond to needs and demand
              as identified through customer interaction.

                                          2
DR 1496-001                                                                  November 21, 2012




              e. Open Data or Content – Digital information that is structured and made
                 available in a way that makes it accessible for meaningful use beyond its
                 system of origin, be that internal to the Department or external to the
                 public. This term expands upon the definition of “openness” in OMB
                 Memorandum M-10-06 Open Government Directive, which specifically
                 concerns the release of information to the public: “Agencies shall respect
                 the presumption of openness by publishing information online…To the
                 extent practicable and subject to valid restrictions, agencies should publish
                 information online in an open format that can be retrieved, downloaded,
                 indexed and searched by commonly used web search applications. An
                 open format is one that is platform independent, machine readable, and
                 made available to the public without restrictions that would impede the re-
                 use of that information.”

   6.    SCOPE

         This policy applies to all USDA digital communication activities including
         websites (USDA.gov, agency, and other partner websites) and social media. It is
         applicable to all digital communications content, whether accessed by desktops,
         mobile devices, or other methods, including web content, data, and apps.

         This policy applies to USDA employees, contractors, grantees, institutions, and
         partners who are responsible for creating and managing digital content, tools,
         and processes on behalf of the Department.


   7.    POLICY

         USDA will establish a collaborative, customer-focused, and data-driven digital
         services delivery framework to:

         a.      Enable USDA customers and employees to access high-quality digital
                 content, information, and services more efficiently and effectively
                 anywhere, anytime, on any device;
         b.      Establish more agile acquisition and budget processes that support the
                 procurement and management of digital technologies in a manner that: is
                 affordable; reduces time to delivery; considers the use of shared,
                 government-wide acquisition vehicles; and, complies with Federal
                 guidelines for information, data and content management including
                 adequate security and privacy controls;
         c.      Identify, unify, and make more efficient current fragmented digital
                 services policies and practices; and ensure that continuous improvement is
                 part of future digital policy development;
         d.      Ensure that digital service development, design and delivery meets the
                 widest possible scope of national, regional, and local customer
                 requirements, including USDA employees;

                                               3
DR 1496-001                                                               November 21, 2012


         e.   Establish a collaborative, repeatable oversight process that incorporates
              measures against performance goals for customer satisfaction, alignment
              with Federal guidelines, incorporation into the USDA Enterprise
              Architecture, cost savings, and time to delivery; and,
         f.   Ensure that high-value data is open, accurate, clearly described, structured,
              machine-readable, and incorporates adequate security and privacy controls
              by default.


   8.    PROCEDURES

         This policy is further delineated in a procedural manual published as a
         companion document within the Regulation series.


   9.    RESPONSIBILITIES

         This policy assigns the responsibilities for effectively governing USDA digital
         communication investments and activities as follows:

         a.   USDA Director of OC will:


              (1)   Serve as the primary business lead for strategic digital services;
              (2)   Coordinate the execution of strategies that meet the needs and
                    preferences of internal and external customers;
              (3)   Coordinate content management across agencies;
              (4)   Represent the voice of the customer;
              (5)   Fully participate in digital strategy development;
              (6)   Serve as the coordinator between and among the Agency and Office
                    webmasters and public affairs directors; and,
              (7)   Review and approve all investments supporting digital
                    communication services and activities, in coordination with the
                    USDA CIO.

         b.   USDA CIO will:


              (1)   Serve as the technical lead for digital service platform and
                    infrastructure development, provisioning and management for
                    innovative digital services;
              (2)   Coordinate with OC to gather requirements for technical service
                    delivery;

                                            4
DR 1496-001                                                                  November 21, 2012


              (3)   Lead digital services portfolio development and management;
              (4)   Coordinate across agencies and offices to develop and maintain data
                    structure management process;
              (5)   Fully participate in the digital strategy development;
              (6)   Provide a secure and rapidly scalable infrastructure to support
                    mobility;
              (7)   Serve as the coordinator with Agency and Office Chief Information
                    Officers; and
              (8)   Review and approve all USDA digital strategy investments pursuant
                    to the requirements of the Clinger-Cohen Act (CCA) and other
                    applicable laws and regulations.

         c.   USDA Agencies and Staff Offices will:


              (1)   Participate fully in the USDA Digital Strategy effort and serve as the
                    business leads to provide requirements for the development and
                    implementation of digital services and investments;
              (2)   Identify opportunities for innovation and requirements for digital
                    services and investments;
              (3)   Implement this policy within their respective organizations by
                    developing and coordinating an integrated operational digital service
                    framework; and
              (4)   Establish partnerships with USDA functional counterparts, including
                    Web, information technology, portfolio management and public
                    affairs.


                                         -END-




                                            5
