                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                         NUMBER:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION DR 1420-002
                                                         DATE:
SUBJECT:                                                 September 8, 2016
Printing Policy                                          OPI:
                                                         Printing Services Division, Office
                                                         of Communications, OC



  Section                                                                    Page

  1 Purpose                                                                  2
  2 Special Instructions/Cancellations                                       2
  3 Policy                                                                   2
  4 Authority                                                                2
  5 Applicability and Scope                                                  4
  6 Roles and Responsibilities                                               4
  7 Economic Considerations                                                  6
  8 Reprints and Reproducibles                                               8
  9 Restrictions                                                             9
  10 Requests for Printing, Binding and E-Books                              10
  11 Ordering Forms                                                          11
  12 Shipments of Printed Material from Printer to Field                     11
  13 Deliveries of Printed Material in Washington, D.C.                      11
  14 Consolidated Orders                                                     12
  15 Blanket Clearance for Recurring Printing                                12
  16 Acquisition, Use, Inventory, Rental and Disposal of Equipment           12
  17 Preparing Copy                                                          13
  18 Submission of Copies of Publications Printed in the Department
     Duplicating Facility and Field Office                                   13
  19 Regional and Field Printing and Duplicating                             13
  20 Review of Printing Procurement Activities and Printing Plants           14
  21 Waivers                                                                 15
  22 Type and Design Considerations                                          15
  23 Quality Levels                                                          15
  24 Classification of Defects                                               16

  Appendix A Reports and Forms                                               A-1
  Appendix B Acronyms and Abbreviations                                      B-1
  Appendix C Definitions                                                     C-1
1. PURPOSE

  This regulation describes policies and procedures for the production and procurement of
  printing, microforming, and duplication of materials for USDA. The Secretary has
  delegated authority to the Office of Communications (OC), at 7 CFR 2.36, to determine
  policy and provide leadership and centralized operational direction for all USDA and
  agency information activities.

2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  This regulation cancels and replaces DR 1420-001, “Composition and Printing”

3. POLICY

  The printing, microforming, and duplication of materials necessary to conduct the
  programs of USDA and its agencies are integral parts of the coordinated information
  process by which the Department keeps the public informed. A key objective of this
  central printing activity is to use the most economical printing methods consistent with
  the requirements of need, time, quality, distribution, and effectiveness.

4. AUTHORITY

  Special statutory and regulatory authorities provide the basis on which printing is
  obtained.

  a. Legal Requirements. Except as otherwise specified, funds available to the
     Department of Agriculture may be used for printing and binding (7 U.S.C. § 2239).
     All Federal printing must be procured through the Government Publishing Office
     (GPO) (44 U.S.C. 501 and 502; section 207(a) of the Legislative Branch
     Appropriations Act, 1993 (44 U.S.C. 501 note)). The exceptions are:

     (1) when GPO cannot provide the printing service (48 C.F.R. § 8.802(a)(1); 44
         U.S.C. 504);

     (2) printing in field printing plants that have been approved by and are operated by a
         Federal Department, independent office, or establishment (44 U.S.C. 501(2));

     (3) the procurement of printing by a Federal Department, independent office, or
         establishment from allotments for contract field printing (44 U.S.C. 501 (2));

     (4) the procurement of any printing related to the production of Government
         publications (including printed forms) (a) when the individual printing orders cost
         $1,000 or less, if the work is not of a continuing or repetitive nature, or (b) when
         printing from other sources is specifically authorized by law (section 207 of the
         Legislative Branch appropriations Act, 1993 (44 U.S.C. § 501 note)).


                                           2
b. Exemptions
   (1) The Foreign Agricultural Service has a waiver from the Government Print
       Office (GPO) to use its funds for printing outside the United States, where it is
       more cost effective to do so.

   (2) The Secretary is authorized to use appropriated funds for meat inspection for the
       purchase of printed tags, labels, stamps, and certificates, without regard to
       existing laws applicable to public printing (7 U.S.C. § 431).

   (3) The Secretary is authorized to use funds appropriated to carry out chapter 11 of title 7,
       U.S.C. (honeybee activities), for printing and binding without regard to 44 U.S.C. § 501 (7,
       U.S.C. § 285).

   (4) The Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC) is authorized to procure printing directly from
       commercial sources using CCC funds (15 U.S.C. §§ 714b (g), (j).


c. FAR. FAR Subpart 8.8 (48 C.F.R. §§ 8.800-8.802) provides policy for the
   acquisition of Government printing and related supplies.

d. Joint Committee on Printing (JCP), Government Printing and Binding Regulations
   copies are distributed within USDA by the OC, Printing Services Division.

e. Secretary's OC Delegations. The Secretary has designated OC as the Central Printing
   Authority (7 C.F.R. §2.36(a) (2) (v)). The Central Printing Authority shall have the
   responsibility for the conduct of a coordinated program controlling the development,
   production, procurement, and distribution of materials through the use of
   conventional printing and binding methods or multiple-copy microform methods. It
   also shall control duplicating and automatic copy-processing or copier-duplicating
   equipment or machines that can be used for printing in volumes exceeding those of
   duplicating work, (Government Printing & binding Regulations, section 30). That
   control does not relate to office or desk-type copiers which are subject to Agriculture
   Property Management Regulations. OC is the only contact for the Department and its
   agencies with JCP and GPO. Conferences between agencies and GPO or contract
   printers may be necessary to resolve major problems. OC shall determine when
   agency participation is required on printing matters with GPO or printing contractors
   and shall arrange such conferences.

f. OC will designate sources of printing, copying, duplicating, and microforming
   for the following:

   (1) Information material for public use, including publications and periodicals
       as described in DR 1410.001, Publications Review/ Clearance Policy;

   (2) Administrative materials, including memorandums, letters, speeches,

                                         3
         newsletters, internal reports, program announcements, grade manuals,
         regulations, regulatory guidelines, training materials, interoffice memo pads,
         forms, and similar kinds of materials not defined as publications in DR 1410-
         001.

5. APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE

  This regulation applies to all agencies and staff offices of the Department.

6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a. The Director of OC is responsible for USDA’s printing policies. To carry out this
     responsibility, the Director or the Director’s delegates shall:

     (1) Review and approve final specifications for printing, marked copy, and other
         instructions;

     (2) Provide advice and direction on printing methods and procedures and hold
         periodic meetings to explain new developments, improve procedures, and clarify
         instructions and requirements;

     (3) Notify agencies of changes in printing specifications and deviations from standard
         practice when changes are necessary to meet schedules and deadlines;

     (4) Approve proposals for equipment and plant sites relating to copying (when
         defined as printing), duplicating, and microforming before notifying JCP;

     (5) Approve Washington-based requests to use more than one color, full reverses, and
         separate covers and case bindings, and to exceed printing limitations;

     (6) Survey printing facilities in USDA and periodically review materials produced in
         the field for production efficiency;

     (7) Work closely with GPO to develop contracts for duplicating, and printing; serve
         as the Department’s liaison with JCP, GPO, and other Government agencies on
         printing matters; and interpret and administer the printing statutes, policies, and
         regulations set forth by JCP and GPO.

     (8) Use of Logos/Marks under Departmental Regulation 1430-002 outlines
         requirements and procedures to be followed by USDA’s mission areas, agencies,
         and staff offices in regard to the design and use of new and existing logos/marks
         (words, acronyms, symbols, insignia, devices, and combinations thereof), in
         program materials, by USDA’s mission areas, agencies, and staff offices to
         identify themselves and their programs, initiatives, legislation, events, etc., or the
         use on products and services by program participants to certify participation in or
         compliance with Department programs.

                                           4
       This regulation applies to the use of the USDA Symbol and the Official USDA
       Seal. The USDA Office of Communications “Visual Standards Guide” is the
       Official USDA Symbol and the Official USDA Seal guidance for proper use.

       See OC’s “Visual Standards Guide” dated October 2012. The USDA Visual
       Standards Guide can be accessed at www.usda.gov/oc/ under the side bar
       “Division” Click on: “Brand Events/Exhibits and Editorial Review” to download
       a pdf copy of the guide.

       Clearance for external use of the USDA name and logo must go through the
       Office of Communications, Brand Events, Exhibits and Editorial Review and
       Clearance Division.

b. Office of Operations (OO), this agency is responsible for Departmental duplication
   services. OO also will:

   (1) Operate headquarters duplicating and copying facilities; and

   (2) Work closely with OC to assure that copying and duplicating services are
       provided in the most cost effective manner consistent with program requirements.

c. Agencies of the Department. Heads of agencies and staff offices are responsible for
   assuring that requests for all kinds of microforming, copying, duplication, artwork,
   and printing required by their agencies and staff offices are properly prepared. These
   responsibilities include appropriate specifications and instructions for quality control,
   timely reproduction, and shipment of materials. Agency Heads must also make sure
   that services and materials requested are held within limits necessary to carry on the
   work of the Department effectively and are consistent with the economical use of
   public funds. In addition, each agency will:

   (1) Designate, in Washington, D.C., and, if necessary, in each field office that
       procures printed materials, one or more individuals to serve as a printing officer.
       (Some agency programs require close administrative office supervision over the
       printing of forms and similar materials; others require information office
       supervision over the printing of publications. Whether separate printing officers
       are necessary or one can do both tasks is the prerogative of each agency.) The
       officers based in the Washington area will represent their agencies with OC on
       printing matters. Printing officers in the field shall work through their
       headquarters in a manner determined by the agency administrator.
       Responsibilities of printing officers shall include review of camera copy,
       photographs, and color transparencies for quality control before forwarding to OC
       for production.

   (2) Provides annual data to OC as necessary on anticipated printing needs, with time
       requirements, to assure requirements can be met by term contracts;

                                         5
     (3) Review agency printing problems and procedures regularly and consult OC on
         matters that need resolution in order to achieve economical and timely
         reproduction.

7. ECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS

  All materials for which microforming and printing are necessary shall be reviewed for the
  most economical methods of production consistent with requirements of time, quality,
  distribution, and any other such matters affecting the job. Specific concerns shall be:

  a. Size of Job - Number of copies to print is determined by audience size and needs.
     Limitations are:

     (1) Work reproduced on duplicating and copying machines shall not exceed 5,000
         production units of any one page or 25,000 production units in the aggregate of
         multiple pages; and

     (2) Work initiated by agency field office shall not exceed 5,000 production units of
         any one page without prior authority of their Washington, D.C., agency
         administrator or, as in the case of publications, the agency headquarters
         information office.

  b. Two or More Colors - Printing in two or more colors increases costs. While most of
     the Department's printing needs require only one color of ink, multicolor printing can
     be used when it is needed to fulfill the purpose of the printed matter. Examples are
     maps and technical diagrams needing clarity, photographs and drawings to depict
     scientific accuracy, and materials to explain or draw attention to special programs
     such as recruiting, educational matters, safety programs, and similar activities as
     described in JCP regulations. Agency field offices shall submit justifications for
     using more than one color to their Washington headquarters information director.
     Washington offices shall submit their justifications to the Publications Review
     Clearance Policy. (See DR 1410-001, section 9).


  c. Illustrations and Photographs - Only illustrations that are functional and directly
     related to the transaction of public business shall be printed. Aggrandizement of
     individuals is prohibited (see JCP regulations).

  d. Covers and Binding - A self-cover of the same paper stock as the inner pages is the
     prescribed standard, especially if the publication is 32 pages or less and is not to be
     subjected to hard use. If an originating agency believes a publication 32 pages or less
     requires a separate cover, justification for approval must be submitted to OC in
     writing. Agency field offices must obtain prior approval from their Washington
     headquarters information office. Low-cost binding methods and materials to protect
     the printed matter should be practical and economical. All requests for case-bound
     covers require a written justification for approval by OC.
                                           6
e. Paper - Kinds of paper available for printing are listed in the paper catalog issued
   periodically by GPO. Paper selection affects both the cost and the quality of printing.
   The use of coated stock requires a written justification submitted for approval by OC.

f. Composition - Type selection will be based on suitability to design, readability, and
   economy and will follow the prescribed formats listed in the USDA Visual
   Information Standards, located in The Office of Communications, Creative Media
   and Broadcast Center, Design Services. If the submitted copy other than typewritten
   copy was not obtained through JCP approved facilities, does not meet GPO and
   USDA standards, or otherwise fails to meet printing laws and regulations, it can be
   reset at the option of GPO or OC and the cost charged to the originating agency.

g. Planning Printing Jobs - Jobs should be planned carefully as far in advance as
   possible. Otherwise, there can be wasted effort, reduction of quality, and excessive
   expense. Allow adequate lead time for the work to be done. Usually the shorter the
   lead time, the greater the planning required. To assure effective planning, agencies
   should:

   (1) Analyze work to establish priorities, assign adequate staff, initiate time-
       consuming actions early, eliminate nonessential steps, and set realistic release
       dates;

   (2) Plan to take advantage of printing contracts for fast service. Contracts have strict
       specifications, so jobs must be suited to the contracts;

   (3) Select the most practical and economical form of composition. Composition
       often is the most time-consuming and costly step in the publishing process,
       especially if many proofs need to move back and forth between printer and author
       for reading and corrections. For effective planning on use of composition, follow
       the formats in USDA Visual Information Standards, located in The Office of
       Communications, Creative Media and Broadcast Center, Design Services;

   (4) Keep jobs simple. Special design and layout add time and costs to the process, as
       does use of more than one color, separate covers and special binding, die cuts, too
       much white space, and blank pages;

   (5) Avoid blank pages, as they generally add additional cost to a job. A written
       justification in advance of camera-copy preparation is required for a request that
       an entire publication be printed only on one side of each page;

   (6) Avoid overtime costs. Surcharges for fast printing can significantly increase labor
       costs, depending upon where the job is handled. Overtime requirements must be
       worth the extra expense and must be fully justified; and

   (7) Plan distribution in the beginning.

                                         7
  h. Rush Printing - When lead time is inadequate under normal procedures to meet an
     agency's needs, the agency printing officer should immediately consult with the OC,
     Printing Services Division. If camera-ready copy is not already prepared, the most
     time-saving composition process for the job will be selected. When camera-ready
     copy is available, procurement will be expedited by personal attention; the most
     reliable and fastest printing process will be selected; overtime will be authorized if
     essential, and arrangements will be made to obtain advance copies for special release,
     when appropriate.

  i. Corrections and Changes in Proofs - To avoid additional costs and delays in handling
     proofs, all manuscripts or copy shall be carefully edited and prepared before
     submission to the printer. When a manuscript has advanced to page proof,
     nonessential improvements in language, form of expression, capitalization,
     paragraphing, etc., shall be avoided as well as author's alterations. These types of
     corrections and changes are expensive and create delays and therefore should be
     made before copy goes to the printer.

  j. Errata Sheets - Errata sheets should be issued only when errors are of such magnitude
     as to affect the functional value of the subject material.

  k. Form Style - All printing shall comply with the form determined by the Public Printer
     (44 U.S.C. 1105) and by the USDA Visual Management Manual. The USDA Visual
     Management Manual and the GPO Style Manual are the standard guides for USDA
     publications and other printed materials.

  l. Self-Mailer Techniques - When economically advantageous, the penalty or postage-
     paid indicia shall be used directly on printed materials to avoid use of envelopes,
     wrappers, or packages. Space also shall be allowed for the name and address of
     individuals or organizations to which the material will be mailed.

8. REPRINTS AND REPRODUCIBLES

  USDA policy encourages commercial groups and educational and nonprofit
  organizations to reprint USDA publications in their entirety or in part to increase
  dissemination of information at no cost to the Government. Federal publications are in
  the public domain, unless copyrighted by a grantee or a contractor, and may be
  reproduced by the public in whole or in part with or without credit. Any copyrighted
  material in a Federal publication cannot be reprinted by the public without permission
  from the copyright holder. A brief credit statement is encouraged, such as "Reprinted
  from (title of publication), published by the U.S. Department of Agriculture." Reprinted
  publications should not be used to imply endorsement by the Department of any
  commercial concern, product, or service nor shall USDA publications be combined with
  non-USDA publications such that the combinations would imply or identify the
  publication as a USDA publication.



                                          8
  (1) Purchase of Reproducibles - Engravings, electroplates, and offset negatives usually
      can be purchased from the Superintendent, Departmental Account Representative
      Division, GPO, Washington, D.C. 20401. Private concerns and individuals should
      deal directly with that office, but agency requests should be submitted to OC. All
      requests should include a copy of the publication or its full title, issue date, number,
      and any other information that will help identify the material.

  (2) Storage of Reproducibles - Except for publications available for distribution by
      Members of Congress, agencies may request that reproducibles be returned with the
      printed job.


9. RESTRICTIONS

  Much of the copying, duplicating, microforming, and printing procured through GPO
  involve commercial printers. However, service contracts and grants shall not be used as
  the primary source of such printing and related processes nor shall private or commercial
  printing be done at any Government plant (see JCP regulations and 44 U.S.C. 1102 and
  1118).

  (1) Service Contracts - The procurement of writing, editing, preparation of manuscript
      copy, or preparation of related illustrative material may be included in contracts for
      service. A contractor also may print forms and instructional materials necessary to
      respond to the terms of a contract, but a contractor cannot be the prime or substantial
      source of printing unless authorized by OC and after notifying JCP. A contractor
      may duplicate fewer than 5,000 units of one page or fewer than 25,000 units of more
      than one page for a Department or agency. Agencies shall be responsible for seeing
      that the limitations are not exceeded by the contractor.

  (2) Grants - Grantees are subject to the same restrictions on printing as service
      contractors and shall not become prime or substantial sources of printing. Thus, the
      inclusion of printing is prohibited unless authorized by OC and JCP is formally
      notified. A grantee, as part of a requirement, may duplicate fewer than 5,000 units of
      one page or fewer than 25,000 units of more than one page. Department or agency
      grants may, however, support non-government publications if grants were issued
      pursuant to an authorization of law and were not made primarily or substantially for
      printing materials. Writing, editing, preparation of manuscript copy, and preparation
      of related illustrative material are permitted by grantees, as may be required in the
      terms of the grant. Agencies shall be responsible for assuring that the limitations are
      not exceeded by grantees.

  (3) Private or Commercial Work - No private or commercial work may be performed at
      any Government plant even though the Government is reimbursed. If appropriated
      funds are used to create information for use in any kind of publication other than a
      nonprofit, scientific journal, USDA must have first rights to print and bind that
      information. It shall not be made available to a private publisher for first publication
      without prior approval of OC and notification of JCP.

                                            9
  (4) Stationery and Letterhead - No embossed stationery other than that permitted in JCP
      regulations shall be produced or procured at Government expense. All stationery
      shall be designed and approved by the Creative Media Services, OC, prior to printing.

  (5) Greeting Cards - Printing or engraving of greeting cards is considered to be personal
      rather than an official need and shall not be done at Government expense.

  (6) Calendars - Standardized Government desk and wall calendars may be ordered from
      the General Services Administration. Other styles, sizes, and formats may not be
      printed or purchased at Government expense.


10. REQUESTS FOR PRINTING, BINDING and E-BOOKS

  The OC, Printing Services Division, shall coordinate the procurement of all composition,
  copying, duplicating, e-books, microforming, and printing.

  The Director, Printing Services Division, shall process all requisitions to GPO for
  composition and printing and arrange all negotiations with GPO and Washington-based
  offices regarding all forms of composition and printing.

  Washington-based offices of the Department shall conduct neither oral nor written
  negotiations with GPO nor its contractors but shall conduct their negotiations with and
  through the OC Printing Services Division. Washington-based procedures are:

     (1) Printing through GPO - Orders for printing through GPO shall be submitted to
         OC on Form AD-78. This form has essential specifications and serves as
         permanent record and should not be folded or pinned to other materials. This
         form will help to expedite the procurement and delivery of orders. From the AD-
         78, printing specialists in OC will prepare any additional forms necessary, as
         determined by the source from which printing will be obtained. OC will provide
         the agencies with access to their printing data base so they will know where
         printing is being obtained and will be aware of estimated costs. Special care
         should be taken to include correct addresses for delivery of orders. (Street
         addresses should be used at all times. Postal Service box addresses are
         unacceptable by GPO;


     (2) Printing in the Department Duplicating Facilities. Orders for printing in the
         Department's duplicating facility shall be submitted to OC on Form AD-270.
         Such requests for printing shall be made only when OC and the agency determine
         that the size of the printing and the schedule are suitable. Agencies may receive a
         waiver for orders exceeding the 25,000 unit limitation for printing done in the
         USDA; and



                                          10
     (3) Printing Guidelines. For details on printing procedures and explanations of
         methods used in determining the placement of work, see the Printing Monograph,
         "Printing and Composition Schedules and Contract Information," available in the
         OC Printing Services Division.


11. ORDERING FORMS

  Special attention is required for ordering overprinting of forms and for providing enough
  lead time for printing of all forms.

  (1) Overprinting – Some programs necessitate overprinting special information on
      standard forms. Such deviations—including overprinting, serial numbering, or other
      alterations—require prior approval of the General Services Administration, or in
      certain cases, the Government Accountability Office or other appropriate agencies.
      Agencies should request any alterations at the time the Form AD-78 is submitted to
      the OC, Printing Services Division.

  (2) Providing Lead Time – Orders to replenish supplies of stock forms, interleaved forms
      (commonly called “snapouts”), and all new forms shall be placed whenever possible
      with the OC, Printing Services Division, 90 days in advance for economical
      procurement. Orders for book-bound snapouts and continuous forms must be placed
      90 to 120 days in advance.

12. SHIPMENTS OF PRINTED MATERIAL FROM PRINTER TO FIELD

  GPO contractors can send bulk shipments directly to field offices. This capability should
  be used when it will save space, time, transportation, and other distribution costs.
  Distribution lists should accompany requests for printing and binding sent to OC. The
  Printing Services Division will work with GPO for economical routing of shipments
  within scheduled delivery dates.

13. DELIVERIES OF PRINTED MATERIAL IN WASHINGTON, D.C.

  GPO delivers printed materials to one central point in the Department, which is the
  Office of Operations, Loading Dock.

14. CONSOLIDATED ORDERS

  Periodically, the Department initiates requisitions to the Public Printer for Federal
  publications printed by other branches of the Government. Department agencies should
  notify OC of their needs when requested. In most instances, agencies will be requested to
  submit AD-78 to the OC, Printing Services Division, for ordering the documents. A
  consolidated order then will be placed with GPO.

15. BLANKET CLEARANCE FOR RECURRING PRINTING

                                          11
  OC, at its discretion, may give written advance clearance for up to one year for certain
  recurring jobs. Application for advance clearance should be made on Form AD-59, with
  a copy of the manuscript or a copy of the latest edition of the recurring publication
  attached. Items given such clearance will be post-audited.

16. ACQUISITION, USE, INVENTORY, RENTAL, AND DISPOSAL OF EQUIPMENT

  Various methods of reporting use and inventories of printing and related equipment are
  described in JCP regulations. Procedures for handling these matters within the
  Department include:

  (1) Annual Plant Reports. The approved National Cartography and Geospatial Center,
      Fort Worth, Texas, will submit an annual report to the OC, Printing Services
      Division. This report shall be made on JCP Forms 4 and 5. Date due in OC is 5
      weeks after September 30, of each year;

  (2) Advance Approvals. Purchases, rentals, exchanges, or transfers of any composition,
      microforming, or printing equipment require justification, the approval of OC, and
      notification of JCP (see section 9d). Duplicating equipment capable of producing an
      image size larger than 10 3/4" x 14 1/4" requires similar approvals. Copying
      equipment which can produce quantities of production units comparable to
      duplicating equipment (5,000 units of any one page and work exceeding 25,000
      production units in the aggregate of multiple pages) also requires justification and
      advance approval from OC;

  (3) Justification Requirements. Agency request for equipment requires the approval of
      OC and notification of JCP. To save time, prior consultation with the Printing
      Services Division is advisable. Content of requests shall include a statement of need,
      a complete description (quantity, make, size, condition, cost or estimated value, etc.),
      location, and a statement that the needed service is otherwise unavailable. If the
      proposed equipment is a replacement, the request shall indicate that the old
      equipment will be disposed of in accordance with JCP regulations.

  (4) Completion of Transaction. When delivery and installation of approved equipment
      have been completed, the agency shall notify the Director, OC, Printing Services
      Division, in writing of completed transaction;

17. PREPARING COPY

  General-procedures for submission of manuscripts for publication review are described in
  DR 1410-001, section 9. To facilitate handling of all types of material for printing, OC
  will provide information on copy or tape preparation, methods of reproduction, and costs
  and speed of reproduction. OC shall determine if copy is properly prepared for printing
  and shall make final approval of layouts, illustrations, and other materials for submission
  to the printer. No officer or employee of the Department, however, may agree or offer to

                                           12
  participate in any arrangement for obtaining composition or printing by a contractor in
  order to avoid clearance in the Department or to avoid obtaining composition or printing
  through Department channels.

18. SUBMISSION OF COPIES OF PUBLICATIONS PRINTED IN THE DEPARTMENT
    DUPLICATING FACILITY AND FIELD OFFICES

  USDA is required to submit monthly to the Superintendent of Documents copies of
  publications printed or duplicated by USDA facilities in Washington and in the field.
  The National Agricultural Library and the Library of Congress also require copies of all
  printed and duplicated publications. Requirements for submission of copies from agency
  headquarter offices include:

  (1) Copies Produced in Washington, D.C. Duplicating Facility. Five copies of each
      publication produced by agencies in the facility in Washington will be furnished by
      OO to the OC, Printing Services Division. These copies will be used for reporting to
      the Superintendent of Documents and for supplying copies to the Library of
      Congress. OO furnishes copies directly to (See DR 1020-001, National Agricultural
      Library (NAL).); and

  (2) Copies Produced Under Cooperative Agreements and Contracts. Agencies shall
      establish procedures to assure that six copies of each publication produced under
      cooperative agreement or by contract are forwarded to the OC, Printing Services
      Division. One copy of the six produced by cooperative agreement shall carry the
      notation "Produced under cooperative agreement." OC will forward two copies to
      NAL and four copies to the Library of Congress.

19. REGIONAL AND FIELD PRINTING AND DUPLICATING

  a. Limitations. GPO Regional Printing Procurement Offices are the authorized offices
     where the Department's agency regional and field offices must procure contract field
     printing. The following limits also apply:

     (1) Field Printing. Materials printed in the field must be used in the geographical
         area of origin, unless approved by OC through the agency's information head.
         Agency field offices should submit justifications for use of more than one color to
         their Washington headquarters information director. Field facilities of staff
         offices should submit justifications to OC, Printing Services Division;

     (2) Procurement. Agencies shall procure all field printing through GPO Regional
         Printing Procurement Offices, unless the work is authorized by Headquarters to be
         done in a printing plant of a Federal Agency (see JCP regulations for regional
         boundaries and DR 1410, section 9a(7) . Should an agency desire to establish a
         field printing plant, justification for application shall be submitted to OC. OC
         will notify JCP;



                                         13
     (3) Authorized Ordering Officials. Agencies shall supply to the OC, Printing
         Services Division, the names of personnel authorized to sign orders for printing
         through GPO procurement offices. Changes in those names must be reported
         immediately to the Printing Services Division; and

     (4) Methods of Ordering. Procedures for ordering field printing are outlined in the
         Agency Procedural Handbook issued by GPO (Publication 305.1) which is
         available from the Printing Services Division.

  b. Required Reports - Although further detail on reports is supplied in JCP regulations,
     specific concerns for field offices include:

     (1) OC Report to JCP. This report covers all printing procured from GPO Regional
         Printing Procurement Offices. Use AD-575 and include all work requested on
         Standard Form 1 and work requested on GPO-2511. The AD-575 shall be sent to
         the OC, Printing Services Division, no later than 5 weeks after September 30;

     (2) JCP Form No. 2. This form covers all transactions concerning composition,
         printing, binding, and blank book work which are procured directly from
         commercial sources. Report semiannually, in duplicate. Negative reports are not
         required. Due 5 weeks after March 31 and September 30;

     (3) Notice of Transaction Authorized by JCP. This letter must be completed by The
         Office of Communications, Printing Services, and returned immediately upon
         completion of an authorized transaction: and

     (4) Procedure. All reports shall be sent to The Office of Communications, Printing
         Services Division, by the agency's Washington office for forwarding to JCP.
         Copies of all JCP forms are available from the Printing Division.


20. REVIEW OF PRINTING PROCUREMENT ACTIVITIES AND PRINTING PLANTS

  The OC, Printing Services Division, will make periodic reviews of Department printing
  activities in Washington and in the field to ensure that such printing is produced in the
  most efficient manner and in conformance with Government laws and regulations related
  to printing. After each review, the Printing Division will prepare a report with
  recommendations for use by the agency or office involved. Installations may request a
  review of their operations by writing to the Director, Office of Communications, Printing
  Services Division.

21. WAIVERS

  In certain instances GPO, or its contractors, cannot provide or procure printed matter
  needed by a Department or agency. When agencies believe they have material which
  meets such conditions, they may provide a justification to OC, for a waiver. When

                                          14
  waivers are granted, agencies shall assure that the publications carry proper USDA
  identification, that the publications remain in the public domain and cannot be
  copyrighted, and that adequate quantities are printed for distribution to depository
  libraries.

22. TYPE AND DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS

  Policies on design standards and guides for identifications, logos, and symbols are
  provided in the USDA Visual Information Standards, located in The Office of
  Communications, Creative Media and Broadcast Center, Design Services. Printing
  officials should consider the following specific approaches in order to meet the policies
  set forth in those paragraphs:

     (1) Consult with the Creative Media and Broadcast Center on selecting type for credit
         lines to avoid overemphasis. Generally, a reduced or subordinate size of type to
         that in the text and the legends will suffice;

     (2) Obtain from the Creative Media and Broadcast Center standardized designs or
         formats for recurring jobs that seldom or never require type changes other than in
         titles.

23. QUALITY LEVELS

  The final responsibility for achieving printing quality is set forth by GPO in their Quality
  Assurance through Attributes Program. The primary responsibility for assigning quality
  levels will rest with the ordering agency. The level of quality desired shall be given on
  AD-78. If no quality level is requested, OC, Printing Services Division will assign one
  and notify the agency. Levels of quality available include:

  (1) Level 1 (Best Quality) - These products require the best available materials, printing,
      workmanship, quality control and commensurate production time. Products in this
      level have single or multicolor detailed halftones, very fine line drawings, and
      reproductions up to 300 line screen halftones. The highest quality original copy,
      composition, reproduction proofs, and typography are required. Supplied films must
      be certified suitable for printing. Maximum fidelity in detail, color, and resolution to
      original copy is a prime requirement and must be maintained throughout production.
      Finishing must be held to the highest standards of accuracy, durability, and
      appearance;

  (2) Level 2 (Better Quality) - These products require high quality printing, materials,
      workmanship, quality control, and commensurate production time. Products in this
      level have single or multicolor 150 lines or finer halftone screen reproductions of
      single or multicolor subject matter. A high quality of original copy, films,
      composition, reproduction proofs, and typography are required. Close fidelity and
      resolution to original copy and/or films is required. Finishing must be held to high
      standards of accuracy, durability, and appearance;

                                           15
  (3) Level 3 (Good Quality) - These products require above average materials, printing,
      workmanship, quality control, and commensurate production time. Products in this
      level require clean, sharp printing of single or multicolor work (general process
      work), and halftone reproductions up to 150 line screen. Above average quality
      original copy, films, composition, reproduction proofs, and typography are required.
      Finishing must be held to above average standards of accuracy, durability, and
      appearance;

  (4) Level 4 (Basic Quality) - These products require average quality printing, materials,
      workmanship, quality control, and commensurate production time. Products in this
      level are generally informational and have general black-and-white or line color (non-
      process) and occasional halftone reproductions. Average quality original copy, films,
      composition, proofs, and typography are required. Average fidelity and resolution to
      original copy and/or films is required. Finishing must be of an accuracy, durability,
      and appearance that do not impair the function of the product; and

  (5) Level 5 (Duplicating Quality). These products require printing with no information
      loss from original copy. These products may be reproduced from any readable copy.
      Finishing must not impair the function of the product.

24. CLASSIFICATION OF DEFECTS

  GPO classifies a defect as any nonconformance to specific requirements. Each product
  class has a separate classification of defects. Defects are measurable in terms of
  requirements. Determinations to resolve conflicts between contractors and agencies shall
  be handled through OC, Printing Services Division according to procedures established
  by GPO. Defects include:

  (1) Critical Defects. These are defects which render the products unusable for
      their intended end use, for example, a missing signature in a book;

  (2) Major Defects. These are defects which would normally be spotted by the lay
      observer and which could justifiably result in customer complaints. A printed
      piece containing a major defect is still usable for the purpose intended but may
      make such use more difficult than it should be, for example, a badly printed page
      in a book but which is still readable; and

  (3) Minor Defects. These are defects that would normally pass unnoticed by the lay
      observer in the routine use of the print and would not be the source of comment,
      complaint, or inconvenience unless present in large number, for example, a broken
      letter or a small hickey.


                                       -END-


                                          16
                                    APPENDIX A

                              REPORTS AND FORMS



JCP Report 1 - Printing Plants except Plants Primarily Concerned in Map and/or Chart
Reproduction

JCP Report 2 - Commercial Printing Report Notice of Completion of Transaction
Authorized by JCP

AD-59 - Request for Manuscript Review

AD-78 - Request for Printing and Binding

AD-270 - Request for Reproduction Service

AD-700 - Procurement Request

GPO-2511 - Print Order

SF-l - Printing and Binding Requisition




                                          A-1
                         APPENDIX B

             ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS



AGPMR   Agriculture Property Management Regulations
DR      Departmental Regulation
FAR     Federal Acquisition Regulation
GPO     Government Publishing Office
JCP     Joint Committee on Printing, U.S. Congress
NAL     National Agricultural Library
OC      Office of Communications
OO      Office of Operations
NRCS    Natural Resources Conservation Service




                              B-1
                                         APPENDIX C

                                         DEFINITIONS

“Printing” as defined in section 207 (a) (3) of the Legislative Branch Appropriations Act, 1993
(44 U.S.C. § 501 note), “includes the processes of composition, platemaking, presswork,
duplicating, silk screen processes, binding. microforming, and the end items of such processes.”

Terms used in printing and related activities are based on the JCP regulations. JCP regulations
classify certain basic equipment for copying, composition, platemaking, and presswork, binding,
and related activities. Equipment classifications are related to printing definitions and indicate
the kinds of equipment requiring OC approval and formal notification of JCP. Other terms
pertinent to the Department's printing activities include:

Microform

A miniaturized image format for mass or general distribution used as a substitute for
conventionally printed material, except microfilming of administrative records, accounting
reports, and similar items. Microform duplicating is the production of up to 250 duplicates, or
units from original microform; more than 250 duplicates constitute printing and must be
contracted through the Government Printing Office. One microform production unit is one roll
of microfilm 100 feet in length or one microfiche;

Duplicating

Reproduction involving stencils, masters, and plates to be used on single unit equipment not
larger than 11 x 17 inches and with a maximum image of 10 3/4 x 14 1/4 inches. Jobs may not
exceed 5,000 production units of any one page or 25,000 production units in the aggregate of
multiple pages [(see sections 2-1)]. This definition includes reproduction by electrostatic copy
machines capable of production of the volume listed above;

Production Unit

A single sheet, from 8 1/2 x 5 1/2 inches up to 8 1/2 x 11 inches, printed on one side only in one
color of ink. A sheet within these dimensions printed on both sides or on one side in two colors
of ink are two production units. Total number of production units is the product of the number
of copies and the number of sheets within the dimensions, which are printed in one or two colors.
A page no larger than 8 1/2 x 5 1/2 inches is considered one-half of a production unit; an 8 1/2 x
3 2/3-inch page, one- third of a production unit; and an 8 1/2 x 2 3/4-inch page, one-fourth of a
production unit;

Printing Plant

Refers to a plant approved by JCP and located on property owned or controlled by the
Government to produce printing as defined by JCP regulations;



                                               C-1
Map and Chart Printing Plants

Called "cartographic plants" for Departmental purposes, these plants are authorized by JCP to
produce only multicolor flat and/or folded maps. The National Cartography and Geospatial
Center, Fort Worth, Texas, is authorized to procure map work directly from commercial sources
and from GPO;

Camera-Ready Copy

A term commonly used among printers, designers, and editors to identify material prepared for
photomechanical reproduction. The material can include words composed by a typesetting
machine, an office machine, or an electronic character- generating device, as well as illustrations
prepared by an artist or photographer. Preparation of camera-ready copy is the last step in the
assembly of material prior to delivery to a printer. The printer prepares negatives from the
camera-ready copy for transferring an image to printing plates. Other terms used for camera-
ready copy include: "camera copy," "camera-ready art," line art," "reproduction copy," "boards,"
"mechanicals," "shooting art," and "shooting copy." Storage or disposal is the responsibility of
the originating agency; and

Copying

Refers to the duplication or reproduction of an original work, or a facsimile of an original work,
with the aid of a machine or device. Number of copies made generally provides the criteria for
determining whether the reproduction process is to be considered printing or "office work." For
instance, copying machines capable of reproducing more than 5,000 production units of any one
page and 25,000 production units in the aggregate of multiple pages are classified as printing
equipment.




                                               C-2
