                                  U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                         Washington, D.C.


               DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                             NUMBER:
                                                                                   1480-001

    SUBJECT:                                         DATE: February 7, 2003
    Photography Policy
                                                     OPI:
                                                     Office of Communications,
                                                     Photography


        Section                                                      Page

1       Purpose                                                      1
2       Special Instructions/Cancellations                           1
3       Policy                                                       2
4       Photography in the Washington, D.C., Complex                 2
5       Photography Outside the Washington, D.C., Complex            2
6       Official Requirements for Photographic Work                  3
7       Official Use of Cameras and Equipment                        3
8       Ownership of Photographs                                     3
9       USDA Photo Library                                           3
10      Requests for Audiovisual Productions                         3
11      Filing and Storage of Original Negatives and Slides          4
12      Procurement of Photographic Services and Equipment           4
13      Photo Numbers and Photo Credits in Publications              4
14      Restrictions                                                 4
15      Exceptions                                                   5


1       PURPOSE

        This regulation establishes policies and procedures for the agencies of the USDA in
        matters pertaining to still photography, including its procurement, use, dissemination, and
        storage.


2       SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

        These policies and procedures supersede any previous regulations and take precedence
        over any agency regulations that are in conflict with the policies and principles described
        here. This regulation adheres to provisions of OMB Circulars A-130 and A-76.

                                                 1
3    POLICY

     a      The policy of USDA is to use mass and specialty media as well as other methods
            to report, explain, and interpret to the public and specific interest groups the
            policies, regulations, programs, and activities of USDA. The Secretary has
            delegated authority to OC, at 7 CFR 2.36, to determine policy and provide
            leadership and centralized operational direction for all USDA and agency
            information activities.

     b      The Photography Center is OC’s organizational unit to lead and serve USDA
            agencies on matters relating to still photography. The Photography Center:

            (1)    Provides standards and guidance for the acquisition, preparation, distribu-
                   tion, and storage of photographs about Departmental activities;

            (2)    Maintains the USDA's centralized photo library;

            (3)    Maintains and updates USDA’s Photo Center website;

            (4)    Provides electronic images and guidance on photo selection and usage to
                   USDA Web site;

            (5)    Coordinates and provides leadership in the effective preparation and
                   distribution of prints, slides, audiovisual presentations, and photo features
                   for public and media use; and

            (6)    Assigns photographers and procures photographic services.

     c      Additional information on reimbursable agreements, use of the photo library, and
            how to obtain photographic services is available from the Photography Center.


4⋅   PHOTOGRAPHY IN THE WASHINGTON, D.C., COMPLEX

     Photography work performed in the Washington, D.C., complex, including Beltsville and
     surrounding areas, will be coordinated through the OC Photography Center. Work
     subject to this paragraph includes taking photographs, developing film, and ordering
     prints and supplies.


5    PHOTOGRAPHY OUTSIDE THE WASHINGTON, D.C., COMPLEX

     There is a need for continuing photographic capability in field offices for agency
     employees to document research projects, construction compliance, cultural practices,
     news events, natural disasters affecting USDA programs and activities, and public
     information and education efforts.




                                             2
     It is the responsibility of the agency information director to insure that agency field
     activities relating to still photography operate within the guidelines of this regulation.


6    OFFICIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PHOTOGRAPHIC WORK

     No photographic work will be undertaken that is not essential for official use or
     necessary in furthering the official business of the USDA. Authorization for new
     photography work should take into account existing photographs available in the photo
     library and agency files.


7    OFFICIAL USE OF CAMERAS AND EQUIPMENT

     Photographic equipment and supplies purchased with USDA funds are for official use
     and will not be used for personal or private purposes.


8    OWNERSHIP OF PHOTOGRAPHS

     Any agreements pertaining photographs taken with USDA equipment, and photographs
     taken of USDA work or subject matter by employees using private equipment on
     government time, should provide that the photographs are the property of USDA. Any
     agreements pertaining to photographic negatives and positives, and original work
     obtained through and processed at the expense of USDA funds, should provide that such
     items are property of the USDA.


9    USDA PHOTO LIBRARY

     The OC Photography Center will maintain the centralized USDA photo library. All
     photography originating in USDA agencies is the property of USDA and under the
     jurisdiction of the OC Photography Center. Agencies may place their libraries of original
     material with the centralized USDA photo library.


10   REQUESTS FOR AUDIOVISUAL PRODUCTIONS

     In accordance with the authority codified at 7 USC 2243 and 2245, slide sets and
     videotape conversions of slide sets will be sold at prices established by the Photography
     Center to cover the cost of reproduction.




11   FILING AND STORAGE OF ORIGINAL NEGATIVES AND SLIDES

                                               3
     Original negatives and positives shot by Photography Center staff, agency photographers
     in the Washington, D.C., area, and by contract freelancers will be filed in the
     Photography Center. Selected images will be digitized onto Photo CD’s for electronic
     storage.
     Agencies may file their original slides there, as well.


12   PROCUREMENT OF PHOTOGRAPHIC SERVICES AND EQUIPMENT

     a      The OC Photography Division is organized to consolidate orders for photographic
            services in the interest of economy, quality, and services. Agencies in the
            Washington, D.C., complex will request photographic services through the
            Photography Center. A Form AD-271, Request for Photographic Services, will
            accompany each request.

     b      Agencies will obtain prior approval from the Director, OC Photography Center
            for proposed purchases of photographic equipment costing $1,000 or more.
            Proposed purchases by field offices will be routed through the agency's
            Audiovisual Control Officer for prior approval before forwarding to the Director,
            OC Photography Center.

     c      Contractual agreement for photo coverage of a USDA event or activity should
            explicitly give all rights to reproduction and all original materials to the
            government.


13   PHOTO NUMBERS AND PHOTO CREDITS IN PUBLICATIONS

     a      Photo numbers will be included in USDA publications to aid in identification and
            retrieval of photographs requested by the public. Credit lines also may include
            the photographer's name and agency abbreviation, as in the following example:

            USDA photo no. 02CS1001, Lee Smith, FSA

     b      For photographs used in non-USDA publications, request credit lines to
            acknowledge the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the photographer.


14   RESTRICTIONS

     a      Promotion. Photographs shall not be used to promote USDA, its agencies, or
            individuals. USDA photographs that would be considered “puffery” or self-
            aggrandizement will not be produced or distributed. Also, USDA photographs
            will not be used to advance USDA, agency, or individual opinions on broad
            subjects without specific program reference.


                                            4
     b      Endorsements, commercial references, and use of brand names. USDA’s policy
            is to avoid endorsements, directly or indirectly, of any commercial enterprise or
            product whenever possible. However, it is recognized that occasions may arise
            when photographing a specific commercial enterprise or product is in the public
            interest or is difficult, if not impossible, to avoid. The following statement may
            be used as needed in public information materials: “Photographs of a commercial
            product or enterprise do not constitute an endorsement by the USDA over
            products or enterprises not shown.”


15   EXCEPTIONS

     Any exception to this regulation must be agreed to in writing by the Director, OC
     Photography Center, and the agency information director. Any disagreement will be
     resolved by the OC Director.

                                          -END-




                                             5
