                                U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                      Washington, D.C.


      DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                    NUMBER:
                                                                 1440-002

SUBJECT:                                                         DATE: September 7, 2016
Press Operations
                                                                 OPI:
                                                                 Office of Communications


       Section                                                            Page

 1     Purpose                                                            1
 2     Special Instructions/Cancellations                                 1
 3     Policy                                                             1
 4     Responsibilities for Current Information Materials                 2
 5     Responsibilities for News Media Service                            3
 6     Limitations                                                        4
 7     Information Dissemination                                          5
 8     Policy and Style Guides                                            5


 1.    PURPOSE

       This regulation prescribes the policies and procedures for production and dissemination
       of current information materials, principally news releases, backgrounders, media
       advisories, and similar information, and for working with news media representatives.


 2.    SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

       This regulation supersedes DR-1440-002, “Communications Coordination and Review
       Policy.”


 3.    POLICY

       The policy of USDA is to use news media and other communications channels to report,
       explain, and interpret to the public, including specific interest groups, the policies,
       regulations, programs, and activities of USDA. The Secretary has delegated authority to
       the Office of Communications (OC) to determine policy and provide leadership and
       centralized operational direction for all USDA and agency information activities so that
       they will promote understanding about USDA policies, programs, and activities.
     The Office of the Press Secretary within the Office of Press Operations is the OC unit
     through which current information is released in printed and electronic forms. Current
     information includes news releases, features, notices to correspondents, media
     advisories, testimony, speeches, fact sheets, digital and graphical content, and back-
     ground pieces on current topics issued to all branches of the news media and other
     selected communications entities. The Communications Coordination unit in the Office
     of Press Operations coordinates with the Press Secretary on these activities as well as
     others. These include recurring as well as one-time Departmental-level publications and
     special communications projects that disseminate information to general consumers as
     well as to targeted constituents.


4.   RESPONSIBILITIES FOR CURRENT INFORMATION MATERIALS

     a.   Agency Duties. USDA agencies are responsible for developing information of
          national significance and making it available to OC's Office of Press Operations in
          acceptable formats. Each agency is responsible for accuracy of statements contained
          in news materials about agency activities, conformance to news style, and for
          clearance within the agency and mission area, including approvals as required by
          individual agency regulations. Each agency will indicate to the Communications
          Coordinator the name of the highest ranking agency official who cleared the news
          material(s). During the clearance process, news materials are to be marked
          "DRAFT" or otherwise clearly indicated as a draft document, and agency and OC
          employees are not to discuss with or show the contents to people who are not
          working directly with USDA.

          Issuance of Regional Releases by Agency Field Offices. Agency field offices should
          make a preliminary determination on whether news materials they are developing
          may have national significance and, if so, send a draft to the agency’s national
          information director. That official may consult with the Communications
          Coordinator, and if they agree, the draft will be forwarded to the Communications
          Coordinator as a national release. Field offices are authorized to initiate and release
          information to news media within their geographic area only or to publications
          outside their geographic area which serve a specific trade group. Communications
          Coordinators serve as the authoritative reference for all clearance requirements for all
          press materials between OC and the agencies.

     b.   Communications Coordinator Duties. It is the responsibility of the OC
          Communications Coordinator(s) to clear all news materials with the appropriate
          Department leadership and any other officials deemed necessary such as officials in
          the Secretary’s Office and the OC Director. Final clearance of all news materials is
          given by the Press Secretary. When the news materials have cleared USDA, the
          Communications Coordinator can clear them with other Federal agencies' and
          departments’ communications offices, and with the press office in the White House,
                                              2
          as necessary. If the Communications Coordinator substantively edits materials, the
          agency must be notified so the copy may be re-checked for accuracy prior to official
          release.

     c.   Issuance of National Releases. Following clearances, the Communications
          Coordinator directs release of the information to Washington correspondents and
          national media directly, electronically, or through other acceptable means. USDA
          agencies and their field offices are encouraged to redistribute national materials
          electronically or by other means to regional and local news media and other
          interested entities.

     d.   Issuance of Ongoing News Summaries to Top USDA Officials. The Office of Press
          Operations keeps the Secretary of Agriculture and top USDA decision makers
          informed about the broad range of issues affecting USDA, especially those likely to
          be considered when formulating policy or procedures, or those likely to come up in
          interactions with the public and other Federal decision makers through a daily
          edition of relevant media clips.


5.   RESPONSIBILITIES WHEN WORKING WITH NEWS MEDIA

     The customer service policy of USDA is to cooperate with all media representatives when
     at all possible. This includes, but is not limited to, radio and television reporters,
     newspaper and magazine reporters, wire service reporters, online outlets, bloggers,
     newsletter editors, and the agricultural, consumer, and environmental media. Media
     inquiries must be given top priority since media representatives are often working on short
     deadlines. Failure to respond to media inquiries will be seen as poor customer service and
     may result in a negative image for all of USDA.

     a.   Agency Responsibilities. Each agency’s national information director or staff office
          director is responsible for notifying the appropriate Communications Coordinator
          when the agency has been contacted by a national news media representative, or the
          agency is planning a "media event." Each agency’s national information director is
          responsible for seeing that the proper agency official respond to media inquiries as
          quickly as possible.

          Handling "Crisis" Situations. Each agency’s national information director is
          responsible for providing to the appropriate Communications Coordinator the name
          and home phone number of an agency "spokesperson" who may be contacted in the
          event of an agency "crisis." This spokesperson should be a knowledgeable program
          person who will be available to give interviews and talk to reporters during the
          "crisis." The agency’s national information director will work closely with the
          appropriate Communications Coordinator and the Press Secretary to manage ongoing
          crises.


                                             3
     b.   Communications Coordinator Responsibilities. The Communications Coordinator is
          responsible for coordinating all public communications within the respective USDA
          program mission area and within OC, including USDA-level media events,
          dissemination of current information, and responses to queries from national news
          media. Coordinators will:

          (1)    Provide communications training for USDA officials, and help prepare
                 USDA spokespersons to effectively communicate USDA messages to
                 media and constituent groups.

          (2)    Work with others throughout USDA and in other Federal agencies to
                 coordinate the involvement of agency public affairs directors, State
                 program directors, and regional public affairs staff in communications
                 planning where appropriate.


6.   LIMITATIONS

     a.   Promotion. Information and news materials will not be used to advance USDA,
          agency, or individual opinions on broad subjects without reference to a specific
          program. Neither agency offices nor OC will produce or distribute materials that
          constitute self-aggrandizement of USDA, agencies, or officials, or that are purely
          partisan in nature. This policy does not limit an agency’s legitimate information
          dissemination or promotion activities.

     b.   Influencing Legislation. Unless requested by the Secretary or a Congressionally-
          confirmed member of the subcabinet, information materials will not be issued by
          USDA for the purpose of directly influencing Congress to vote for or against any
          legislation or appropriation. Information which criticizes or aggrandizes elected or
          politically appointed officials, the Administration, or the Congress will not be issued
          as news materials by agency information offices or OC. This restriction includes
          statements that the public contact elected representatives to support or oppose
          pending legislation. (18 U.S.C. 1913)

     c.   Endorsements, Commercial References, and Use of Brand Names.
          Endorsements -- directly or indirectly -- of any commercial enterprise(s) or
          product(s) must be avoided whenever possible. However, in recognition that
          occasions may arise when mention of specific commercial enterprises or products
          is in the public interest or is difficult to avoid, these occasions must be justified and
          explained in documentation that is forwarded with the draft release for clearance
          and retained as part of the official file.

7.   INFORMATION DISSEMINATION

     The Office of Communications Office of Press Operations has oversight for dissemination
                                               4
     of information and news materials through computerized means and via electronic mailing
     lists nationally from Washington, D.C. Agencies may establish electronic, facsimile, and
     postal mailing lists to serve their particular needs, both in headquarters units and in field
     offices. However, each agency will notify the appropriate Communications Coordinator
     when establishing a new distribution system, and, if requested, will promptly provide an
     electronic copy of the distribution list and its intended use. All mailing lists/codes, both in
     Washington and in the field, must be circulated and revised at least annually.


8.   POLICY AND STYLE GUIDES

     a.   The Office of Press Secretary will maintain a policy and style guide to be used by
          all USDA agencies and offices in preparing news materials. The guide will
          provide policy and style guidelines not covered by these regulations. Any news
          release style questions not covered in the USDA style book should follow the
          Associated Press style.

     b.   Use of Logos/Marks. Departmental Regulation 1430-002 outlines requirements and
          procedures to be followed by USDA’s mission areas, agencies, and staff offices in
          regard to the design and use of new and existing logos/marks (words, acronyms,
          symbols, insignia, devices, and combinations thereof), in program materials, by
          USDA’s mission areas, agencies, and staff offices to identify themselves and their
          programs, initiatives, legislation, events, etc., or the use on products and services by
          program participants to certify participation in or compliance with Department
          programs.

          This regulation applies to the use of the Official USDA Symbol and the Official
          USDA Seal. The USDA Office of Communications “Visual Standards Guide” is the
          Official USDA Symbol and the Official USDA Seal guidance for proper use. See the
          Office of Communications “Visual Standards Guide” dated October 2012. The USDA
          Visual Standards Guide can be accessed at www.usda.gov/oc/. Under “Division”, select
          “Brand Events/Exhibits and Editorial Review” to download a PDF copy of the guide.

          Clearance for external use of the USDA name and logo must go through OC, Brand
          Events, Exhibits and Editorial Review and Clearance Division.


                                             -END-




                                               5
