                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                              NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                      DR 1521-003
 SUBJECT: Legal Review and Execution of Settlement            DATE:
 Agreements for Program Civil Rights Matters                  December 26, 2023
                                                              EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of the General Counsel                           December 26, 2028



Section                                                                                Page

1.   Purpose                                                                              1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                   1
3.   Scope                                                                                2
4.   Policy                                                                               2
5.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                           2
6.   Inquiries                                                                            4

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                 A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                 C-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of Agriculture
     (USDA) requirements for obtaining legal sufficiency review and concurrence for settlement
     agreements in civil rights matters involving USDA’s conducted and assisted programs and
     activities. This DR also sets forth the level of authority necessary for the execution of
     Settlement agreements by USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     This DR in tandem with DR 1521-002, Legal Review and Execution of Personnel Settlement
     Agreements, supplements DR 1521-001, Legal Review and Execution of Non-Personnel and
     Non-Program Civil Rights Settlement Agreements.
3. SCOPE

  This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices.


4. POLICY

  a.   It is the policy of USDA that Program Civil Rights Settlement Agreements be entered
       into by individuals within Mission areas, agencies, and staff offices at sufficiently high
       levels of authority to ensure that the settlements are in the best interests of the
       Government. It also is the policy of USDA that monetary settlement agreements above
       certain thresholds be reviewed by and concurred with by the Office of the General
       Counsel (OGC) prior to the terms or any agreement being provided to opposing parties
       in litigation.

  b.   It is the policy of USDA that, if after reviewing, OGC deems a draft Program Civil
       Rights Settlement Agreement legally insufficient or otherwise does not concur, the
       Program Civil Rights Settlement Agreement shall not be entered into by the submitting
       USDA Mission Area, agency, or staff office. OGC’s legal sufficiency review and
       concurrence is in addition to existing processes that USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and
       staff offices use for negotiating and processing Program Civil Rights Settlement
       Agreements, including regulations identified in Appendix C, Authorities and References.

  c.   It is the policy of USDA that prior to entering into a Program Civil Rights Settlement
       Agreement for conducted programs and activities in an amount of $50,000 or more,
       including attorneys’ fees, all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices first
       submit the Program Civil Rights Settlement Agreement to OGC for legal sufficiency
       review and concurrence.

  d.   It is the policy of USDA that prior to the terms of any Program Civil Rights Settlement
       Agreement for assisted activities regardless of monetary amount being communicated
       outside of USDA that all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices first submit
       all proposed terms of the Program Civil Rights Settlement Agreement to OGC for legal
       sufficiency review and concurrence.


5. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Office of the General Counsel will provide legal sufficiency review and
       concurrence or nonconcurrence for Program Civil Rights Settlement Agreements above
       certain thresholds as set forth in Section 4, Policy.

  b.   USDA Mission Area Heads, Agency Heads, and Staff Officer Directors will:

       (1) Take the necessary steps to ensure awareness of and compliance with this directive
           within their organization, and to ensure that Program Civil Rights Settlement



                                                2
         Agreements above the thresholds in Section 4 are provided to the General Counsel
         for advice, required legal sufficiency review, and concurrence;

     (2) Take the necessary steps to ensure that Program Civil Rights Settlement
         Agreements are approved by individuals with sufficient authority within the
         organization;

     (3) Take the necessary steps to ensure that their organization’s Resolving Officials
         (RO) are aware of the roles and responsibilities in Section 5c, Resolving Officials;
         and

     (4) Take the necessary steps to ensure their organization provides OGC with a copy of
         all Program Civil Rights Settlement Agreements once signed by the RO.

c.   Resolving Officials should:

     (1) Consult with program management and appropriate USDA personnel involved in
         any settlement implementation prior to any settlement negotiation. The
         consultation should include acquiring knowledge of the basic facts of the case,
         significant legal issues involved in the case, and any recommendations for
         settlement prior to beginning any settlement negotiation. Consultation may include
         reviewing any written summary or oral briefing on the facts and legal issues of the
         case. The sole purpose of any consultation is to allow the RO to gather information
         the RO deems necessary to make informed decisions in the best interest of the
         Secretary;

     (2) Ensure that any Program Civil Rights Settlement Agreements is in the best interest
         of the Government. The RO should strive to assess the Government’s position
         through a fair assessment of liability risk and equitable considerations;

     (3) Negotiate in good faith;

     (4) Agree to terms for resolution only within the limits of their authority. If the RO is
         unsure whether they have the authority to offer or approve a required remedy, the
         RO will stop the settlement discussions until they obtain clarification on the scope
         of their settlement authority; and

     (5) Seek consultation of the General Counsel if uncertain regarding the meaning or
         effect of a proposed Program Civil Rights Settlement Agreements or individual
         settlement term. If any concern exists regarding the legality of a proposed term, the
         RO must consult with the General Counsel before placing a signature on the
         Program Civil Rights Settlement Agreements.




                                             3
  d.   Approving Official Levels for Program Civil Rights Settlement Agreements are:

       (1) Deputy Administrators for Management (or equivalent position), or higher, will
           approve Program Civil Rights Settlement Agreements of up to $5,000, inclusive of
           monetary and non-monetary awards, programmatic relief, and attorneys’ fees.

       (2) Agency Heads, Staff Office Directors, or higher, will approve Program Civil Rights
           Settlement Agreements of $5,001 to $49,999, inclusive of monetary and non-
           monetary awards, programmatic relief, and attorneys’ fees.

       (3) Under Secretaries, Assistant Secretaries, or higher, will approve Program Civil
           Rights Settlement Agreements of $50,000 or more, inclusive of monetary and non-
           monetary awards, programmatic relief, and attorneys’ fees.


6. INQUIRIES

  USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should direct questions and inquiries
  regarding this DR to OGC at telephone number 202-720-3351.


                                           -END-




                                             4
                             APPENDIX A

                  ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS



CFR     Code of Federal Regulations
DR      Departmental Regulation
LEP     Limited English Proficiency
OASCR   Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
OGC     Office of the General Counsel
REE     Research, Education, and Economics
RO      Resolving Official
SES     Senior Executive Service
SL      Senior Level
ST      Scientific and Professional Level
USDA    United States Department of Agriculture




                                    A-1
                                           APPENDIX B

                                           DEFINITIONS


Agency. Organizational units of the Department, other than staff offices as defined in the
“Resolving Official” (RO) definition below, whose heads report to officials within the Office of
the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Under and Assistant Secretaries. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-
001, Departmental Directives System)

Approving Official. A USDA employee at the Deputy Administrator for Management (or
equivalent position) or higher with delegated authority to approve the monetary settlement terms
proposed by RO for resolution of a matter or case on behalf of the Secretary and USDA when the
proposal meets the criteria of Section 5c of this DR.

Assisted Programs and Activities. All of the operations of any entity listed in 7 Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR) § 15.2(k), Program or activity, any part of which receives Federal financial
assistance from USDA. (Sources: 7 CFR § 15.2(k), and USDA, DR 4330-002,
Nondiscrimination in Programs and Activities Receiving Federal Financial Assistance From
USDA)

Complaint. A written statement (except as provided below) that contains the complainant's name
and address and describes an agency’s alleged discriminatory action in sufficient detail to inform
the Office of the Assistance Secretary for Civil Rights (OASCR) of the nature and date of an
alleged civil rights violation. The statement must be signed by the complainant(s) or someone
authorized to sign on behalf of the complainant(s). The complaint does not need to be written
or signed if it is submitted in an alternate format to accommodate the complaint filing needs of a
person who has a Limited English Proficiency (LEP), a disability, or other special need.
(Sources: USDA, DR 4330-002, and DR 4330-003, Nondiscrimination in USDA-Conducted
Programs and Activities)

Conducted Programs and Activities. Program services, benefits or resources delivered directly to
the public by USDA. (Source: USDA, DR 4330-003)

Federal Financial Assistance or financial assistance from USDA. Includes:

   a.   Grants and loans of Federal funds;

   b.   The grant or donation of Federal property and interests in property;

   c.   The detail of Federal personnel;

   d.   The sale and lease of, and the permission to use (on other than a casual or transient
        basis), Federal property or any interest in such property or the furnishing of services
        without consideration or at a nominal consideration, or at a consideration which is




                                               B-1
         reduced for the purpose of assisting the recipient, or in recognition of the public interest
         to be served by such sale, lease or furnishing of services to the recipient; and

    e.   Any Federal agreement, arrangement, or other contract which has as one of its purposes
         the provision of assistance.

    (Sources: 7 CFR § 15.2(g), Federal financial assistance, and USDA, DR 4330-002)

Mission Area. A group of agencies with related functions that report to the same Under or
Assistant Secretary. Research, Education, and Economics (REE) is an example of a mission
area. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-001)

Program Civil Rights Complaint. A complaint wherein a program recipient or beneficiary
asserts a violation of an applicable law, regulation, or policy based on race, color, national origin,
religion, sex, disability, marital status, family or parental status, income derived from a public
assistance program, political beliefs, or reprisal or retaliation for prior civil rights activity, in any
program or activity conducted by USDA or which receives Federal financial assistance from
USDA. (Source: USDA, DR 4330-002)

Program Civil Rights Settlement Agreement. Proposed resolution terms within any written
agreement to resolve formal or informal program civil rights complaints where the USDA is
party pending in the Department, any Federal court, or any court of competent jurisdiction.
Agreements to resolve or withdraw a complaint against a recipient of Federal financial assistance
in which USDA’s role is limited to oversight, compliance, training, or other, non-monetary
technical assistance to the recipient are not Program Civil Rights Settlement Agreements for
purposes of this Departmental Regulation.

Resolving Official (RO). A USDA employee at the Senior Executive Service (SES), Senior
Level (SL), or Scientific and Professional level (ST) or higher level with delegated authority to
resolve a matter or case on behalf of the Secretary and USDA. The RO may be someone from a
different subcomponent of the agency or staff office involved.

Staff Office. Departmental administrative offices whose heads report to officials within the
Office of the Secretary. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-001)




                                                  B-2
                                        APPENDIX C

                             AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES



7 CFR § 15.2(g), Federal financial assistance

7 CFR § 15.2(k), Program or activity

USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System, January 4, 2018

USDA, DR 1521-001, Legal Review and Execution of Non-Personnel and Non-Program Civil
Rights Settlement Agreements, February 6, 2024

USDA, DR 1521-002, Legal Review and Execution of Personnel Settlement Agreements,
December 26, 2023

USDA, DR 4330-002, Nondiscrimination in Programs and Activities Receiving Federal
Financial Assistance from USDA, July 27, 2021

USDA, DR 4330-003, Nondiscrimination in USDA-Conducted Programs and Activities, October
3, 2022

USDA, DR 4330-005, Prohibition Against National Origin Discrimination Affecting Persons
with Limited English Proficiency in Programs and Activities Conducted by USDA, June 4, 2013




                                                C-1
