                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                        DR 1512-001
                                                                DATE:
SUBJECT: Regulatory Development and Review                      February 4, 2022
                                                                EXPIRATION DATE:
OPI: Office of Budget and Program Analysis
                                                                February 4, 2027



Section                                                                                     Page

1. Purpose                                                                                     1
2. Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                          2
3. Scope                                                                                       2
4. Policy                                                                                      2
5. Workplan                                                                                    3
6. Rule Development, Clearance, and ROCIS                                                      8
7. Roles and Responsibilities                                                                 13
8. Small Entity Considerations                                                                18
9. Review of Existing Regulations                                                             18
10. Congressional Review Act                                                                  20
11. Guidance Documents                                                                        21
12. Administrative Record and Electronic Government Policy                                    22
13. Interagency Regulatory Reviews                                                            23
14. Inquiries                                                                                 24

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                      A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                     B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                      C-1
Appendix D – Exemptions from EO 12866 Review                                                 D-1
Appendix E – Workplan Information Requirements                                               E-1
Appendix F – Clearance Sheet for Significant, Economically Significant, and
Major Rules                                                                                  F-1
Appendix G – Clearance Sheet for Non-Significant Rules                                       G-1



1. PURPOSE

   This United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Departmental Regulation (DR) is
   intended as a guide for the development and review of all regulatory actions, including
   significant guidance documents and relevant supporting documents. It covers the full
   rulemaking cycle, starting when the need for a rule is first identified, to drafting, review,
  initial publication in the Federal Register, receipt of public comment, and final publication
  for inclusion in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). It includes rulemaking requirements
  identified by statutes, Executive Orders (EO), Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
  circulars and memoranda, and USDA requirements. Moreover, this DR is intended to ensure
  that USDA regulatory actions:

  a.   Promote public health, welfare, safety, and economic growth and do not impose undue
       costs or burdens on the public;

  b.   Promote human dignity and respect the civil rights of individuals;

  c.   Respect the role of tribes and State and local governments;

  d.   Are effective, consistent, and understandable.

  Accordingly, the DR assigns regulatory development and review responsibilities to USDA
  officials and Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to accomplish these goals.

  This DR is intended only to improve the internal management of USDA. It is not intended to
  and does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or at
  equity by a party against USDA, its Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, officers,
  employees, or any other person.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This DR supersedes DR 1512-001, Regulatory Development and Review, dated
       September 14, 2021.

  b.   USDA has updated this DR to incorporate new statutes, EOs, OMB guidance, and
       processes and procedures implemented since DR 1512-001 was last issued.


3. SCOPE

  This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices.


4. POLICY

  a.   USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will use this DR in the development
       and review of rules as defined by the Administrative Procedure Act (APA).

  b.   Furthermore, this DR is intended to ensure consistency with OMB’s Office of
       Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA)’s oversight of the Federal regulatory system
       under EO 12866, Regulatory Planning and Review.



                                               2
  c.   Finally, this DR is intended to ensure compliance with statutes governing Federal
       rulemaking, such as the Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act of 1996
       (SBREFA), a part of which contains the Congressional Review Act (CRA), Public Law
       (Pub. L.) No. 104-121, March 29, 1996, codified at 5 United States Code (U.S.C.) § 801
       et seq., and the Federal Crop Insurance Reform and Department of Agriculture
       Reorganization Act of 1994 (FCIR and DAR Act), Pub. L. No. 103-354. Mission Areas,
       agencies, and staff offices should consult with the Office of the General Counsel (OGC)
       on the latest statutory requirements.


5. WORKPLAN

  Drafting a regulatory workplan (“workplan,” Appendix E, Workplan Information
  Requirements) is the first step required in USDA regulatory development, as it provides a
  concise, easy-to-read summary of the rule. The workplan’s audience includes Departmental
  reviewing officials and OIRA desk officers.

  a.   The workplan:

       (1) Allows the Office of the Secretary (OSEC) to review and approve or disapprove
           Mission Area, agency, or staff office work on the rule. If OSEC approves:

       (2) Allows Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to obtain a ROCIS (Regulatory
           Information Service Center and Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs
           Consolidated Information System) regulatory identification number (RIN) for any
           new rulemaking for tracking in the spring and fall Unified Regulatory Agenda of
           Regulatory and Deregulatory Actions (Regulatory Agenda); and

       (3) Allows OIRA to designate the rule as significant or non-significant under EO 12866
           (i.e., to determine whether OIRA, and other Federal agencies or offices such as the
           U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) through OIRA, will need to review the
           rule and supporting documentation).

  b.   Coordination

       The Office of Budget and Program Analysis (OBPA)’s Legislative and Regulatory
       Affairs Staff (LRAS) manages the workplan process at USDA under the direction of
       OSEC. Workplan submissions to OBPA LRAS from Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
       offices responsible for USDA’s regulatory programs, if approved by OSEC, also inform
       USDA’s spring and fall Regulatory Agenda and annual regulatory plan (a statement of
       rulemaking priorities) per EO 12866. Accordingly, workplan processing, review, and
       approval by OSEC for purposes of submission to OIRA for a significance designation
       are generally timed to coincide with OIRA’s spring and fall regulatory agenda data calls
       in late February and late July, respectively. The timing of workplan submissions may
       also coincide with major statutory reauthorizations, emergencies, or other circumstances.



                                              3
c.   Preparation

     Written workplans must be prepared for the following stages of regulatory actions listed
     below. Moreover, because OIRA workplan designations for a given rule can change
     from the proposed or interim final to the final stage, a workplan is required for both
     those stages.

     (1) An advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR):

         Notifies the public that a Mission Area, agency, or staff office is considering
         publishing a proposed rule and requests public comments on the scope of the
         proposed rule, including answers to specific questions on the scope.

     (2) A notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR):

         Notifies the public that a Mission Area, agency, or staff office is proposing a rule
         and requests public comment on the proposed rule. Unlike an ANPR, an NPR
         provides the text of the proposed rule along with the background and need for the
         proposed rule and issues involved in the rulemaking.

     (3) An interim final rule:

         Goes into effect upon publication for public comment based upon a finding by a
         Mission Area, agency, or staff office that good cause exists to issue the interim final
         rule.

     (4) A direct final rule:

         Goes into effect when the comment period has ended based upon a finding by the
         Mission Area, agency, or staff office that the rule is routine and noncontroversial,
         unless an adverse comment is received during the comment period. If an adverse
         comment is received during the comment period, the Mission Area, agency, or staff
         office must withdraw the direct final rule before the effective date.

     (5) A final rule:

         Is the final step in the rulemaking process in which the Mission Area, agency, or
         staff office responds to public comment on a proposed or interim final rule and
         makes any appropriate revisions before publishing a final rule in the Federal
         Register. The final rule generally becomes effective 30 calendar days after
         publication in the Federal Register.

d.   OIRA Designation

     Under EO 12866, OIRA can designate a rule as:



                                             4
(1) Non-significant

    The rule and supporting documentation do not have to be reviewed further by
    OIRA, or by other Federal agencies or offices through OIRA (e.g., SBA) and may
    be submitted to the Federal Register for publication upon completion of USDA
    clearance.

(2) Significant

    OIRA has determined that the rule will:

    (a) Create a serious inconsistency or otherwise interfere with an action taken or
        planned by another Federal agency;

    (b) Materially alter the budgetary impact of entitlement, grants, user fees, or loan
        programs or the rights and obligations of recipients of those programs; or

    (c) Raise novel legal or policy issues arising out of legal mandates, the President’s
        priorities, or the principles set forth in EO 12866, as amended.

    Per EO 12866, as supplemented by EO 13563, Improving Regulation and
    Regulatory Review, rules that have been designated as significant require an
    economic cost-benefit analysis and, depending on the scope of the economic
    effects, may require a threshold Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA), 5 U.S.C. § 602 et
    seq., analysis of the rule’s effects on small entities per the RFA, as amended by
    SBREFA, and EO 13272, Proper Consideration of Small Entities in Agency
    Rulemaking. If a threshold RFA analysis is conducted and supports a determination
    that the rule will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of
    small entities, an RFA analysis is not needed. If such a determination cannot be
    supported, an initial RFA analysis must be completed for the proposed rule,
    followed by a final RFA analysis reflecting public comment as part of the final
    rulemaking.

(3) Economically significant

    (a) OIRA has determined that the rule will lead to an annual effect on the economy
        of $100 million or more or adversely affect in a material way the economy, a
        sector of the economy, productivity, competition, jobs, the environment, public
        health or safety, or State, local, or tribal governments or communities.

    (b) Rules that have been designated as economically significant require a
        comprehensive regulatory impact analysis (RIA), including a cost-benefit
        analysis.




                                       5
   (c) In addition to an RIA, rules that have been designated as economically
       significant require a threshold RFA analysis per the RFA and EO 13272. If the
       threshold RFA analysis supports a determination that the rule will not have a
       significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities, an RFA
       analysis is not needed. If such a determination cannot be supported, an initial
       RFA analysis must be completed for the proposed rule, followed by a final
       RFA analysis reflecting public comment as part of the final rulemaking.

(4) Major

   (a) As defined by Pub. L. No. 103-354, § 304(b)(1) of the FCIR and DAR Act:

       1    Proposed rules that the Secretary of Agriculture estimates will have an
            annual economic impact of $100 million or more as measured in 1994
            dollars; and

       2    The primary purpose of which is to regulate issues of human health,
            human safety, or the environment.

   (b) As defined by the CRA:

       1    OIRA has determined that the rule is economically significant; and

       2    Represents a major increase in costs or prices for consumers, individual
            industries, Federal, State, or local governmental agencies, or geographical
            regions;

            or

       3    Has significant adverse effects on competition, employment, investment,
            productivity, innovation, or on the ability of United States-based
            enterprises to compete with foreign-based enterprises in domestic and
            export markets.

   (c) In addition to RIA and RFA analyses, rules designated as major under Pub. L.
       No. 103-354 require a risk assessment.

   (d) The definitions of major under the FCIR and USDAR Act and the CRA
       subsume and augment the definition of economically significant.
       Consequently, a rule that has not been designated as economically significant
       is highly unlikely to be a major rule. In addition, all major rules are
       economically significant, but not all economically significant rules are major.




                                      6
e.   Exemptions

     (1) Workplans are not prepared for routine or non-sensitive rules, such as those that do
         not have to be published for public comment because they involve minor, purely
         technical, nondiscretionary revisions and those that are covered by an exemption
         listed in Appendix D, Exemptions from EO 12866 Review. These USDA-specific
         exemptions authorized by OIRA in 1994 include amendments to existing marketing
         and promotion orders. New marketing and promotion orders are not exempt and
         require a workplan and an OIRA designation. When in doubt regarding
         exemptions, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should contact OBPA-
         LRAS.

     (2) Workplans are also not required for routine Federal Register notices such as
         announcements of meetings or public hearings, extensions of public comment
         periods, or other informational notices and actions that are not designed to
         implement, interpret, or prescribe law or policy or describe procedure or practice
         requirements.

     (3) When appropriate, a Mission Area, agency, or staff office, working through OBPA,
         may petition OIRA for additional exemptions.

f.   NEPA Compliance

     (1) The National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), 42 U.S.C. § 4321 et seq. requires
         all Federal agencies to include in proposals for major Federal actions (40 CFR §
         1508.1(q)) significantly affecting the quality of the human environment a detailed
         statement on the environmental impact of the proposed action and alternatives to
         the proposed action, i.e., an environmental impact statement (EIS).

     (2) The definition of a major Federal action under NEPA differs from the definitions of
         major under the FCIR and DAR Act and SBREFA in that there is no dollar
         threshold for a major Federal action under NEPA. Not all major Federal actions
         under NEPA will significantly affect the quality of the human environment; those
         that do not significantly affect the quality of the human environment may require
         only preparation of an environmental assessment (EA) or may be categorically
         excluded (i.e., covered by a categorical exclusion (CE)) from documentation in an
         EIS or EA.

     (3) Some USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices whose rulemakings do not
         involve environmental considerations are exempt from this requirement (see 7 CFR
         § 1b.4, Exclusion of agencies, for the list of exempt USDA agencies and staff
         offices). Even if an exemption applies, the agency or staff office head may
         determine that a particular proposed rule would significantly affect the quality of
         the human environment (see last sentence in 7 CFR § 1b.4).




                                            7
       (4) In addition, the U.S. Forest Service has promulgated NEPA regulations and
           directives that include a CE covering most of the agency’s rules, even though they
           often involve environmental considerations, because they are programmatic and do
           not have any effects on the human environment until they are implemented.


6. RULE DEVELOPMENT, CLEARANCE, AND ROCIS

  Once Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices have a designation from OIRA and a RIN for
  a rule, they can initiate additional actions that are required before clearance of the rule.

  a.   Documents Typically Required for USDA Rules

       The following table displays the documents typically required for USDA rules
       depending on their designation.




                                             8
                                  TABLE 1 – Documents Required for USDA Rules


                                       Civil Rights                  Regulatory
                          Preamble
                                         Impact       Cost-Benefit    Impact         Risk        NEPA
Designation    Workplan   and Rule
                                        Analysis       Analysis       Analysis    Assessment   Compliance
                            Text
                                         (CRIA)                        (RIA)
    Non-
                 Yes        Yes            No             No            No           No            No
 Significant
                                                                                               Yes, unless
 Significant     Yes        Yes            Yes            Yes           No           No
                                                                                                exempt
Economically                                                                                   Yes, unless
                 Yes        Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes          No
 Significant                                                                                    exempt
  Major per
                                                                                               Yes, unless
 Pub. L. No.     Yes        Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
                                                                                                exempt
  103-354
  Major per
                                                                                               Yes, unless
 Pub. L. No.     Yes        Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes          No
                                                                                                exempt
  104-121
b.   Rules that are Exempt from EO 12866 Review and Non-Significant Rules

     (1) Mission Area, agency, or staff office:

         (a) Drafts rule text and preamble; and

         (b) Compiles any supporting documents and information for the rulemaking
             record.

     (2) Clearance:

         (a) OGC;

         (b) OBPA-LRAS;

         (c) Mission Area; and

         (d) OSEC (if needed).

     (3) Publication and Compliance:

         (a) Publication in the Federal Register and concurrently online;

         (b) Regulations.gov (for public comment); and

         (c) Compliance with the CRA for all interim final, direct final, and final rules.

c.   Significant, Economically Significant, and Major Rules

     (1) Mission Area, agency, or staff office:

         (a) Drafts rule text and preamble; CRIA; RIA; if there are economic effects,
             threshold or initial RFA analysis; and risk assessment, if applicable; and

         (b) Compiles any supporting documents and information for the rulemaking
             record.

     (2) Clearance:

         (a) OGC;

         (b) Simultaneous 2-week review:

              1    OBPA-LRAS;




                                             10
              2   OCE;

              3   Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO);

              4   Office of Tribal Relations (OTR);

              5   Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights (OASCR); and

              6   Mission Area;

         (c) OSEC; and

         (d) OIRA 90-day review. If OIRA has reviewed a proposed or interim final rule
             and there has been no material change in the facts and circumstances upon
             which the rule is based, the OIRA review period for the final rule is 45
             calendar days. The OIRA review period may be extended once by the Director
             of OMB by up to 30 calendar days. In addition, the OIRA review period may
             be extended at the request of the Secretary of Agriculture.

     (3) Publication and Compliance:

         (a) Publication in the Federal Register and concurrently online;

         (b) Regulations.gov (for public comment); and

         (c) Compliance with the CRA for all interim final, direct final, and final rules.

d.   ROCIS

     ROCIS is an online database managed by the General Services Administration (GSA)
     through which Federal agencies and departments submit rules and information collection
     packages to OIRA for review. ROCIS also permits Federal agencies and departments to
     update and submit their fall and spring Regulatory Agenda to OIRA. Finally, ROCIS
     informs OIRA’s Reginfo.gov. In summary, ROCIS permits USDA Mission Areas,
     agencies, and staff offices to:

     (1) Obtain a RIN:

         (a) A RIN is obtained for new rules after a significance designation by OIRA and
             authorization by OBPA-LRAS.

         (b) The unique eight-digit RIN, with the first four digits constituting the Mission
             Area, agency, or staff office’s identifier code, stays with the rule from
             proposed or interim final to final. Upon publication of the final rule, the RIN is
             retired.




                                            11
         (c) The RIN helps track rules in the spring and fall Regulatory Agenda and in the
             Federal Register.

     (2) Submit significant rules to OIRA for review:

         (a) OIRA has up to 90 calendar days to review a rule.

         (b) Significant rules under OIRA review are posted at Reginfo.gov.

     (3) Submit a spring and fall Regulatory Agenda for OIRA review:

         (a) A successful ROCIS submission is contingent upon accurate completion of all
             USDA Mission Area, agency, or staff office RIN data fields.

         (b) Upon approval by OIRA, the Regulatory Agenda is posted on Reginfo.gov.

e.   Additional Rulemaking Procedures

     (1) Public Notice and Comment

         Consistent with EO 12866, the comment period for proposed and interim final rules
         generally should be 60 calendar days and no less than 30 calendar days. For more
         complex rules, the comment period may be longer, even up to 180 calendar days.
         Depending on the rule and associated circumstances, the comment period can vary.
         Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should consult with OGC and policy
         officials to determine the appropriate comment period.

     (2) Rules That Go Into Effect Without Opportunity for Public Comment

         An interim rule goes into effect upon publication without prior opportunity for
         public comment based upon a finding of good cause by the Mission Area, agency,
         or staff office, as provided in 5 U.S.C. § 553(b), that an exigency exists and that
         implementing the rule after public comments are considered would be contrary to
         the public interest. An example of such an exigency would be a public health or
         safety crisis. An interim final rule is published for public comment, and timely,
         relevant comments received on the interim final rule are considered in developing
         the final rule. A final rule may be published without public comment based upon a
         finding of good cause by the Mission Area, agency, or staff office, as provided by 5
         U.S.C. § 553(b), that public comment is unnecessary per because the rule involves
         minor, purely technical, nondiscretionary revisions. An example would be a rule
         implementing a statutory formula for inflation-adjusted civil penalties. The finding
         of good cause must be included in the Federal Register notice for an interim final
         rule or a final rule published without public comment. Consultation with OGC is
         recommended regarding applicability of these exceptions to the standard public
         notice and comment process.




                                           12
       (3) EO 13175 – Tribal Consultation

           USDA will consult with tribes on rules that have tribal implications. As stated in
           EO 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments: “Each
           agency shall have an accountable process to ensure meaningful and timely input by
           Tribal officials in the development of regulatory policies that have tribal
           implications.” Additionally, as stated in DR 1350-002, Tribal Consultation,
           Coordination, and Collaboration: “Each USDA agency shall provide an
           opportunity for Tribes to participate in policy development to the greatest extent
           practicable and permitted by law. Each Tribe will be provided the opportunity for
           timely and meaningful government-to-government consultation regarding policy
           actions which may have tribal implications.”


7. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   Agency and Staff Office Heads, acting in consultation with their Mission Areas, will:

       (1) Designate a regulatory officer or coordinator as the point of contact within the
           agency on regulatory matters;

       (2) Approve all proposed rules and any applicable analyses in compliance with
           applicable laws, EOs, OMB circulars, memoranda, and guidance, and USDA
           requirements prior to forwarding the rules:

           (a) To OGC for legal sufficiency clearance;

           (b) To OBPA (after OGC clearance for legal sufficiency) to initiate Department-
               level review and clearance. Submittals to OBPA must include OGC approval
               for legal sufficiency. Significant, economically significant, and major rules
               must have a Departmental clearance sheet included (see Appendix F,
               Clearance Sheet for Significant, Economically Significant, and Major Rules);

       (3) Approve exemptions from EO 12866 review for rules prior to forwarding them to
           their Mission Areas for review and clearance;

       (4) Approve significant guidance documents prior to forwarding them to OBPA review
           and clearance;

       (5) Update and complete all data fields in ROCIS for each Mission Area, agency, or
           staff office RIN in compliance with OBPA and OIRA data calls for completing
           spring and fall Regulatory Agenda and workplan cycles. Commensurate with these
           data calls and USDA policy determinations, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
           offices must:

           (a) Add new RINs in ROCIS as needed;



                                              13
    (b) Determine which RINs are active, inactive, or long-term or should be
        withdrawn from ROCIS;

    (c) Ensure that all RINs and annual regulatory plans account for international
        cooperation in rulemaking as applicable, e.g., for rules with significant
        international impacts, in accordance with EO 13609, Promoting International
        Regulatory Cooperation;

(6) Comply with the requirements of 7 CFR § 1.27, Rulemaking and other notice
    procedures, of USDA’s regulations regarding rulemaking and other notice
    procedures;

(7) Provide timely and complete public online access to the rulemaking docket on
    Regulations.gov, including all relevant scientific and technical findings, in a format
    that can be easily searched and downloaded;

(8) Manage the rulemaking docket, including posting of public comments, on the
    Federal Docket Management System (FDMS);

(9) Develop and maintain current plans for reviewing existing significant rules as
    required by Section 5, Existing Regulations, of EO 12866 and Section 6,
    Retrospective Analyses of Existing Rules, of EO 13563, Improving Regulation and
    Regulatory Review, to ensure that reviews are conducted in a timely manner and
    needed modifications are made to existing rules;

(10) Maintain adequate records of the conclusion of reviews of existing significant rules,
     including online release, per Section 6 of EO 13563;

(11) Notify the Chief Counsel for Advocacy of the SBA of any proposed rule that may
     have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities per the
     RFA either:

    (a) When the rule is submitted to OIRA for EO 12866 or EO 13563 review, if
        required; or

    (b) At a reasonable time prior to the publication of the proposed rule, if EO 12866
        or EO 13563 review is not required;

(12) Ensure compliance with Section 212(a)(6) of the SBREFA, as amended by Pub. L.
     No. 110-28, Small Business and Work Opportunity Act of 2007, regarding annual
     reporting to Congress on publication of small entity compliance guides;

(13) Conduct peer review of influential scientific information and highly influential
     scientific assessments, which will be disseminated by the Mission Area, agency, or
     staff office in compliance with USDA’s Peer Review Guidelines;



                                       14
     (14) Identify new or updated Mission Area, agency, or staff office-identified guidance
          documents;

     (15) Maintain an online portal for all guidance documents in effect; and

     (16) Ensure ROCIS training through GSA for new Mission Area, agency, and staff
          office users to coincide with spring and fall Regulatory Agenda cycles.

b.   The Chief Information Officer will:

     (1) Review all rules which contain information collection requirements for compliance
         with the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (PRA), 44 U.S.C. § 3501 et seq. The
         PRA covers requests for information from the public such as forms, reports, and
         surveys; recordkeeping requirements for businesses; third-party or public
         disclosures such as nutrition labeling requirements for food; and any other
         information collected from the public; and

     (2) Assist Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices with identification of information
         collection requirements and with the submission of information collection requests
         under the PRA to OMB via ROCIS for approval. DR 3410-001, Information
         Collection Activities – Collection of Information from the Public, provides detailed
         instructions concerning preparation, review, and clearance of information
         collections.

c.   Reviewing staff organizations will:

     Utilize their expertise and exercise their independent oversight authority in drafting and
     reviewing rules. The reviewing staff organizations consist of OGC, OCE, OBPA, OTR,
     and OASCR.

     (1) The Chief Economist will:

         (a) Review regulatory cost-benefit analyses for economically significant, major,
             and significant regulatory actions to ensure that:

              1    The analytical techniques used are adequate;

              2    The analysis is accurate and consistent;

              3    If required, reasonable alternatives to the regulatory action have been
                   considered and analyzed; and

              4    Any required risk assessment has been conducted. For major proposed
                   rules under Pub. L. No. 103-354, the Director of OCE’s Office of Risk
                   Assessment and Cost-Benefit Analysis (ORACBA) will work with



                                            15
             Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to develop the required risk
             assessment and the cost-benefit analysis and review and approve the
             analysis and assessment to ensure that the requirements of Pub. L. No.
             103-354 are met. If it is not practicable to conduct a risk assessment and
             cost-benefit analysis, as required by Pub. L. No. 103-354, the Director of
             ORACBA will provide, in the applicable proposed major regulation, an
             explanation of why they were not conducted; and

    (b) Review workplans that have been designated as economically significant or
        major by OIRA.

(2) The General Counsel will:

    (a) Review rules for legal sufficiency. This review should include a review of the
        justifications for reliance on the good cause exception for publication of an
        interim final rule or final rule without public comment, or for publication of a
        proposed rule with an abbreviated comment period. Regulatory actions should
        also be reviewed for conformity with applicable statutes, regulations, and
        USDA policy;

    (b) Assist Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices, as needed, in drafting rules;

    (c) If an analysis of alternatives is required for significant and economically
        significant rules, review the analysis (including legal issues);

    (d) Review regulatory certifications in Federal Register notices for compliance
        with applicable EOs; and

    (e) Review and clear workplans drafted by Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
        offices.

(3) The Director of OBPA will:

    (a) Ensure that all rules and all required analyses described in this DR are
        consistent with applicable OMB circulars, memoranda, and guidelines,
        statutes, EOs, USDA directives and guidelines, and any other applicable
        requirements;

    (b) Ensure that all rules are consistent with policy and budgetary constraints;

    (c) Serve as the Departmental proxy between Mission Areas, agencies, or staff
        offices and OIRA on all regulatory activities under OIRA review;

    (d) Assist Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices in the development and
        clearance of all rules and significant guidance documents and associated
        analyses;



                                       16
    (e) Facilitate the clearance of workplans and rules through OIRA:

         1   Respond to inquiries from OIRA;

         2   Contact OIRA staff, as needed, on the status of rules under review,
             highlighting as necessary rules experiencing clearance delays;

         3   Maintain records of transmittals to and clearances by OIRA; and

         4   Promptly notify Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices of OIRA’s
             significance determination for any rule;

    (f) Coordinate the development and submission of the spring and fall Regulatory
        Agenda, including the annual regulatory plan;

    (g) Submit all significant, economically significant, and major USDA rules and
        guidance documents to OIRA for EO 12866 and EO 13563 review and
        clearance via ROCIS;

    (h) Under the direction and approval of OSEC, coordinate all OIRA requests for
        USDA review of other Federal agencies’ and departments’ rules under EO
        12866. These requests are submitted by OIRA to OBPA-LRAS via email to
        OBPA-USDA-REG@usda.gov;

    (i) Maintain electronic clearance records for all rules; and

    (j) Assist Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices with adding and approving
        FDMS user accounts.

(4) The Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights (ASCR) will:

    (a) Upon review and recommendation from the OASCR staff, determine whether a
        CRIA prepared by the Mission Area, agency, or staff office for a significant,
        economically significant, or major rule fully addresses the civil rights
        implications of the rule. DR 4300-004, Civil Rights Impact Analysis, requires
        USDA to establish internal systems to identify and analyze the civil rights
        implications and impacts of proposed policy actions before those actions are
        approved and implemented. When an agency or staff office’s Under or
        Assistant Secretary determines that a rule has a civil rights impact, a CRIA
        must be completed per DR 4300-004 and the rule and CRIA must be submitted
        to OASCR for review; and

    (b) Provide technical assistance and advice to Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
        offices regarding the civil rights impact of a rule.




                                      17
       (5) The Director of OTR will:

           (a) Review and clear significant, economically significant, and major rules to
               ensure that they meet the requirements of EO 13175 and USDA DR 1350-002;
               and

           (b) Provide technical assistance and advice to Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
               offices regarding tribal consultation.

       (6) OSEC will:

           Review and clear significant, economically significant, and major rules before they
           are submitted to OIRA for 90-day review and clearance and release for publication
           in the Federal Register.


8. SMALL ENTITY CONSIDERATIONS

  a.   The RFA requires Federal agencies to evaluate the economic impact of rules on small
       entities. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should refer to the SBA Office of
       Advocacy’s A Guide for Government Agencies: How to Comply with the Regulatory
       Flexibility Act.

  b.   Subtitle A of the CRA requires that for each rule or group of related rules for which a
       Mission Area, agency, or staff office is required to prepare a final RFA analysis, the
       Mission Area, agency, or staff office must publish one or more guides, entitled “small
       entity compliance guides,” to assist small entities in complying with the rule. The
       guides must explain in plain language the actions a small entity must take to comply
       with the rule. Each small entity compliance guide must be:

       (1) Posted on a Mission Area, agency, or staff office website; and

       (2) Distributed to known industry contacts, such as small entities, associations, or
           industry leaders affected by the rule.


9. REVIEW OF EXISTING REGULATIONS

  a.   Objectives

       The objectives of review of existing regulations, as stated in EO 12866, EO 13563, and
       EO 13610, Identifying and Reducing Regulatory Burdens, are to:

       (1) Reduce the regulatory burden on the American people, their families, and their
           communities, State and local governments, tribes, and industries;




                                              18
     (2) Determine whether rules promulgated by USDA have become unjustified or
         unnecessary as a result of changed circumstances;

     (3) Confirm that rules are compatible and not duplicative or inappropriately
         burdensome in the aggregate;

     (4) Ensure that all rules are consistent with current regulatory priorities and principles
         set forth in EO 12866 and EO 13563 and with applicable law; and

     (5) Otherwise improve the effectiveness of existing rules.

     To achieve these objectives, existing regulations are to be reviewed on an ongoing basis.
     Under and Assistant Secretaries are responsible for ensuring that these reviews are
     accomplished.

b.   Regulatory Review Plans

     Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must maintain regulatory review plans which
     establish priorities for review of existing rules. Generally, significant, economically
     significant, and major rules should be given the highest level of priority in any review
     plan. The regulatory review plans must provide for review of existing rules every 5
     years. Regulatory review plans and revisions to regulatory review plans must be
     approved by the appropriate Under or Assistant Secretary.

c.   Criteria for Review

     Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should review an existing rule in accordance
     with the following factors:

     (1) The continued need for the rule;

     (2) Public comments or petitions concerning the rule received after its promulgation;

     (3) The complexity of the rule;

     (4) The extent to which the rule overlaps, duplicates, or conflicts with other Federal
         rules, and, to the extent feasible, with State, tribal and local governmental
         regulations;

     (5) The length of time since the rule has been evaluated or the degree to which
         technology, economic conditions, or other factors have changed in the areas
         affected by the rule;

     (6) The extent to which there is opportunity to reduce governmental or
         nongovernmental burdens while still achieving statutory objectives and
         requirements;



                                             19
       (7) Whether proper tribal consultation occurred when USDA promulgated the rule; and

       (8) Any other factors deemed appropriate.

  d.   Conclusion of Review

       (1) The Mission Area, agency, or staff office head should determine, based on the
           review, whether a rule should remain in effect without revision or be revised or
           rescinded. A rulemaking file must be created for each review.

       (2) If a determination is made that a rule should be revised or rescinded, the Mission
           Area, agency, or staff office should initiate revision or rescission of the rule subject
           to the requirements of this DR, including applicable Executive Orders and
           preparation of a workplan and any analyses required for significant, economically
           significant, and major rules.


10. CONGRESSSIONAL REVIEW ACT

  a.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are responsible for compliance with the CRA.
       Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must submit on the date of publication in the
       Federal Register a copy of all final, direct final, and interim final rules, the RIA and
       threshold or final RFA analysis (if applicable), and a completed CRA form to the:

       (1) Government Accountability Office (GAO)

           (a) Via email to: RulesC@GAO.gov;

           (b) Including a portable document format (PDF) file of the completed and signed
               OMB Submission of Federal Rules Under the Congressional Review Act form;
               and

           (c) With a copy to OBPA-USDA-REG@usda.gov.

       (2) U.S. House of Representatives

           (a) Via the U.S. Postal Service mailing address: Office of the Speaker of the
               House, H-209, the Capitol, Washington, DC 20515; and

           (b) With an original signature in blue ink from an authorized Mission Area,
               agency, or staff office official.




                                               20
       (4) U.S. Senate

           (a) Via the U.S. Postal Service mailing address: Office of the President of the
               Senate, S-212, the Capitol, Washington, DC 20510; and

           (b) With an original signature in blue ink from an authorized Mission Area,
               agency, or staff office official.

  b.   Reviewing and policy officials at USDA must be familiar with the CRA’s application in
       its entirety, its provision for Congressional disapproval of an agency rule subject to the
       CRA, and its applicability to Mission Area, agency, or staff office-issued guidance
       documents. Please see OMB Memorandum M-19-14, Guidance on Compliance with the
       Congressional Review Act.

  c.   Generally, except as provided by 5 U.S.C. § 553(d) and when a good cause exemption
       applies, non-major rules take effect 30 calendar days after the final rule is published in
       the Federal Register. For a major rule, the effective date is delayed for 60 calendar days
       after publication in the Federal Register, provided the agency has submitted the final
       rule and supporting documentation to Congress and GAO on the date of publication of
       the final rule.


11. GUIDANCE DOCUMENTS

  A guidance document is a Mission Area, agency, or staff office statement of general
  applicability that is intended to have future effect on the behavior of regulated parties and
  that sets forth a policy on a statutory, regulatory, or technical issue or the interpretation of a
  statute or regulation. Guidance documents come in a variety of formats, including
  interpretive memoranda, policy statements, manuals, bulletins, and advisories. While not
  codified in the CFR, guidance documents can still have the legal effect of a legislative rule in
  that they can impose requirements on the public or can create a serious inconsistency or
  otherwise interfere with an action taken or planned by another Federal agency. Accordingly,
  to ensure accountability, transparency, and consistency in issuance of guidance documents,
  the following process at USDA is established for those “significant” guidance documents that
  may have the legal effect of a legislative rule in that they may impose requirements on the
  public or industry or that create a serious inconsistency or otherwise interfere with an action
  taken or planned by another Federal agency:

  a.   The Mission Area, agency, or staff office submits the significant guidance document to
       OGC to determine whether legally binding;

  b.   The Mission Area, agency, or staff office submits the significant guidance document to
       OBPA-LRAS;

  c.   OBPA-LRAS submits the guidance document package to OIRA for a significance
       designation and copies OSEC; and



                                               21
  d.   OIRA submits its significance designation and, for a final guidance document, its CRA
       designation to OBPA-LRAS.

  For guidance documents designated as significant by OIRA, agencies must clear the
  document through OBPA-LRAS. Typically, significant guidance documents will need
  OBPA, OCE, and OSEC clearance before submission to ROCIS for OIRA’s 90-day review.
  For more information on new and existing guidance documents, see OMB M-07-07, Issuance
  of OMB’s “Final Bulletin for Agency Good Guidance Practices.”


12. ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD AND ELECTRONIC GOVERNMENT POLICY

  a.   Administrative Record

       Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices within USDA must maintain an administrative
       record (AR) for each of their rules. The AR for a rule should include but is not limited
       to:

       (1) Documents and information supporting the rule (including those in digital format)
           that are prepared, reviewed, or received by Mission Area, agency, or staff office
           personnel and are relied upon by decision-makers in conducting the rulemaking;

       (2) Comments received on the rule;

       (3) Communications concerning the rule, both inside and outside the Federal
           Government;

       (4) Summaries and transcripts of any meetings or hearings concerning the rule,
           including consultation with tribes; and

       (5) All Federal Register notices concerning the rule.

       Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should maintain as reference materials all
       policies, guidelines, directives, manuals, articles and books relevant to a rule. Guidance
       documents that directly support a rule should be included in the AR. Documents not in
       existence at the time a rulemaking decision is made should not be included in the AR.
       As some of the documents produced may be privileged or otherwise should not be
       included in the AR, OGC must be consulted on the contents and form of the AR prior to
       dissemination outside USDA. Mission Area, agency, and staff office personnel may
       also contact OGC prior to and during preparation of the AR regarding its contents and
       preparation. In maintaining a current AR, Mission Area, agency, and staff office
       personnel should consult with their records officer and refer to DR 3080-001, Records
       Management.




                                              22
  b.   Electronic Government Policy

       (1) The E-Government Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-347, is the basis by which each
           Mission Area, agency, or staff office must, to the maximum extent feasible, ensure
           that its rules and significant guidance documents are available on the internet for
           public access through Regulations.gov or a central USDA regulatory web page.
           These internet postings should include, to the extent possible and consistent with
           copyright laws, links to the documents relied upon by the Mission Area, agency, or
           staff office in rulemaking decisions. If linking is not possible, include a complete
           citation to the publication. Per the principles of transparency and openness in the
           rulemaking process, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should also promote
           consistency in electronic dockets and their associated documents on
           Regulations.gov.

       (2) FDMS will be used by Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to manage their
           electronic (e-) rulemaking and non-rulemaking dockets. Although this is a
           centralized Governmentwide docket management system and records repository,
           Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices using FDMS are responsible for creating,
           maintaining, and properly managing their own records within the system, including
           the posting of any public comments. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may
           contact the e-Rulemaking help desk at (877) 378-5457 for assistance.


13. INTERAGENCY REGULATORY REVIEWS

  OIRA frequently circulates other Federal agencies’ and departments’ significant rules and
  guidance documents under its review for USDA review and comment. Such interagency
  feedback can be critical to OIRA’s reviews. While OBPA coordinates this process for
  USDA, relevant Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will be requested to review and
  provide comment as needed, including participating in OIRA interagency conference calls.
  The process for interagency regulatory reviews is as follows:

  a.   OIRA submits a request to OBPA-USDA-REG@usda.gov;

  b.   OBPA-LRAS submits a request to Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices and assigns
       a due date for comments;

  c.   Relevant Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices provide comments to OBPA-LRAS;
       and

  d.   OSEC reviews and approves comments for submission by OBPA-LRAS to OIRA.




                                              23
14. INQUIRIES

   Direct all inquiries regarding this DR to OBPA-LRAS at OBPA-USDA-REG@usda.gov or
   (202) 720-1516.


                                       -END-




                                         24
                               APPENDIX A

                   ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AMS        Agricultural Marketing Service
ANPR       Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking
APA        Administrative Procedure Act
APHIS      Animal Plant Health Inspection Service
AR         Administrative Record
ASCR       Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
CE         Categorical Exclusion
CFR        Code of Federal Regulations
CRA        Congressional Review Act
CRIA       Civil Rights Impact Analysis
CSFP       Commodity Supplemental Food Program
DR         Departmental Regulation
EA         Environmental Assessment
EIS        Environmental Impact Statement
EO         Executive Order
FCIR and
DAR Act    Federal Crop Insurance Reform and Department of Agriculture
           Reorganization Act of 1994
FDMS       Federal Docket Management System
FGIS       Federal Grain Inspection Service (AMS Component)
GAO        Government Accountability Office
GSA        General Services Administration
LRAS       Legislative and Regulatory Affairs Staff
NARA       National Archives and Records Administration
NEPA       National Environmental Policy Act
NPR        Notice of Proposed Rulemaking
OASCR      Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
OBPA       Office of Budget and Program Analysis
OCE        Office of the Chief Economist
OCIO       Office of the Chief Information Officer
OGC        Office of the General Counsel
OIRA       Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OMB Component)
OMB        Office of Management and Budget
ORACBA     Office of Risk Assessment and Cost-Benefit Analysis (OCE Component)
OSEC       Office of the Secretary
OTR        Office of Tribal Relations
PDF        Portable Document Format
Pub. L.    Public Law
PRA        Paperwork Reduction Act
RFA        Regulatory Flexibility Act
RIA        Regulatory Impact Analysis



                                    A-1
RIN      Regulatory Identification Number
RISC     Regulatory Information Service Center
ROCIS    Regulatory Information Service Center and Office of Information and
         Regulatory Affairs Consolidated Information System
RUS      Rural Utilities Service
SBA      Small Business Administration
SBREFA   Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act
SNAP     Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture
WIC      Women, Infants, and Children




                                   A-2
                                           APPENDIX B

                                           DEFINITIONS


Agency. Organizational units of the Department, other than staff offices as defined below,
whose heads report to officials within the Office of the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Under
Secretaries, Assistant Secretaries, and Assistant to the Secretary. (Source: USDA,
DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System)

Guidance. Any statement of agency policy or interpretation concerning a statute, regulation, or
technical matter within the jurisdiction of the agency that is intended to have general
applicability and future effect, but which is not intended to have the force or effect of law in its
own right and is not otherwise required by statute to satisfy the rulemaking procedures specified
in 5 U.S.C.

Informal Rulemaking. Rulemaking by a Government agency in accordance with the provisions
of Section 553 of the Administrative Procedure Act — also called notice-and-comment
rulemaking.

Legislative Rule. A rule that has legal effect, i.e., a rule that imposes, eliminates, or modifies
requirements on the public.

Mission Area. A group of agencies with related functions that report to the same Under or
Assistant Secretary. Research, Education, and Economics is an example of a Mission Area.
(Source: USDA, DR 0100-001)

Non-Legislative Rule. A rule that has no legal effect and merely interprets existing legal
obligations (interpretative rule) or states the agency’s view on a matter of policy without creating
legal rights or obligations (general statement of policy).

Rule or Regulation. An agency statement of general applicability and future effect designed to
implement, interpret, or prescribe law or policy or describe its procedure or practice
requirements.

Staff Office. Departmental administrative offices whose heads report to officials within the
Office of the Secretary. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-001)

Tribe. The governing body of any Indian or Alaska Native tribe, band, nation, pueblo, village,
community, component band, or component reservation, individually recognized (including
parenthetically) in the list published most recently pursuant to Section 104 of the Federally
Recognized Indian Tribe List Act of 1994. (Source: 25 U.S.C. § 5131, Publication of List of
Recognized Tribes)




                                                 B-1
                                         APPENDIX C

                              AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


7 CFR § 1b.4, Exclusion of agencies

7 CFR § 1.27, Rulemaking and other notice procedures

7 CFR Part 810, Official United States Standards for Grain

9 CFR Part 97, Overtime Services Relating to Imports and Exports

9 CFR Part 354, Voluntary Inspection of Rabbits and Edible Products Thereof

40 CFR § 1508.1, Definitions

5 U.S.C. § 553, Rule Making

5 U.S.C. § 601, Definitions

5 U.S.C. § 604, Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis

25 U.S.C. § 5131, Publication of List of Recognized Tribes

Administrative Procedure Act (APA), 5 U.S.C. §§ 551-559

E-Government Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-347, December 17, 2002

EO 12866, Regulatory Planning and Review, September 30, 1993

EO 13175, Consultation and Coordination With Indian Tribal Governments, November 6, 2000

EO 13272, Proper Consideration of Small Entities in Agency Rulemaking, August 13, 2002

EO 13563, Improving Regulation and Regulatory Review, January 18, 2011

EO 13609, Promoting International Regulatory Cooperation, May 1, 2012

EO 13610, Identifying and Reducing Regulatory Burdens, May 10, 2012

Federal Crop Insurance Reform and Department of Agriculture Reorganization Act of 1994, 7
U.S.C. § 2204e, Office of Risk Assessment and Cost-Benefit Analysis

Federally Recognized Indian Tribe List Act of 1994, Pub. L. No. 103-454, November 2, 1994




                                              C-1
National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), Office of the Federal Register,
Document Drafting Handbook, August 2018 Edition, Revision 1.3, March 24, 2021

National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), 42 U.S.C. § 4321 et seq.

OMB Form: Submission of Federal Rules Under the Congressional Review Act, March 23, 1999

OMB M-07-07, Issuance of OMB’s Final Bulletin for Agency Good Guidance Practices, January
18, 2007

OMB M-19-14, Guidance on Compliance with the Congressional Review Act, April 11, 2019

OMB, OIRA, Memorandum for the President’s Management Council, Increasing Openness in
the Rulemaking Process – Improving Electronic Dockets, May 28, 2010

OMB, OIRA, Reginfo.gov

OMB, OIRA, Reginfo.gov, Reg Map Federal Rulemaking Process and Authorities website

OMB, OIRA, Regulations.gov

OMB, OIRA, Statements of Regulatory Priorities

OMB, OIRA, Unified Regulatory Agenda of Regulatory and Deregulatory Actions

Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (PRA), 44 U.S.C. § 3501 et seq.

Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA), 5 U.S.C. Chapter 6, The Analysis of Regulatory Functions

SBA, Office of Advocacy, A Guide for Government Agencies: How to Comply with the
Regulatory Flexibility Act, August 2017

Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act of 1996 (SBREFA), 5 U.S.C. Chapter 8,
Congressional Review of Agency Rulemaking

Small Business and Work Opportunity Act of 2007, Pub. L. No. 110-28, May 25, 2007, § 8302,
Enhanced Compliance Assistance for Small Businesses

Swine Health Protection Act, Pub. L. No. 96-468, October 17, 1980

USDA DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System, January 4, 2018

USDA DR 1350-002, Tribal Consultation, Coordination, and Collaboration, January 18, 2013

USDA DR 3080-001, Records Management, August 16, 2016




                                             C-2
USDA DR 3410-001, Information Collection Activities – Collection of Information from the
Public, January 26, 2022

USDA DR 4300-004, Civil Rights and Impact Analysis, October 17, 2016



USDA, Directives by Categories website

USDA, OCIO, Peer Review Guidelines




                                            C-3
                                        APPENDIX D

                         EXEMPTIONS FROM EO 12866 REVIEW


1. AGRICULTURAL MARKETING SERVICE

  a.   Agricultural Marketing Service (AMS) regulations that establish voluntary standards for
       grading the quality of food.

  b.   Administrative or "housekeeping" rules. Rules that are designed to improve operational
       efficiency of programs through updating outmoded administrative practices or
       procedures, correcting technical errors, clarifying language or other technical changes.

  c.   Amendments to existing marketing and promotion orders and plans and proposed rules,
       interim final rules, and final rules which issue or revise the rules and regulations which
       are needed to carry out national research and promotion programs. This exemption is
       only for amendments to existing programs, not the implementation of newly authorized
       research and promotion programs.

2. ANIMAL PLANT HEALTH INSPECTION SERVICE

  a.   Animal Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) rules and notices concerning
       quarantine actions and related measures to prevent the spread of animal and plant pests
       and diseases.

  b.   APHIS rules affirming actions taken on an emergency basis if no adverse comments
       were received.

  c.   Additions to or deletions from lists of ports approved for the importation or exportation
       of certain animals or plants.

  d.   Rules declaring foreign countries to be affected by or to be free from certain animal or
       plant diseases or pests.

  e.   Rules extending or reducing regulated areas associated with established domestic
       quarantines, and rules releasing the quarantine when the danger from the infestation is
       over.

  f.   Revisions of 9 CFR Part 97, Overtime Services Relating to Imports and Exports, and
       9 CFR Part 354, Voluntary Inspection of Rabbits and Edible Products Thereof, not
       including changes to user fees.

  g.   Additions to or deletions from lists of recognized breeds and books of record.




                                              D-1
  h.   Additions to or deletions from lists of States meeting criteria for receiving animals
       imported from disease-affected countries.

  i.   Additions to or deletions from lists of plant pests, plant diseases, or noxious weeds.

  j.   Changes in plant or animal disease status of States or areas under domestic quarantines.

  k.   Changes in status of States under the Swine Health Protection Act, Pub. L. No. 96-468.

  l.   Additions to and deletions from lists of approved pesticides and other treatment
       procedures for various regulated articles.

  m. Additions to or deletions from lists of official tests for various animal diseases.

3. FEDERAL GRAIN INSPECTION SERVICE

  Routine permissive marketing standards published by FGIS under the Agricultural Marketing
  Act of 1946 and under the United States Grain Standards Act, Official United States
  Standards for Grain.

4. FOOD AND NUTRITION SERVICE

  a.   Notices that revise reimbursement rates and eligibility criteria for the School Lunch,
       Child and Adult Care Food, and other nutrition programs.

  b.   Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) notices that set eligibility criteria
       and deduction policy.

  c.   Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants and Children (WIC) Poverty
       Income Guidelines.

  d.   Commodity Supplemental Food Program (CSFP) Poverty Guidelines.

  e.   National Advisory Council on Maternal, Infant and Fetal Nutrition Meeting Notice.

5. FEDERAL CROP INSURANCE CORPORATION

  Rules which are amendments to crop specific insurance policies, exclusive of the Small
  Grains Crop Insurance Policy (wheat, oats, flax, barley, and rye), Cotton Crop Insurance
  Policy, and Coarse Grains Crop Insurance Policy (soybeans, corn, and gain sorghum).

6. RURAL DEVELOPMENT

  Rural Utilities Service (RUS) rules concerning standards and specification for construction
  and materials.




                                              D-2
                                          APPENDIX E

                       WORKPLAN INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS


The following information must be included when submitting a workplan to OBPA-LRAS:

1. Agency or staff office name.

2. Under or Assistant Secretary’s recommended designation of significance (non-significant,
   significant, economically significant, or major under Pub. L. No. 103-354).

3. Signature of Under or Assistant Secretary and date.

4. Signature of agency or staff office head and date.

5. Descriptive title (include CFR part or subpart if applicable).

6. Type of action (ANPR, proposed, interim final, final, direct final, other).

7. Description of action and agency or staff office contact:

   a.   Briefly describe what the current regulations require or allow and how you wish to
        change them. If this action does not involve a change to the regulations, briefly describe
        the action you wish to take.

   b.   Briefly describe the justification for this action (what problem is being addressed, the
        objectives of the action, the alternatives considered, and the expected results of the
        action).

   c.   Briefly discuss other issues associated with this action, including any significant changes
        in program operations; effects on other Federal agencies and State and local
        governments, and the extent of any related consultations; alternatives considered; time
        constraints (state here if docket needs to be published by a specific date and why); and
        why the action is important, sensitive, controversial, or precedent setting.

   d.   Name, title, telephone number, and e-mail address of project manager or other lead
        agency or staff office contact and backup contact, if available.

8. Briefly discuss the potential economic effects of this action, including benefits and costs,
   economic effects on small entities, and budgetary effects.

9. Did the Mission Area, agency, or staff office consider the potential significant effects of this
   action on the human environment, including significant effects on human health?




                                                E-1
10. EO 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian and Tribal Governments, states that
    agencies must consult with Indian tribal governments about any actions that may have
    substantial direct effects on one or more Indian tribes, on the relationship between the
    Federal Government and Indian tribes, or on the distribution of power and responsibilities
    between the Federal Government and Indian tribes. Please state whether this action will have
    such substantial direct effects.

11. The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 requires agencies to obtain approval from OMB
    before implementing any new information collection. Will this action contain a new
    information collection?

12. State briefly which sections of the CFR will need to be changed as a result of this action (it is
    not necessary to show how the sections will be amended).




                                                E-2
                                         APPENDIX F

    CLEARANCE SHEET FOR SIGNIFICANT, ECONOMICALLY SIGNIFICANT, AND
                             MAJOR RULES


The following signature block information must be included in a clearance sheet when
submitting a Significant, Economically Significant, or Major Rule to OBPA-LRAS:

1. Title of rule.

2. Agency or staff office head signature block and date.

3. OGC signature block and date.

4. OBPA signature block and date.

5. OCE signature block and date.

6. OCIO signature block and date.

7. OASCR signature block and date.

8. OTR signature block and date.

9. Mission Area signature block and date.

10. OSEC signature block and date.




                                              F-1
                                        APPENDIX G

                    CLEARANCE SHEET FOR NON-SIGNIFICANT RULES


The following signature block information must be included in a clearance sheet when
submitting a Non-Significant Rule to OBPA-LRAS:

1. Title of rule.

2. Agency or staff office head signature block and date.

3. OGC signature block and date.

4. OBPA signature block and date.

5. Mission Area signature block and date.

6. OSEC signature block and date.




                                              G-1
