                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                        DR 1521-002
 SUBJECT: Legal Review and Execution of Personnel               DATE:
 Settlement Agreements                                          December 26, 2023
                                                                EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of the General Counsel                             December 26, 2028



Section                                                                                   Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                 1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                      1
3.   Scope                                                                                   2
4.   Policy                                                                                  2
5.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                              3
6.   Inquiries                                                                               4

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                    A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                   B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                    C-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of Agriculture
     (USDA) requirements for obtaining legal sufficiency review and concurrence for monetary
     personnel settlement agreements for certain thresholds. This DR also sets forth the level of
     authority necessary for the execution of settlement agreements by USDA Mission Areas,
     agencies, and staff offices.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     This DR, in tandem with DR 1521-003, Legal Review and Execution of Settlement
     Agreements for Program Civil Rights Matters, supplements DR 1521-001, Legal Review and
     Execution of Non-Personnel and Non-Program Civil Rights Settlement Agreements.
3. SCOPE

  This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices.


4. POLICY

  a.   It is the policy of USDA that monetary settlement agreements be entered into by
       individuals within Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices at sufficiently high levels
       of authority to ensure that the settlements are in the best interests of the Government. It
       also is the policy of USDA that monetary settlement agreements above certain
       thresholds as specified in Section 4c, below, be reviewed by and concurred with by the
       Office of the General Counsel (OGC).

  b.   It is the policy of USDA that, if after reviewing, OGC deems a draft monetary
       settlement agreement legally insufficient or otherwise does not concur, the settlement
       agreement shall not be entered into by the submitting USDA Mission Area, agency, or
       staff office. OGC’s legal sufficiency review and concurrence is in addition to existing
       processes that USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices use for negotiating and
       processing monetary settlement agreements including regulations identified in Appendix
       C, Authorities and References.

  c.   Guidance Specific to Personnel Settlement Agreements.

       (1) It is the policy of USDA to ensure that all personnel complaints, including informal
           and formal Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO), Office of Special Counsel
           (OSC), or Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB) complaints, or in coordination
           with the Department of Justice (DOJ) any Federal court matter arising therefrom are
           resolved expeditiously, cost efficiently, and at the lowest level possible.

       (2) All personnel settlements, whether at the informal or formal stage, require a
           Resolving Official (RO) to resolve the matter on behalf of the Secretary and USDA.

       (3) If the RO must consult with another USDA official in accordance with this directive
           who is not present at the settlement discussion or alternative dispute resolution
           (ADR) efforts, such official must be immediately accessible to the RO during
           settlement discussions or other ADR efforts.

       (4) It is the policy of USDA that prior to making a settlement offer to, or agreeing to a
           settlement offer from, an opposing party for a personnel settlement agreement in an
           amount of $50,000 or more, including attorneys’ fees, all USDA Mission Areas,
           agencies, and staff offices first submit the offer to OGC for legal sufficiency review
           and concurrence. This requirement applies to formal or informal settlements of
           EEO, OSC, and MSPB matters or in coordination with the DOJ any Federal court
           matter arising therefrom.




                                                2
       (5) It is the policy of USDA that prior to making a settlement offer to, or agreeing to a
           settlement offer from, an opposing party for a personnel settlement agreement, all
           USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices first submit the offer to OGC for
           legal sufficiency review and concurrence if the offer:

           (a) Places a political appointee of USDA on a detail outside of USDA or on an
               Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) agreement for 1 year or more; and

           (b) USDA retains the obligation to pay the employee’s salary and benefits during
               the duration of the detail or IPA agreement.

           This requirement applies to formal or informal settlements of EEO, OSC, and
           MSPB matters or in coordination with the DOJ any Federal court matter arising
           therefrom.


5. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA General Counsel will provide legal sufficiency review and concurrence or
       nonconcurrence for settlement agreements above certain thresholds as set forth in
       Section 4, Policy.

  b.   USDA Mission Area Heads, Agency Heads, and Staff Officer Directors will:

       (1) Take the necessary steps to ensure awareness of and compliance with this directive
           within their organization, and to ensure that settlement agreements above the
           thresholds set forth in Section 5d, Approving Official Levels for Personnel
           Settlement Agreements below are provided to the General Counsel for advice,
           required legal sufficiency review, and concurrence; and

       (2) Take the necessary steps to ensure that settlement agreements are approved by
           individuals with sufficient authority within the organization.

  c.   Resolving Officials should:

       (1) Consult with management and appropriate USDA personnel prior to any settlement
           negotiation. The consultation should include acquiring knowledge of the basic facts
           of the case, significant legal issues involved in the case, and any recommendations
           for settlement prior to beginning any settlement negotiation. Consultation may
           include reviewing any written summary or oral briefing on the facts and legal issues
           of the case. The sole purpose of any consultation is to allow the RO to gather
           information the RO deems necessary to make informed decisions in the best interest
           of the Secretary;




                                               3
       (2) Ensure that any settlement agreement is in the best interest of the Government. The
           RO should strive to assess the Government’s position through a fair assessment of
           liability risk and equitable considerations;

       (3) Negotiate in good faith;

       (4) Agree to terms for resolution only within the limits of their authority. If the RO is
           unsure whether they have the authority to offer or approve a requested remedy, the
           RO will stop the settlement discussions until they obtain clarification on the scope
           of their settlement authority; and

       (5) Seek consultation of the General Counsel if uncertain regarding the meaning or
           effect of a proposed settlement agreement or individual settlement term. If any
           concern exists regarding the legality of a proposed term, the RO must consult with
           the General Counsel before placing a signature on the settlement agreement.

  d.   Approving Official Levels for Personnel Settlement Agreements:

       (1) ROs at the Senior Executive Service (SES), Senior Level (SL), Scientific and
           Professional Level (ST), or higher level, will approve personnel settlement
           agreements of up to $5,000, inclusive of all monetary and non-monetary relief that
           carries a dollar value and attorneys’ fees. The General Counsel can consult on
           terms as needed for legal sufficiency.

       (2) Agency Heads, Staff Office Directors, or higher, will approve personnel settlement
           agreements of $5,001 to $49,999, inclusive of all monetary and non-monetary relief
           that carries a dollar value and attorneys’ fees. OGC encourages submission to the
           General Counsel for legal sufficiency review.

       (3) Under Secretaries, Assistant Secretaries, or higher, will approve personnel
           settlement agreements of $50,000 or more, inclusive of all monetary and non-
           monetary relief that carries a dollar value and attorneys’ fees. These agreements
           also require concurrence by the General Counsel prior to execution, as set forth in
           Section 4.


6. INQUIRIES

  USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should direct questions and inquiries
  regarding this DR to OGC at telephone number 202-720-3351.


                                            -END-




                                               4
                           APPENDIX A

                 ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS



ADR    Alternative Dispute Resolution
DOJ    Department of Justice
DR     Departmental Regulation
EEO    Equal Employment Opportunity
EEOC   Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
IPA    Intergovernmental Personnel Act
MSPB   Merit Systems Protection Board
OGC    Office of the General Counsel
OSC    Office of Special Counsel
REE    Research, Education, and Economics
RO     Resolving Official
SES    Senior Executive Service
SL     Senior Level
ST     Scientific and Professional Level
USDA   United States Department of Agriculture




                               A-1
                                          APPENDIX B

                                          DEFINITIONS



Agency. Organizational units of the Department, other than staff offices as defined in the “Staff
Office” definition below, whose heads report to officials within the Office of the Secretary,
Deputy Secretary, Under and Assistant Secretaries. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-001,
Departmental Directives System)

Approving Official. A USDA employee at the Deputy Administrator for Management (or
equivalent position) or higher with delegated authority to approve the monetary settlement terms
proposed by RO for resolution of a matter or case on behalf of the Secretary and USDA when the
proposal meets the criteria of Section 5d in this DR.

Mission Area. A group of agencies with related functions that report to the same Under or
Assistant Secretary. Research, Education, and Economics (REE) is an example of a Mission
Area. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-001)

Personnel Settlement Agreement. Proposed monetary resolution terms, offers of resolution, or
written agreements to resolve informal or formal Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO)
complaints pending in the Department or at the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC), matters pending before the Office of Special Counsel (OSC), appeals pending before
the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB), or in coordination with the DOJ any Federal court
matter arising there from.

Resolving Official (RO). A USDA employee at the Senior Executive Service (SES), Senior
Level (SL), or Scientific and Professional level (ST) or higher level with delegated authority to
resolve a matter or case on behalf of the Secretary and USDA. In personnel settlements, the RO
should not be the responsible management official or an official directly involved in the facts of
the case, as determined by the Mission Area, agency, or staff office, and should be at the same
organizational level or higher of the responsible management official. The RO may be someone
from a different subcomponent of the Mission Area, agency, or staff office involved.

Staff Office. Departmental administrative offices whose heads report to officials within the
Office of the Secretary. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-001)




                                               B-1
                                       APPENDIX C

                                AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES



7 CFR § 2.31, General Counsel

USDA, DM 4300-001, EEO Complaint Processing Procedures, July 20, 2001

USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System, January 4, 2018

USDA, DR 1312-002, Cooperation with the Office of the Special Counsel, Merit Systems
Protection Board, July 17, 1986

USDA, DR 1521-001, Legal Review and Execution of Non-Personnel and Non-Program Civil
Rights Settlement Agreements, February 6, 2024

USDA, DR 1521-003, Legal Review and Execution of Settlement Agreements for Program Civil
Rights Matters, December 26, 2023

USDA, DR 4300-002, Federal Equal Opportunity Recruitment Program Plan, October 18, 1984

USDA, DR 4300-003, Equal Opportunity Public Notification Policy, October 17, 2019

USDA, DR 4300-007, Processing Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Complaints of
Discrimination, August 4, 2021

USDA, DR 4710-001, Alternative Dispute Resolution, April 5, 2006




                                            C-1
