                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                 NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                         DR 1521-001
 SUBJECT: Legal Review and Execution of Non-Personnel            DATE:
 and Non-Program Civil Rights Settlement Agreements              February 6, 2024
                                                                 EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of the General Counsel                              February 6, 2029



Section                                                                                    Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                   1
2.   Scope                                                                                     1
3.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                        2
4.   Policy                                                                                    2
5.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                                3
6.   Inquiries                                                                                 4

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                     A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                    B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                     C-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of Agriculture
     (USDA) requirements for obtaining legal sufficiency review and concurrence for monetary
     non-personnel and non-program civil rights settlement agreements above certain thresholds.
     This DR also sets forth the level of authority necessary for the execution of these settlement
     agreements by USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices.


2. SCOPE

     This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices.
3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This DR supersedes DR 1521-001, Legal Review and Execution of Settlement
       Agreements, dated January 4, 2018.

  b.   See DR 1521-002, Legal Review and Execution of Personnel Settlement Agreements and
       DR 1521-003, Legal Review and Execution of Settlement Agreements for Program Civil
       Rights Matters for requirements for obtaining legal sufficiency review and concurrence
       for program civil rights and personnel settlement agreements.

  c.   This DR is effective immediately when published and will remain in effect until it is
       superseded, or it expires.


4. POLICY

  a.   It is the policy of USDA that monetary settlement agreements be entered into by
       individuals within Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices at sufficiently high levels of
       authority to ensure that the settlements are in the best interests of the Government. It also
       is the policy of USDA that monetary settlement agreements above certain thresholds be
       reviewed by and concurred in by the Office of the General Counsel (OGC).

  b.   It is the policy of USDA that, if after reviewing, OGC deems a draft monetary settlement
       agreement legally insufficient or otherwise does not concur, the settlement agreement must
       not be entered into by the submitting USDA Mission Area, agency, or staff office. OGC’s
       legal sufficiency review and concurrence is in addition to existing processes that USDA
       Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices use for negotiating and processing monetary
       settlement agreements.

  c.   Non-Personnel and Non-Program Civil Rights Settlement Agreements

       (1) It is the policy of USDA that prior to entering into a non-personnel or non-program
           civil rights settlement agreement in an amount of $500,000 or more, inclusive of all
           monetary and non-monetary relief that carries a dollar value and attorneys’ fees or
           more, including attorneys’ fees, all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices
           must first submit the agreement to OGC for legal sufficiency review and concurrence.

       (2) The requirement for OGC review of and concurrence in non-personnel and non-
           program civil rights settlement agreements does not apply to any of the following:

            (a) Settlements pursuant to the Federal Tort Claims Act (28 United States Code
                (U.S.C.) §§ 2671-2680), which are processed in accordance with regulations of
                the Department of Justice and USDA DR 2510-001, Claims Against the United
                State;




                                                2
           (b) Negotiation and settlement of or issuance of final contracting officer decisions
               related to requests for equitable adjustment or claims submitted by
               procurement contractors, which are processed by USDA procurement
               personnel in accordance with the Contract Disputes Act (41 U.S.C. § 7101 et
               seq.), the Federal Acquisition Regulation, and the Agriculture Acquisition
               Regulation; and

           (c) USDA Mission Area, agency, and staff office debt collection activities.


5. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA General Counsel will provide legal sufficiency review and concurrence or
       nonconcurrence for settlement agreements above certain thresholds as set forth in
       Section 4, Policy.

  b.   USDA Mission Area Heads, Agency Heads, and Staff Officer Directors will:

       (1) Take the necessary steps to ensure awareness of and compliance with this directive
           within their organization, and to ensure that settlement agreements above the
           thresholds set forth in Section 4 above are provided to OGC for advice, required
           legal sufficiency review, and concurrence; and

       (2) Take the necessary steps to ensure that settlement agreements are approved by
           individuals with sufficient authority within the organization.

  c.   Approving Official Levels for Non-Personnel and Non-Program civil rights Settlement
       Agreements:

       (1) Non-personnel and non-program civil rights settlement agreements of less than
           $100,000, inclusive of attorneys’ fees, must be approved by the Deputy
           Administrator for Management (or equivalent position), or higher.

       (2) Non-personnel and non-program civil rights settlement agreements of $100,000 to
           $499,999, inclusive of attorneys’ fees, must be approved by an Agency Head, Staff
           Office Director, or higher.

       (3) Non-personnel and non-program civil rights settlement agreements of $500,000 or
           more, inclusive of attorneys’ fees, must be approved by an Under Secretary,
           Assistant Secretary, or higher.




                                              3
7. INQUIRIES

  USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should direct questions and inquiries
  regarding this DR to OGC at telephone number 202-720-3351.


                                          -END-




                                             4
                            APPENDIX A

                 ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


DR       Departmental Regulation
EEO      Equal Employment Opportunity
EEOC     Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
MSPB     Merit Systems Protection Board
OGC      Office of the General Counsel
OSC      Office of Special Counsel
REE      Research, Education, and Economics
RO       Resolving Official
SES      Senior Executive Service
SL       Senior Level
ST       Scientific and Professional Level
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                                 A-1
                                         APPENDIX B

                                         DEFINITIONS


Agency. Organizational units of the Department, other than staff offices as defined below,
whose heads report to officials within the Office of the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Under
Secretaries, Assistant Secretaries, and Assistant to the Secretary. (Source: USDA, DR
0100-001, Departmental Directives System)

Mission Area. A group of agencies with related functions that report to the same Under or
Assistant Secretary. Research, Education, and Economics (REE) is an example of a Mission
Area. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-001)

Non-Personnel Settlement Agreement. Proposed monetary settlement terms and offers for
resolution of non-personnel and non-program civil rights claims and litigation.

Personnel Settlement Agreement. Proposed monetary resolution terms, offers of resolution, or
written agreements to resolve informal or formal Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO)
complaints pending in the Department or at the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC), matters pending before the Office of Special Counsel (OSC), or appeals pending
before the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB).

Resolving Official (RO). A USDA employee at the Senior Executive Service (SES), Senior
Level (SL), or Scientific and Professional level (ST) or higher level with delegated authority
to resolve a matter or case on behalf of the Secretary and USDA. In personnel settlements, the
RO should not be the responsible management official or an official directly involved in the
facts of the case, as determined by the Mission Area, agency, or staff office, and should be at
the same organizational level or higher of the responsible management official. The RO may
be someone from a different subcomponent of the Mission Area, agency, or staff office
involved.

Staff Office. Departmental administrative offices whose heads report to officials within the
Office of the Secretary. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-001)




                                               B-1
                                        APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Agriculture Acquisition Regulation

Contracts Dispute Act, 41 U.S.C. § 7101 et seq.

Federal Acquisition Regulation

Federal Tort Claims Act, 28 U.S.C. §§ 2671-2680

USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System, January 4, 2018

USDA, DR 1521-002, Legal Review and Execution of Personnel Settlement Agreements,
December 26, 2023

USDA, DR 1521-003, Legal Review and Execution of Settlement Agreements for Program Civil
Rights Matters, December 26, 2023

USDA, DR 2510-001, Claims Against the United States, June 4, 2015




                                             C-1
