U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE 

WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250 

DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION 
NUMBER: 
DR 1630-003 
SUBJECT: Space Utilization 
DATE: 
December 20, 2022 
OPI: Office of Property and Environmental Management EXPIRATION DATE: 
December 20, 2027 

Section Page 

1. Purpose 1 
2. Special Instructions/Cancellations 1 
3. Scope 2 
4. Policy 2 
5. Roles and Responsibilities 6 
6. Policy Exceptions 7 
7. Inquiries 7 


Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations A-1 

Appendix B – Definitions B-1 

Appendix C – Authorities and References C-1 

1. PURPOSE 
This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of 
Agriculture’s (USDA) policy for space utilization in all agency locations to maximize the 
efficient use of space. 

2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS 

a. This regulation supersedes the USDA supplement to the Federal Management 
Regulation (FMR) listed as Agriculture Property Management Regulation (AgPMR) 
110-79, Assignment and Utilization of Space, as amended. 




b. This regulation supersedes the following USDA AgPMR Advisories: 




(1) AgPMR Advisory 21-03 (as amended), Space Planning and Utilization Due to 
Increased Telework, dated March 21, 2022; 







(2) AgPMR Advisory 16-01, Space Utilization Rate Policy, dated July 25, 2017; 






(3) AgPMR Advisory 14-01, Space Utilization Rate Exception Guidance, dated May 
20, 2015; 






(4) AgPMR Advisory 14-01, Space Utilization Rate Policy, dated September 5, 2014; 
and 






(5) AgPMR Advisory 14-01, Space Utilization Rate Policy, dated March 4, 2014. 






c. This regulation is effective immediately when published. All Mission Areas, agencies, 
and staff offices must align their policies and procedures with this DR within 6 months 
of the publish date. 




3. SCOPE 

a. This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices. 




b. This DR applies to USDA facilities with a Predominant Use of “Office” as defined by 
the Federal Real Property Council (FRPC) in their Federal Real Property Profile Data 
Dictionary. Facilities with a Predominant Use of something other than “Office” will be 
designed and utilized by the requiring activity based on need. 




4. POLICY 


a. Space Needs Review and Development 

(1) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must review their space requirements on 
an annual basis for changes. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will notify 
the appropriate real property acquisition personnel if they have excess footage that 
can be released or returned to the lessor or the General Services Administration 
(GSA). 






(2) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are required to develop their space needs 
36 months prior to the expiration of a current lease or occupancy agreement. 






(3) When submitting their requests for space, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices 
must calculate Space Needs Units (SNU) for the agency location. The SNU 
calculation considers the decreased need for space due to increased use of telework 
and space sharing. 






(4) To be counted in the SNU for an agency location, positions must be funded on the 
approved staffing plan of the Mission Area, agency, or staff office. Contractors 
must have a contract that requires on-site federally provided space. Other partners 







and cooperators must have a valid agreement that includes the provision of USDA 
space. Vacant positions must be funded to be included in the SNU for an agency 
location. 






(5) The following categories of individuals working in an agency location are assigned 
SNU of 1: 






(a) Full or part-time employees, partners, cooperators, and contractors who work 
in the agency location for 3 or more days per week. 








(b) Funded vacant positions on the approved staffing plan of the Mission Area, 
agency, or staff office in which the employee will be required to work in the 
agency location for 3 or more days per week. 








(6) The following categories of individuals working in an agency location are assigned 
SNU of 0.5: 






(a) Full or part-time employees, partners, cooperators, and contractors who are not 
100% remote workers and who work in the agency location less than 3 days 
per week. 








(b) Funded vacant positions on the approved staffing plan of the Mission Area, 
agency, or staff office in which the employee will not be required to work in 
the agency location for 3 or more days per week. 








(c) Seasonal hires, interns and other temporary staff who are not 100% remote 
workers and are employed at least for 3 months. 








(7) The following categories of individuals are assigned SNU of 0: 






(a) Employees, partners, cooperators, contractors, seasonal hires, interns, or other 
temporary staff who are remote employees not assigned to work out of the 
agency location. 








(b) Other individuals not elsewhere classified (including Farm Service Agency 
County Committee members). 








(8) Public Facing vs. Non-Public Facing. When submitting their requests for space, 
Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must determine whether the SNU should 
be adjusted to account for increased space needs for public-facing agency locations. 
This determination is made on a case-by-case basis. A blanket determination for all 
or some locations within a Mission Area, agency, or staff office is not allowed. 
When more than one USDA Mission Area, agency, or staff office is collocated, it is 
possible to have one public-facing and one non-public facing agency location 
within the building. 







(a) Public-Facing. A public-facing agency location occurs where the mission is to 
service and interact with members of the public conducting personal business 
(e.g., applying for benefits, permits, sales, licenses). 








(b) Non-Public Facing. A non-public facing agency location occurs where the 
mission is something other than interacting with members of the public 
conducting personal business. 








(9) Space Needs Calculation. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must calculate 
the total amount of “all-in” footage allowed in the agency location based on the 
following: 






(a) Public-Facing: 








1 For agency locations with their SNU from 0 up to 5, multiply the SNU by 
350 square feet (SF); 










2 For agency locations with their SNU greater than 5 up to 10, multiply the 
SNU by 300 SF; 










3 For agency locations with their SNU greater than 10 up to 20, multiply the 
SNU by 250 SF; and 










4 For agency locations with their SNU more than 20, multiply the SNU by 
200 SF. 










(b) Non-Public Facing: 








1 For agency locations with their SNU from 0 to 5, multiply the SNU by 
300 SF; 










2 For agency locations with their SNU greater than 5 up to 10, multiply the 
SNU by 250 SF; 










3 For agency locations with their SNU greater than 10 up to 20, multiply the 
SNU by 200 SF; and 










4 For agency locations with their SNU more than 20, multiply the SNU by 
150 SF. 










(c) USDA warehouses, ware yards, garages, and sheds are not included in the 
allowable “all-in” space needs calculation. 








(d) Shared space is split between the agencies based on the percentage of space the 
Mission Area, agency, or staff office occupies out of the total amount of space 
USDA occupies. 









b. Space Utilization 

(1) Utilization Rate (UR) 






(a) UR measures how efficiently USDA utilizes its office spaces. USDA uses an 
“all-in” approach to calculating space utilization. Using the same rules above 
in space needs development, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must 
calculate the UR by dividing the total usable square feet assigned to the 
Mission, Area, agency, or staff office by the SNU of the Mission Area, agency, 
or staff office. 








(b) Total usable square feet are determined in accordance with the American 
National Standards Institute/Building Owners and Managers Association 
Office Area BOMA Standards website. The standard is available only for 
purchase. The Office of Property and Environmental Management (OPEM) 
will maintain a current copy of the standard so questions on it can be submitted 
to OPEM.RealProperty@usda.gov. 








(2) UR Waivers 






(a) If the Mission Area, agency, or staff office requires more square feet than they 
are allowed in the space needs calculation, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff 
offices must either: 








1 Decrease its space requirements to meet the amount of square feet 
allowed, or 










2 Obtain a UR waiver signed by their Under Secretary for Mission Areas 
and agencies or by the Assistant Secretary for Administration for staff 
offices. This signature authority may be redelegated formally in writing to 
the Chief Operating Officer or equivalent within the Mission Area, 
agency, or staff office. The UR waiver must document and justify why 
the space requirements are higher than allowed. 










(b) A copy of each approved UR waiver must be sent to the Chief, Property 
Management Division (PMD), OPEM. For leases, a copy of this UR waiver 
must be included with any space needs request to the lead leasing agency for 
inclusion in the lease file. For GSA Assignments, a copy of the UR waiver 
must accompany the space needs of the Mission Area, agency, or staff office 
when submitting them to GSA. 








(3) No employee, partner, cooperator, or contractors who is a 100% remote worker as 
defined in DR 4080-811-002, Telework and Remote Work Programs, will have 
designated office space in a USDA agency location. 







(4) Private offices are limited to individuals who are identified as official supervisors or 
who regularly require privacy to conduct confidential activities. 






5. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 


a. The Director, OPEM will: 

(1) Provide executive leadership and oversight for the space utilization program; and 






(2) Establish and implement Departmentwide real property asset management guidance 
and policy. 






b. The Chief, PMD, OPEM will: 

(1) Oversee the implementation, execution, and compliance of this policy; 






(2) Carry out wide-ranging real property asset and space management duties and 
responsibilities; and 






(3) Approve requests for exceptions to this policy per the provisions of Section 6b. 






c. Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Heads will: 

(1) Implement this policy for their respective agency and staff office spaces and align 
policies and procedures with this DR within 6 months of publish date; 






(2) Review space requirements of all agency locations on an annual basis and will 
report excesses as appropriate; 






(3) Develop space needs 36 months prior to the expiration of a current lease or 
occupancy agreement; 






(4) Determine the SNU for each agency location when developing space needs; 






(5) Determine whether each agency location is Public Facing or Non-Public Facing; 
and 






(6) Ensure that a UR waiver is signed by the Under Secretary (or designee) of the 
Mission Area, agency, or staff office in any agency location that has higher footage 
than allowed by this directive. A copy of any UR waiver must be sent to the Chief, 
PMD, and to GSA for GSA-assigned space or the lead leasing agency for leases. 






d. Mission Area Under Secretaries or their designees will approve or deny all UR waivers 
for their respective Mission Area, agency, or staff office. 


6. POLICY EXCEPTIONS 


a. Any lease action for which the Request for Lease Proposals has been issued is excepted 
from this DR. 




b. The process for UR waivers is detailed in paragraph 4b(2). 




c. All other requests for exceptions to any policy set forth in this DR must include 
adequate documentation and a justification stating why the policy cannot be met. 
Submit them to the Chief, PMD, OPEM, USDA, 1400 Independence Avenue SW, 
Washington DC 20250 or to OPEM.RealProperty@usda.gov. 




7. INQUIRIES 


Direct all inquiries about this DR to the Chief, PMD, OPEM, USDA, 1400 Independence 
Avenue SW, Washington DC 20250 or 202-205-4008 or to OPEM.RealProperty@usda.gov. 

-END- 


APPENDIX A 
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 

AgPMR Agricultural Property Management Regulations 

ANSI/BOMA American National Standards Institute/Building Owners and Managers 
Association 

DR Departmental Regulation 

FMR Federal Management Regulation 

FRPC Federal Real Property Council 

GSA General Services Administration 

OPEM Office of Property and Environmental Management 

PMD Property Management Division (within OPEM) 

SF Square Feet 

SNU Space Needs Units 

UR Utilization Rate 

USDA United States Department of Agriculture 


APPENDIX B 
DEFINITIONS 

Agency Location. An established physical office setting where a unit of a USDA Mission Area, 
agency, or staff office performs specific services or functions. USDA employees may perform 
functions at work sites that are not in office settings and that are not agency locations. These 
work sites specifically include local Soil and Water Conservation District offices, private 
residences, site inspection facilities at privately owned processing plants, and temporary or 
transient work sites such as inspection or investigative circuits. Employees working at these 
sites report to a specific supervisory agency location that differs from their work site. 

“All-in” Utilization Rate. A method of calculating the Utilization Rate considering all assigned 
space of a Mission Area, agency, or staff office in an agency location with only a few exceptions 
(warehouse, ware yard, garages, and shops). It is a simple calculation of the SNU times a set 
square feet per SNU. 

Confidential Activities. Core job tasks that deal with a high degree of personally identifiable 
information or that require additional privacy. Examples are human resources, civil rights, 
employee or labor relations, financial, contracting, or legal functions. 

Non-Public Facing. A non-public-facing agency location is one where the primary mission is 
something other than interacting with the public conducting personal business. 

Predominant Use. The greatest use of the real property asset as defined by the Federal Real 
Property Council (FRPC) in their Federal Real Property Profile Data Dictionary. 

Public-Facing. A public-facing agency location is one where the primary mission is to service 
and interact with the public conducting personal business (e.g., applying for benefits, permits, 
sales, licenses). 

Space Needs Units. The quantitative conversion of the numbers of employees assigned to work 
in that location that factors in how frequently they are teleworking or remote working. 

Utilization. A measure of how efficiently space is being used. 

Utilization Rate (UR). The Utilization Rate is a measurement of utilization and is an “all-in” 
calculation of total usable square feet of the Mission Area, agency, or staff office divided by the 
SNU of the Mission Area, agency, or staff office in the space. 


APPENDIX C 
AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES 

ANSI/BOMA, ANSI/BOMA Standard website 

GSA, Federal Management Regulation (FMR), 41 CFR 102, Subchapter C, Real Property 

GSA, Federal Real Property Council (FRPC), Data Dictionary website 

GSA, Leasing Desk Guide website 

USDA, DR 4080-811-002, Telework and Remote Work Programs, November 22, 2021 


U.S. Department of Agriculture 

Washington, D.C. 20250 

 

 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION 

Number: 

1633-001 

SUBJECT: Parking - USDA Headquarters Complex 
Washington, D.C. 

 DATE: 

September 8, 1994 

OPI: Office of Operations 

 



 

1 PURPOSE 

This document establishes the procedures governing parking facilities at the U. S. 
Department of Agriculture (USDA) Headquarters Complex. These procedures ensure 
USDA complies with the goals and objectives set forth by the General Services 
Administration (GSA) and other Federal regulatory and management agencies pertaining 
to the assignment and utilization of parking facilities, energy conservation, ridesharing, 
and other related objectives. This directive supersedes Departmental Regulation, Number 
1633-1, dated December 13, 1982, and any other instructions that conflict with its 
provisions. 

2 SCOPE 

This procedure applies to parking facilities at the USDA Headquarters Complex. It also 
includes the GSA controlled facility known as the 12th & C Streets Lot where USDA has 
an allotment of parking spaces. 

3 AUTHORITY 

The provisions of this directive are in accordance with the Federal Property Management 
Regulation (FPMR) 101-6.3, Ridesharing, and 101-20.104, Parking Facilities. 

4 DEFINITIONS 

The following definitions shall be the official definitions pertaining to the parking 
program at the USDA Headquarters Complex: 

a Agency Parking Representative. An employee designated by their Director of 
Administrative Services or Administrative Officer to administer the parking program 
within their agency or staff office in accordance with these procedures. 

b Capacity. The maximum number of persons that can be transported one-way in the 
motor vehicle. 

c Carpool. A group of at least four (4) persons using a motor vehicle for transportation to 
and from work on a daily basis. At least fifty percent of the members must be USDA 
employees, as define under Employment Boundaries. 


d Contact Person. The member who is responsible for the information on the Parking 
Application (AD-697). The Contact Person ensures that the information is true to the best 
of their knowledge. The applicant is also responsible for ensuring that the Agency 
Parking Representative is notified immediately of any changes which occur in the 
carpool/vanpool, updating and submitting a revised parking application. The Contact 
Person must be a USDA employee, as identified under g Employment Boundaries. The 
box indicating "YES" must be shaded to denote Contact Person on the Parking 
Application (AD-697). 

e Court. South Building parking areas located between each wing. 

f Departmental Transportation Coordinator. An employee in the Office of Operations 
(OO), Washington Area Service Center (WASC), who is responsible for developing, 
maintaining, and implementing a Departmental Parking and Ridesharing Program for the 
USDA Headquarters Complex. 

g Employment Boundaries. Government agencies and offices located within a 1.5 mile 
radius of the USDA Headquarters Complex. Eligible USDA personnel must be employed 
at the USDA Headquarters Complex , or USDA facilities occupied within a 1.5 mile 
radius such as, L'Enfant Plaza, Portals, Aerospace, 501 School Street or Reporters 
Building. USDA employees working at locations outside of the 1.5 mile radius or in 
buildings where employee parking is provided will be considered under "Federal 
employee", as stated in Section 10a5c. 

h Executive Parking provided to the immediate Office of the Secretary and offices 
reporting directly to the Office of the Secretary. Spaces are used by individuals or 
carpools exempt from carpool requirements because of exigencies of Government 
business. These allocations are made by the Assistant Secretary for Administration to 
each Under/Assistant Secretary for use at their discretion. An Executive Parking Permit, 
AD-153C, is issued and must be properly displayed in all vehicles parking in Executive 
Parking space assignments. 

i Government Vehicle/Building Support. Parking spaces reserved for USDA-leased or 
USDA-owned vehicles utilized solely for the conduct of Government business. Also 
includes parking necessary to support the 24-hours-a-day operations and maintenance of 
the Headquarters Complex. 

j Physically Challenged Employee. A USDA employee working in the USDA 
Headquarters Complex who is so physically challenged that the use of public 
transportation and carpooling is unreasonably difficult or impossible due to the presence 
of a medically determinable impairment which significantly impairs ambulation (See 
Section 10d). A physically challenged employee is further defined as a person who: 

(1) Is confined to a wheelchair; 

(2) Requires the use of crutches at all times; 

(3) Wears braces to permanently support their legs and/or hips; and/or 

(4) Suffers from a disease so severe that even minimal walking and the 
use of public transportation, including carpooling, is unreasonably 
difficult or impossible, and would further jeopardize the health and 
safety of the employee. 


k Headquarters Complex. The USDA Headquarters Complex is comprised of the 
Administration, South, Auditors, and Cotton Annex Buildings, associated grounds and 
parking lots; as well as parking allocated to USDA by GSA at the 12th and C Streets 
Parking Lot. 

l Keycard. An electronically coded plastic credit card shaped device, used to access the 
South Building courts on scheduled work days between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 
p.m. 

m Lot. Parking areas having fixed boundaries that are located around the Administration, 
Cotton Annex, and Auditors Buildings. (South Building Parking Areas are called Courts.) 

n Parking Applications. An application that must be completed when applying for a 
USDA Headquarters parking space. All applications may be obtained from Agency 
Parking Representatives or the Departmental Transportation Coordinator. 

o Parking Permits . USDA parking permits are issued and must be displayed when 
entering and using parking facilities at the Headquarters Complex (see Section 5a for the 
types of parking permits). 

p Parking Space. An area allocated in a USDA parking facility to accommodate a motor 
vehicle. 

q Part-time Member. A person who does not ride to and from work on all scheduled work 
days, or travels less than six one way trips weekly, as defined by Regular Member below. 

r Regular Member. A person who travels at least six one way trips each week in a 
carpool/vanpool for a minimum distance of one mile to and from the USDA 
Headquarters Complex or to a work site within employment boundaries. Personnel 
assigned parking under Executive Parking, will not be used in scoring car/vanpool 
applications. 

s Staging Area. A parking area for temporary use to resolve parking problems in the 
complex such as building emergencies, temporary parking for vehicles displaced by 
illegal parking or snow emergencies. 

t Temporary Parking reserved by the Departmental Transportation Coordinator, designee, 
or an Agency Parking Representative, with a time limitation, usually one day or less. 
Temporary Parking is not reserved for the 12th & C Streets Parking Lot. 

u Transmitter. A radio transmitter used to activate the parking control arms located at the 
Administration and Cotton Annex Building parking lots. 

v USDA Parking. Vehicle parking spaces within the Headquarters Complex under the 
jurisdiction and/or control of the U.S. Department of Agriculture. 

w Vanpool. A group of eight (8) or more persons utilizing a van to commute daily to and 
from work. At least four regular members must be USDA employees housed in the 
Headquarters Complex or within employment boundaries. Although some automobiles 
may carry eight (8) or more passengers, they are not considered vanpools. 

x Official Visitor Parking reserved solely for the use of officials visiting the Department 
on official business. A form AD-153B, Temporary Parking Permit, is issued for visitor 


parking use. Visitor spaces are not intended to accommodate the daily or personal needs 
of employees who work in or near the complex. Parking Representatives are not 
authorized to utilize official visitor parking spaces, under any circumstances. These 
spaces are not available to private contractors for use in special agency or departmental 
events or similar circumstances. However, visitor spaces may be used by agencies to 
accommodate the physically challenged on a short-term (less than 30 days) emergency 
basis. See Criteria for Reserving Official Visitor Parking Spaces, Section 10 b. 

5 FORMS 

a Parking Permits. Permits which are issued for entry and display while using USDA 
Headquarters Complex parking facilities are listed below. Permits must be displayed as 
defined in Section 7e(3). 

(1) AD-153A, USDA Parking Permit. Parking Permits used for 
assigned parking spaces, excluding Executive parking assignments. 

(2) AD-153B, USDA Temporary Parking Permit. Parking Permits used 
for temporary assignments such as visitor spaces and temporary 
physically challenged assignments. 

(3) AD-153C, USDA Executive Parking Permit. Parking Permits used 
for Executive parking space assignments. 

(4) AD-153D, USDA 12th & C Lot Parking Permit. Parking Permits 
issued monthly after payment of the monthly fee for use of parking 
facilities at the 12th & C Streets Parking Lot. A single AD-153D, 
provided by USDA, is issued monthly by the parking lot attendant after 
payment of the monthly fee. 

b Parking Applications. Form AD-697, Application for Parking Space, must be 
completed in pencil and submitted through the appropriate authority or Agency Parking 
Representative to the Departmental Transportation Coordinator in the Washington Area 
Service Center (WASC), room S-321, South Building. Agency Parking Representatives 
are specifically instructed to return incomplete or improperly prepared applications to the 
applicant. Applications are available from Agency Parking Representatives and from the 
Departmental Transportation Coordinator. 

(1) AD-697A, Additional Vehicles. Form used to provide information 
for additional vehicles to be used by members in carpools/vanpools, 
physically challenged or executive parking. Applications must be 
properly completed. 

(2) AD-1079, Application for Agency Official Visitor Parking Space, 
Forms are used by agencies when applying for official visitor parking 
spaces. 

(3) AD-1080, Application for Official Government Vehicle Parking 
Space. Forms used by agencies to apply for official parking spaces for 
government owned or leased vehicles . Agencies should submit a copy 
of the purchase order to the Departmental Transportation Coordinator, 
when requisitioning vehicles. 


(4) AD-1081, Application for Designated Physically Challenged 
Parking Space. In addition to submitting Form AD-697, this form must 
also be completed in applying for a designated physically challenged 
parking space. TDD services are also available to physically challenged 
persons. Call 720-PARK and begin keying until the proper "GA" 
response is received. 

C. Express Lane Commuter Information and Ridesharing. Form AD-697, Application for 
Parking Space, should be completed denoting "Ridefinder", and a computer printout will 
be sent to you with information pertaining to your commuting area. 

6 PRIORITY OF ASSIGNMENT OF PARKING SPACES 

a Government Vehicle and Building Support Parking: Vehicle parking areas shall first be 
reserved for Government Vehicles and vehicles associated with the 24-hours-a-day 
operations and maintenance of the Headquarters Complex as defined in Section 4i. 

b Official Visitor Parking as defined in Section 4x. Visitor parking spaces will be 
assigned based on the availability of spaces and agency need. c Parking spaces not 
required for Government Vehicles, Building Support, or Official Visitors will be used for 
employee parking. Available parking spaces shall be assigned according to the following 
priorities: 

(1) Designated Physically Challenged Parking will be assigned to 
USDA physically challenged employees for whom an assigned parking 
space is essential because the use of public transportation or carpooling 
is unreasonably difficult or impossible; (See Sections 4j and 10d). 
Designated Physically Challenged Parking will be made available in 
accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, as outlined in the 
Federal Register, Volume 56, No. 144, Friday, July 26, 1991. 

(2) Executive parking as defined in Section 4h. 

(3) Visitor parking as defined in Section 4t. 

(4) Carpool/Vanpool parking as defined in Sections 4c and 4w. Priority 
for assignment of spaces shall be based on whether a carpool/vanpool 
has physically challenged regular members, the number of trips per pay 
period, the distance traveled and the places of employment of the 
members. 

(5) Bi/motorcycle parking areas, subject to availability, on a first-come, 
first-served, day-to-day basis. 

7 RESPONSIBILITIES 

a The Office of Operations (OO), Washington Area Service Center 
(WASC), Departmental Transportation Coordinator will: 

(1) Maintain written plans and procedures for the 
assignment of parking spaces. 


(2) Develop and implement an employee parking 
program. This includes developing methods and 
procedures to be followed by OO in the assignment 
and management of employee parking spaces. 

(3) Be responsible for assigning parking spaces under 
the control of, the USDA Headquarters Complex. 

(a) Review and verify parking application data; 

(b) Investigate parking hotline complaints received 
regarding the possible misuse of assigned parking; 

(c) Allocate USDA parking spaces according to the 
Department's Priority of Assignment of Parking 
Spaces, (See Section 6); 

(d) Manage visitor parking, reserving spaces as 
requested by Agency Parking Representatives for use 
by official visitors to the department, based on the 
availability of spaces; 

(e) Monitor the use of parking spaces in the 
Headquarters Complex, and take enforcement action, 
when necessary; and 

(f) Develop and implement plans in accordance with 
the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendment Requirements as 
outlined in Section 20. 

b Agency Administrator's and/or Directors will: 

(1) Provide the support necessary to implement Departmental Parking 
Policies and Procedures identified in this regulation within their 
agency. 

(2) Promote flexibility in employee working hours to facilitate 
ridesharing arrangements. 

(3) Contact their Agency Parking Representative to reserve visitor 
parking spaces needed by their agency. 

c Agency Administrative Services Directors and Administrative Officers will: 

(1) Be responsible for providing the support necessary to implement 
Departmental Parking Procedures through their respective Agency 
Parking Representatives. 

(2) Encourage and promote ridesharing and other Departmental parking 
goals and objectives identified in this policy. 

(3) Designate qualified representatives to implement parking 
procedures and regulations for their agency. 


(4) Provide general administrative assistance on an agency level. 

(5) Contact their Agency Parking Representative to reserve visitor 
parking spaces needed by their agency. 

(6) Ensuring the OO/WASC has been provided a copy of all purchase 
orders requisitioning official government vehicles. 

d Agency Parking Representatives are responsible for administering the parking program 
within their agency by serving as their agencies' liaison with the Departmental 
Transportation Coordinator (DTC) in accordance with these procedures. Their 
responsibilities are to: 

(1) Provide assistance within their respective agencies in resolving 
routine parking problems, answering questions, etc.; 

(2) Issue correspondence and provide applicants within their agency 
with parking applications and copies of these parking procedures, etc.; 

(3) With approval from the DTC, issue one day Temporary Parking 
Permits to carpools within their agency or for use by official visitors; 

(4) Obtain for the carpool/vanpool a replacement permit, when 
appropriate; 

(5) Review and process all parking applications for authenticity and 
conformity with Departmental standards and procedures in a timely 
manner; 

(6) Contact agency participants in the parking program at the request of 
the DTC to obtain or relay information or enforce policy and 
procedures; 

(7) Assure that all agency and departmental visitor parking spaces are 
reserved in accordance with the criteria stated in Section 10b. Maintain 
a Visitor Parking Log for agency visitor parking spaces and provide the 
DTC with a copy of this log quarterly; 

(8) Assist OO/WASC with Department-wide reassignments, necessary 
reports and surveys; 

(9) Number all parking applications before submitting them to the DTC 
with the appropriate agency number (example: 00-004). Include preassigned 
or new agency numbers as appropriate on updated or revised 
applications; 

(10) Immediately inform the DTC of changes in carpools, vanpools and 
other agency needs and ensure that updated applications are submitted 
within 30 days. 

(11) Serve on the Appeals Committee, hearing information related to 
member applications originating from their agency. 


(12) Contact the DTC when snow is forecasted and provide a list of 
available agency assigned visitor and official parking spaces for use by 
vehicles displaced due to snow. 

e Persons using USDA's parking facilities must: 

(1) Read, understand and comply with the requirements of USDA's 
Headquarters Complex; 

(2) Keep all vehicle and membership information current by 
immediately reporting all changes to Agency Parking Representatives 
and updating and submitting revised applications to the Contact 
Person's Agency Parking Representative. Failure to immediately report 
changes and update membership information will result in loss of 
parking privileges. Pools will have 30 days to replace lost members and 
submit an updated application to retain assigned space. (See Section 
13); 

(3) Display the parking permit on the driver's side of the dashboard, 
face up, so that all information is visible and readable through the 
vehicle windshield. 

(4) Replace fading permits to assure they are readable at all times. 

(5) Park only in your assigned parking space. 

(6) Know USDA parking permits are government property and must be 
returned immediately upon cancellation, invalidation, transfer, 
separation of the carpool, etc. PARKING PERMITS ARE NONTRANSFERABLE. 


(7) Know that failing to properly display a valid parking permit will 
result in the vehicle being ticketed and towed; 

(8) Know that flagrant violations, such as falsifying applications, 
applying for more than one space or appearing on applications in 
excess of the maximum number of bi-weekly trips, counterfeiting, 
altering, or reproducing permits, failing to turn in permits when the 
pool membership no longer qualifies, and any act of circumventing 
these procedures to gain favor, will result in the loss of parking 
privileges for at least one year and notification in writing to the 
violator's agency administrator or director. 

(9) Know that each member in the pool represents an equal voice. 

(10) Know that each member is responsible and accountable for 
following these procedures and those identified on the reverse of the 
parking permits. 

(11) Know that members must work to resolve internal problems when 
they arise. 


(12) Know that the Contact Person does not have sole authority in 
decision making. 

8 PARKING ASSIGNMENTS (REASSIGNMENTS) 

Applications for parking space assignments will be accepted on a continuous basis. All 
applicants must submit the appropriate forms through their Agency Parking 
Representatives. When applications exceed the number of spaces available, they will be 
placed on a waiting list until spaces become available: 

a Requests for all parking space assignments (excluding Executive Parking) must be 
submitted through Agency Parking Representatives on the appropriate application (i.e., 
AD-697, AD-697A, AD-1079, AD-1080 and AD-1081, See Section 5b). These forms are 
available from Agency Parking Representatives and the Departmental Transportation 
Coordinator. 

b Reassignments shall take place periodically, usually annually. OO/WASC will issue a 
Departmental Notice announcing the reassignment. Agency Parking Representatives shall 
notify employees of applicable instructions, requirements and due dates. 

c Notification of parking assignments will be made to applicants by Agency Parking 
Representatives. 

d Qualified carpools/vanpools will be assigned parking spaces based on a point system. 
Applicants with the highest number of points will be assigned parking spaces within the 
USDA Courts and Lots until all available spaces have been assigned. The remaining 
assignments will be made, still based on the highest number of points, to as many 
applicants as possible until all available spaces at the 12th and C Streets Parking Lot have 
been assigned. 

e Each USDA member of a qualifying carpool will be required to appear in person, with 
photo I.D., in order to obtain the new parking permits. Members should plan to appear 
together. 

f A minimum of four USDA members of qualified vanpools will be required to appear 
together, with photo I.D. to obtain the new parking permit. 

g Approved applicants will be issued the appropriate USDA Parking Permit (one permit 
will be issued to each USDA driving member). Non-USDA personnel will not be issued 
permits to park in the USDA Headquarters Complex. 

h Permit holders shall surrender permits when: 

(1) Use of the permit no longer meets one or more of the criteria upon 
which it was issued; 

(2) Requested to do so by OO/WASC as a result of a violation of the 
rules governing parking at the USDA Headquarters Complex or to meet 
other requirements. 

(3) Employment status changes, such as retirement, termination, or 
relocation outside USDA employment boundaries, as defined in 
Section 4g. 


9 PARKING PERMITS 

a Permits will be issued as appropriate to USDA driving members for all parking 
assignments (except 12th & C Streets Parking Lot, which will be issued only one 
monthly permit per assignment or pool): 

(1) Government Vehicles and Building Support 

(2) Designated Physically Challenged Parking 

(3) Executive Parking 

(4) Visitor Parking 

(5) Carpool/Vanpool Parking 

(6) Temporary Space Assignments 

b Permit holders are responsible for the parking permits and following the rules printed 
on the back of each permit and in this Departmental Order. 

 

10 CRITERIA 

a Assigning Pool Parking Spaces. The following criteria are used to evaluate applications 
and assign spaces: 

(1) Carpools must have at least fifty (50) percent USDA regular 
members and a minimum of four (4) persons. The Contact Person must 
be a USDA employee and identified as the Contact Person on the 
application. 

(2) Vanpools must have at least four (4) USDA regular members. The 
Contact Person must be a USDA employee and identified as the 
Contact Person on the application. 

(3) Carpools/Vanpools having regular members that are USDA 
physically challenged riders or USDA physically challenged drivers 
will be entitled to five (5) additional points for each physically 
challenged person in that pool. See definition, Section 4j for Physically 
Challenged Employee. 

(4) The average* number of miles traveled one-way, by the contact 
person, will entitle carpools/vanpools to additional points. One 
additional point will be given for each 10 miles traveled. (One-tenth 
point increments, for each mile driven.) * The average will be 
determined by dividing the total number of miles traveled bi-weekly by 
the total number of trips made bi-weekly. 

(5) Employment points will be calculated using the number of biweekly 
one-way trips for all members: 


(a) Ten (10) points for each one-way trip, not to 
exceed 160 points for a physically challenged USDA 
employee; 

(b) Four (4) points for each one-way trip, not to 
exceed 64 points for any USDA employee; 

(c) Two (2) points for each one-way trip, not to 
exceed 32 points for each Federal employee; and 

(d) One (1) point for each one-way trip, not to exceed 
16 points for each non-Federal member. 

(6) The maximum number of riders cannot exceed the maximum 
capacity of a vehicle listed for the car/vanpool. 

(7) If at anytime a tie occurs, the assignment of spaces will be 
determined by a lottery. Applications will be randomly selected by the 
Departmental Transportation Coordinator for placement on the waiting 
list. 

b Reserving Official Visitor Parking Spaces Visitor parking spaces will be assigned to 
agencies based on the need and justification submitted. Agencies desiring allocated 
visitor parking spaces must complete an AD-1079, Application for Agency Official 
Visitor Parking Space, and submit it to their Agency Parking Representative. Visitor 
parking spaces shall be reserved solely for the use of Officials visiting the Department on 
official business. These spaces are not intended for USDA employees personal use, nor 
are they to be used by Executives not receiving parking accommodations from their 
respective Under/Assistant Secretary. All reservations for visitor parking spaces must be 
made by contacting your Agency Parking Representative. A completed AD-153B, 
Temporary Parking Permit, must be displayed face up on the driver's side of the vehicle 
for all visitor parking. Priority and procedures for reserving Visitor Parking Spaces: 

(1) Temporary Physically Challenged Employees. Employees requiring 
temporary physically challenged spaces must make requests following 
the procedures outlined in Section 10d(3). Official Visitor parking 
spaces may be temporarily assigned (for less than 30 days) to 
physically challenged employees on an emergency basis only. 

(2) Official visitors to the Department on official business. 
Reservations should be made at least two (2) weeks in advance for use 
of visitor parking spaces for official business. 

c Assignment of Executive Parking Spaces 

(1) Executive Parking Spaces (including assignments based on unusual 
work hours, but not including "shift work"), will be allocated by the 
Assistant Secretary for Administration, who will take into account the 
distribution of executive personnel and/or exigencies of Government 
business. 


(2) Executive Parking Space allocations shall be assigned to each 
Under/Assistant Secretary for use within their immediate office as well 
as by executives and other officials within their respective agencies. 

d Assignment of Designated Physically Challenged Parking Spaces 

(1) Physically challenged employees applying for a Designated 
Physically Challenged Parking Space must have a valid State or 
District of Columbia Government Physically Challenged license plate 
or permit from the appropriate Motor Vehicle Administration, in the 
state where they reside. Copies of completed applications to obtain 
state or local license plates or permits may be required. Applicants will 
be required to present a copy of their vehicle registration or permit to 
verify their status. (See Section 4j for definition of physically 
challenged employee.) 

(2) Procedures for Assignment of Physically Challenged parking are as 
follows: 

(a) Employees must apply through their Agency 
Parking Representative, and submit the following: 

(1) A completed AD-1081, 
Application for Designated 
Physically Challenged Parking 
Space. 

(2) Proof of valid State or District 
Government Physically Challenged 
licensed plates or permit; and 

(3) A copy of their car registration 
as proof of Physically Challenged 
plates or permit. 

(4) Any valid METRO physically 
challenged commuter pass or other 
identification denoting physically 
challenged status. 

(b) Employees should not contact the Departmental 
Transportation Coordinator for information regarding 
their application. Employees should contact their 
Agency Parking Representative to obtain the status of 
the application. 

(3) Procedures for Assignment of Temporary Physically Challenged 
parking: 

(a) Employees must submit a completed AD-1081, 
Application for Designated Physically Challenged 
Parking Space, to their Agency Parking 
Representative, who will in turn submit the request to 


the Departmental Transportation Coordinator. The 
amount of time parking accommodations will be 
needed must also be entered on this form. 

(b) If the need for physically challenged parking 
accommodations exceeds three (3) months, the 
employee must submit a copy of their temporary 
physically challenged parking permit from the 
city/state in which they reside. 

(c) Temporary Physically Challenged parking 
accommodations are only valid for a period of 30 
days. Requests for extensions must be accompanied 
by submitting an updated Application for Designated 
Physically Challenged Parking Space (AD-1081). 

(d) Employees must submit their completed 
application through their Agency Parking 
Representative. 

11 BICYCLE AND MOTORCYCLE PARKING 

No parking permits are issued for bicycle or motorcycle parking. However, USDA ID's 
are required to gain access to the South Building Courts. Employees utilizing these 
facilities may only park in these designated areas. 

a Bicycle parking is available on a first-come, first-served basis at the South Building, 
Court 2; Auditors Building, Lot 14; Lot 10 and the Jefferson Drive side of the 
Administration Building. Cyclers are responsible for providing their own locks to secure 
their bicycles. 

b Motorcycle Parking is available on a first come, first serve basis at the South Building, 
Court 5; the Administration Building, Lot 8; and the Cotton Annex Building, Lot 7. 

12 REASSIGNMENT PROCEDURES 

a Reassignment of individual parking spaces which become available will be made based 
on the priority of assignment of parking spaces as stated in Section 6. Spaces determined 
to be available for reassignment to carpools and vanpools will be assigned to pools on the 
established waiting list. (See Section 14 Interim Assignments) 

b Reassignments of all parking spaces in the Headquarters Complex will occur annually 
unless necessity dictates otherwise. Employees will be notified of reassignment schedules 
and requirements via Departmental Notice to all employees in the D.C. Headquarters 
Complex and USDA employees housed in buildings within a 1.5 mile radius. 

c When competing for parking spaces during a reassignment, employees must return 
completed application package to the Agency Parking Representative on or before the 
announced closing date. Agency Parking Representatives are instructed not to accept 
applications after the closing date. 

d Agency Parking Representatives will review each application for completeness and 
accuracy and assign an Agency Number (example FS-012) to each application for a 


parking space. Agency Parking Representatives will then prepare a recap sheet which 
summarizes all applications by type, and submit the listing and the applications to the 
Departmental Transportation Coordinator by the closing date. 

e The Departmental Transportation Coordinator will review the data, consolidate all the 
agency submissions, establish a cut-off point, assign spaces and notify Agency Parking 
Representatives of the results from the reassignment. 

f Agency Parking Representatives will notify applicants of the results of the 
reassignment, collect old and distribute new parking permits, and keycards to successful 
applicants as directed by the Washington Area Service Center. 

13 LOSS OR CHANGE IN MEMBERSHIP 

a Loss or change in membership must be immediately reported to the Agency Parking 
Representative. The carpool will be given thirty days to replace the member(s) and 
submit a revised AD-697, Application for Parking Space, reflecting all changes. If the 
carpool does not have enough qualifying points after thirty days, their space will be 
reassigned to the next qualifying carpool. 

NOTE: If the carpool has enough qualifying points without an additional member, they 
will retain a USDA parking space, but not necessarily the same space. Failure to report 
changes will result in loss of parking privileges and notification of parking violation to 
your agency head for possible further disciplinary action. 

b The Departmental Transportation Coordinator is available to assist carpools/vanpools in 
locating new members. 

14 INTERIM ASSIGNMENTS (TURNOVER OF PARKING SPACES) 

When spaces become vacant during the assignment period because of retirements, 
separations or any other reason, the Contact Person is responsible for notifying their 
Agency Parking Representative that the space is available for reassignment. Agency 
Parking Representatives shall notify the Departmental Transportation Coordinator who 
will in turn reassign the parking space to the next qualifying carpool/vanpool. Agency 
Parking Representatives are not permitted to reassign any parking spaces and are 
responsible for returning official spaces no longer required, to the Departmental 
Transportation Coordinator for reassignment. 

15 RIDESHARING SERVICES 

a OO/WASC shall maintain current information concerning employee transportation 
services to the extent possible. These services shall include maintenance of an automated 
carpool/vanpool referral service, and shall interface with services provided by local 
ridesharing agencies and entities, such as the Council of Governments (COG) and the 
General Services Administration, National Ridesharing Office, when possible. 

b USDA employees may obtain ridesharing information from the Departmental 
Transportation Coordinator. 

c USDA employees who use TDD equipment may obtain information on joining or 
forming carpools/vanpools by calling 720-PARK. 


16 ACCIDENTS AND COMMON PROBLEMS 

a Accidents. The Federal Protective Service of the General Services Administration has 
jurisdiction over the parking lots/courts in and around the Administration, South, 
Auditors, and Cotton Annex Buildings. Persons involved in an accident are responsible 
for reporting accidents occurring within or at the entrance of the lots/courts immediately 
to appropriate USDA guards and to the Federal Protective Service at (202) 708-1111. 

b Common Problems. If someone is parked in your space, note the license plate number; 
state of tag; type and color of vehicle; and, if a USDA parking permit is visible, the 
information on the permit; then proceed to Court 2 and give the information obtained on 
the vehicle in your space, along with your name, phone number, lot and space number to 
the guard. The guard will contact the parking office and obtain a staging parking space 
for your vehicle. You are responsible for moving your vehicle back to your assigned 
space, in a timely manner, if contacted by either the Departmental Transportation 
Coordinator or your Agency Parking Representative. Should a permit holder forget or 
lose their permit; they should: 

(1) Notify the guard upon entering the court (South Building only); 

(2) Park in their assigned space and immediately see their Agency 
Parking Representative, who will obtain a One-Day Temporary Parking 
Permit, or if the permit was lost, obtain a new one from the 
Departmental Transportation Coordinator. There will be a one-hour 
limit to obtain the Temporary Parking Permit from the Agency Parking 
Representative. If your representative is not available the permit holder 
should call 720-PARK to obtain a temporary permit. If the replacement 
permit is not properly displayed in the vehicle within one hour, the 
vehicle will be subject to ticketing and towing. 

17 ENFORCEMENT and the APPEALS PROCESS 

a All applicants and permit holders are responsible for abiding by these parking 
procedures. By signing the parking application (Form AD-697), each applicant certifies 
that they have read and understand these parking procedures. 

b WASC will provide program participants with a written NOTICE OF INFRACTION 
for all violations. 

c Permit holders shall surrender permits when: 

(1) Use of the permit no longer meets one or more of the criteria upon 
which it was issued; 

(2) Requested to do so by OO/WASC as a result of a violation of the 
rules governing parking at the USDA Headquarters Complex or Ruling 
of the Appeals Committee. 

d If any person's name appears on applications for more than one parking space (inside or 
outside of USDA) and the number of one-way trips is unreasonable or impossible, that 
person will be banned from the parking program for a period of not less than one year or 
reassignment period. The carpool will have thirty (30) days to replace the driver/rider or 
forfeit the space (there will be no exceptions to this rule). 


e WASC will make random investigations of parking assignments during the course of 
the assignment period. If, after the investigation, a space is found to be operating at other 
than the levels indicated on the parking application the space will be returned to the 
parking inventory for reassignment. 

(1) Any member on an original application who provides fraudulent 
information on behalf of the carpool/vanpool, shall be ineligible to 
participate in a carpool/vanpool at the USDA Headquarters Complex 
for at least one year or one reassignment period. Cases involving 
fraudulent or forged parking applications or permits, will be treated as 
falsification of a government document and will be reported to the 
Office of Inspector General for investigation. 

(2) Any infraction which endangers the lives of others, shall result in 
the immediate revocation of parking privileges and permanent 
banishment from the USDA Parking Program. Members invoking the 
Appeals Process for infractions which endanger the lives of others, 
shall be prohibited from continued parking during the Appeals Process. 

(3) Examples of infractions which endanger the lives of others are: 
excessive speeding, impeding or prohibiting the safe access and/or 
egress to any USDA entrance, exit, court, lot or assigned parking space. 

f If, for any reason, an assigned space is occupied by someone other than the assignee, 
the Contact Person or carpool member should: 

(1) Obtain the license number and state, type of car, lot or court, and 
space number and all information displayed on any parking permits; 

(2) Proceed to Court 2 and provide the Security Guard with the 
information obtained in (1), and your name and phone number. The 
Security Guard will contact the Departmental Transportation 
Coordinator and request a temporary space for your vehicle. 

(3) Park in the parking space as directed by the Security Guard. 

(4) Return your vehicle to your assigned space when requested to do so 
by your Agency Parking Representative or the Departmental 
Transportation Coordinator. 

(5) The illegally parked car will be ticketed and/or towed. The carpool 
should not block the illegally parked vehicle or park in someone else's 
space, they too may be ticketed and/or towed. 

g The Departmental Transportation Coordinator authorizes the issuance of District of 
Columbia, Department of Motor Vehicle tickets and the Chief, Executive Services 
Branch authorizes issuance of US Park Service tickets for Jefferson Drive permit holders. 

(1) Tickets and towing may occur for the following reasons: 

(a) Vehicle has no valid parking permit 

(b) Permit is not displayed properly 


(c) Illegally parked in designated physically 
challenged space/area 

(d) Illegally parked in no parking space/area 

(e) Illegally parked in reserved or designated 
space/area 

(f) Parked in two (2) spaces 

(g) Blocking driveway or access 

(h) Other parking violations 

(2) Loss of Parking Privileges. Two (2) violations will result in the 
recipient's loss of parking privileges for a one year suspension period. 
The one year begins upon notification from WASC or from your 
Agency Parking Representative. All violations reported to WASC 
count, regardless of whether they are accompanied by a parking ticket. 

h Illegally parked vehicles at the USDA Headquarters Complex receiving a District of 
Columbia Department of Motor Vehicle ticket, or that have outstanding DC Parking 
Violations may be booted or towed from USDA facilities at any time at the owners 
expense. 

i Tickets received at the USDA Headquarters Complex for parking violations are not 
generally "negotiable" and represent a legal matter between the DC Department of 
Traffic Adjudication or the US Park Service and the receiving individual. 

j South Building court parking spaces, adjacent to offices or court perimeter walls will be 
"Front End Parking" only. 

k Permits must be prominently displayed on driver's side of dashboard, face up, at all 
times. Failure to display valid permits may result in the vehicle being ticketed and towed 
at the owner's expense. 

l DO NOT block traffic lanes in courts while waiting for pool members. Remain in your 
assigned parking space until all members arrive. 

m DO NOT double park while waiting for riders. 

n DO NOT block traffic by allowing passengers to get into or out of vehicles on the 
ramp. 

o Hours of operation: South Building Courts 1 and 6 are open from 6:00 a.m. to 9:30 a.m. 
and 3:30 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. with keycard access from 9:30a.m. to 3:30 p.m., Court 2 is 
open 24-hours-a-day, and Courts 3, 4 and 5 are open from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 

p All vehicles entering the South Building Courts or USDA parking lots are subject to 
search by security guards or appropriate officials of the Department. 

q 12th and C Streets Parking Lot 


(1) Hours of Operation: Government carpools are authorized to park in 
the lot from 7:00 a.m. until 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except 
holidays. 

(2) Parking Permits: The monthly permit must be displayed on the 
drivers side of the dash, face up, with all information clearly in view. If 
the carpool does not have the permit with them upon entering the lot, 
they will be charged the daily rate for that day. 

(3) Parking Fees: Monthly permits are sold to USDA employees at a 
reduced rate. Permits will only be sold to carpool members with a valid 
Federal ID. Permits will only be sold during the last four (4) working 
days of the month. ALL MONTHLY PERMITS MUST BE 
PURCHASED BY NOON ON THE LAST WORKING DAY OF THE 
MONTH. If, for some reason the carpool does not pick-up their permit 
during the specified time, they will not be able to buy a permit until the 
following month and may have to reapply for a parking space. 

(4) Parking Procedures: You must park at the direction of the Parking 
Lot Attendants. If you park against the lot perimeter you must lock 
your car and take the key with you. You must have a spare door key 
with you anytime your vehicle is parked in this lot. Notify the Parking 
Lot Attendants departure time. They will direct you to an appropriate 
parking space. Whenever you park in front of another vehicle, you must 
leave the key accessible to the attendants. Remember to keep a spare 
door key. If an attendant moves your car during the day to a location 
within the lot where it is not blocking another vehicle, they may lock 
your car with the keys inside. You will need the spare door key to 
regain access to your car. 

a Appeals. In cases where parking privileges have 
been suspended or revoked or for any situation where 
redress of a parking violation is desired, an oral or 
written request should be provided , within 30 days 
after notification, to the Agency Parking 
Representative for review by the Appeals Committee. 
A decision to reinstate or rescind parking privileges, 
by the Appeals Committee, is final. Adjudicated 
offenses will be removed from the permit holder's 
violation record. 

(1) The Appeals Committee will 
consist of: the Agency Parking 
Representative, the Departmental 
Parking Coordinator, and a Union 
Representative. 

(2) Program participants will be 
allowed to retain their parking 
assignments while undergoing the 
appeals process. Once a decision is 
rendered by the Appeals 
Committee, it is final. 


(3) Only valid NOTICES OF 
INFRACTION issued, will be used 
by the Appeals Committee. 
Previously adjudicated NOTICES 
OF INFRACTION, will be 
prohibited from use. 

18 EVENING, WEEKEND AND HOLIDAY PARKING 

a Evening parking is available between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. only, during 
scheduled work days. Weekend and holiday parking begins at 6 p.m. and ends at 6:00 
a.m. on the next scheduled work day. Unauthorized vehicles using these facilities at other 
time frames will be ticketed and towed. 

(1) Employees working on weekends and/or Holidays may park in Lots 
7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 of the Headquarters Complex on an "as available 
basis." 

(2) Evening, Weekend and Holiday parking is available for USDA 
employees in Court 2. Employees must have a valid USDA Access 
Card (AD-1030) to gain access to Court 2 after hours (between 6 p.m. 
and 6 a.m.). Spaces in Court 2 posted "Physically Challenged Parking 
Reserved at All Times" and lot spaces posted "Reserved at All 
Times",are exempt from evening, weekend and holiday parking rules 
and regulations. These spaces are reserved for physically challenged 
individuals 24-hours everyday. 

19 PROCEDURES FOR KEYCARDS 

a Key cards are used to enter and exit the South Building Courts when the gates are not 
open. Key cards will only operate the gates between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
No key cards are needed for Court 2 which is open 24-hours a day. 

b Key cards are issued to the Contact Person and next driver listed at the time of 
assignment. If additional key cards are needed for other USDA drivers they should be 
requested by contacting the Contact Person's Agency Parking Representative and provide 
them with the driver's name and agency for each card requested. 

20 CLEAN AIR ACT AMENDMENT OF 1990 REQUIREMENTS 

Steps to reduce vehicle emissions and single-occupant vehicles (SOV's) are being 
undertaken by state and local jurisdictions. The Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 
presently require every employer with 100 or more persons at any work site in a "'severe 
non-attainment" area to implement a Transportation Management Program (TMP) to 
increase the average passenger occupancy (APO) per vehicle by 25 percent over the 
area's average by 1997 and, although the Washington area is not presently a "severe nonattainment" 
area, the Federal Government, with its large concentration of facilities in the 
National Capital Region (NCR), we must continue to help set the example in 
transportation management planning to prevent deterioration of air quality in the area to 
the "severe" category. The National Capital Planning Commission (NCPC), Metropolitan 
Washington Council of Governments (COG) and GSA are working cooperatively to 
ensure: 


a All Federal agencies establish an APO baseline for each work site of more than 100 
persons by June 30, 1994; 

b Implementation of a vigorous TMP to achieve an increase in APO per vehicle by 25 
percent at each such worksite by October 1, 1997, recognizing that where great strides in 
transportation demand management have already been made, a more limited goal may be 
required; 

c Aggressive promotion of a wide range of TMP strategies to achieve the increased APO 
goal, including parking management, personalized assistance and ridematching, 
van/buspooling, transit, bicycling, walking, telecommuting, variable work hours, transit 
benefit program, guaranteed/emergency ride home, and commuter centers, and; 

d Promoting the use of shuttle bus service for Federal employees between Metrorail 
stations and Federal work sites to the extent permitted by law. 

e Strong support of the enactment of legislation to (1) extend authorization for the transit 
benefit program beyond the December 31, 1993 expiration date and (2) permit Federal 
agencies to operate shuttle bus service, where needed, between Metrorail stations and 
Federal work sites, and urges support for such legislation by local, state, regional, and 
Federal agencies in the NCR. 

f Direct circulation of these amendment resolutions to all Federal agencies in the NCR by 
letter, urging each agency to voluntarily implement the goals and policies as soon as 
possible. 

 

 

 

 


U. S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE 

WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250 
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION 
NUMBER: 
DR 1650-001 
SUBJECT: Departmental Physical Security Program 
DATE: 
December 9, 2021 
OPI: Office of Safety, Security, and Protection (OSSP) EXPIRATION DATE: 
December 9, 2026 

Section Page 

1. Purpose 1 
2. Special Instructions/Cancellations 1 
3. Scope 2 
4. Policy 2 
5. Roles and Responsibilities 4 
6. Barring Notices 10 
7. Electronic Reports 11 
8. Inquiries 11 


Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations A-1 

Appendix B – Definitions B-1 

Appendix C – Authorities and References C-1 

Appendix D – USDA Notice of Prohibited Items D-1 

1. PURPOSE 

This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of 
Agriculture (USDA) physical security policy for the protection and security of USDA 
Federal and non-Federal employees, facilities, lands, assets, and the public. 

2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS 

a. This DR supersedes DR 1650-001, Physical Security Program, dated March 16, 2016. 




b. The Office of Safety, Security, and Protection (OSSP), Facility Protection Division 
(FPD) will maintain configuration control over this DR. 




c. No language in this document may be construed to supersede any other Federal laws or 
regulations. 





d. All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must align their physical security policies 
and procedures with this policy within 6 months of the publication date. 




e. Further delineation for physical security policy for buildings in the National Capital 
Region (NCR), including USDA’s Headquarters (HQ) Complex and the George 
Washington Carter Center (GWCC), is provided per 7 Code of Federal Regulations 
(CFR) § 2.94, Chief Security Director, Office of Safety, Security, and Protection and the 
Facility Security Plans for both complexes. 




3. SCOPE 

This DR establishes a uniform set of USDA minimum physical security standards, roles, and 
responsibilities which apply to all personnel including Federal employees, visitors, 
contractors, vendors, volunteers, and political appointees, who will access USDA facilities 
and lands, whether owned, leased, or managed. 

4. POLICY 

The USDA Physical Security Program, which protects facilities, assets, personnel, 
customers and visitors, must be managed in an efficient, effective and uniform manner. 
USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should supplement this policy by 
developing security procedures that apply to their respective work environments and 
facilities. Mission Area, agency, or staff office policies may be more stringent than this 
DR but must still comply with this DR and all applicable Federal laws and regulations. 

a. The Director, Office of Safety, Security and Protection is delegated the authority to 
implement physical security policy as stated in 7 CFR § 2.94. 




b. The USDA Physical Security Program, under the Director’s leadership is responsible 
for: 




(1) The protection of Federal facilities, assets, personnel, customers, and visitors; and 






(2) Managing these resources in an efficient, effective, and uniform manner to protect 
against threats that may lead to potential harm, loss of life, damage to Governmentowned 
or leased property, or disruption of operational capabilities. 






c. All USDA Federal Facilities and assets must apply appropriate physical security 
countermeasures and post signage per Interagency Security Committee (ISC) baseline 
security criteria, as appropriate. 





d. All USDA Federal Facilities and assets will establish employee and visitor access and 
escorting procedures that meet the standards outlined in DR 4620-002, Common 
Identification Standard for U.S. Department of Agriculture. 




e. Possession of firearms, dangerous weapons, explosives, or other destructive devices as 
identified by the ISC, are prohibited in USDA Federal facilities unless required for the 
lawful performance of official duties and only if such possession is authorized by law. 




f. Photography and the use of audio and video recording devices in non-public spaces is 
prohibited unless approved by the Mission Area, agency, or staff office Head, or 
designee. 




g. Packages, briefcases, and other containers in the immediate possession of visitors, 
employees, or other persons arriving on, working at, visiting, or departing from USDA 
Federal facilities and assets are subject to inspection. See 41 CFR § 102-74.370, What 
items are subject to inspection by Federal agencies? 




Refusal of inspection when attempting to enter a USDA Federal facility, will result in 
the denial of access. 

h. All Federal Facilities and assets must be assessed using the ISC Risk Management 
Process (RMP). 




i. USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must identify and develop adequate 
security measures to properly protect unique Federal Facilities and assets (e.g., 
laboratories, animal research facilities, high hazard dams, air tanker bases, explosive 
magazines, plant material centers, other infrastructure and assets identified by the 
Mission areas, agencies, or staff offices that are not specifically covered by the ISC) 
while leveraging ISC standards, pertinent regulations, and laws. 




j. All Federal Facility and asset assessment information shall be maintained in a 
centralized electronic physical security assessment information repository. 




k. All physical security information or similar sensitive information is to be provided to 
OSSP and protected under DR 3440-002, Control and Protection of “Sensitive Security 
Information” and is potentially exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of 
Information Act (FOIA), 5 United States Code (U.S.C.) §§ 552(b)(7)(E) and (b)(7)(F). 




l. Security documents will be maintained in accordance with the National Archives and 
Records Administration (NARA) General Records Schedule (GRS) 5.6, Security 
Records. 




m. Visitors not issued USDA credentials: 




(1) May be subject to security screening; 







(2) Must be escorted at all times while in non-public spaces; 






(3) Must wear a valid USDA Visitor Badge in an appropriate manner at all times while 
in non-public spaces; 






(4) Must comply with the instructions of USDA Security Personnel at all times; and 






(5) Do not require an escort while accessing the USDA South Building Cafeteria. 






n. Non-USDA Federal Employees: 




(1) May be subject to security screening; 






(2) Do not require an escort when non-public spaces; and 






(3) Must comply with the instructions of USDA Security Personnel at all times. 






5. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 

a. The Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA) will: 

(1) Oversee all physical security policies; and 






(2) Approve waivers and any exceptions to physical security policies. 






b. The Director, OSSP will: 

(1) Serve as the senior official for physical security as outlined in Secretary’s 
Memorandum (SM) 1076-032, Office of Safety, Security, and Protection, dated 
September 13, 2019; 






(2) Develop and maintain the Physical Security Program and Policy; 






(3) Keep Senior Management informed of all security concerns that may impact 
USDA; 






(4) Receive, review, and make recommendations on all waivers and any exceptions to 
the ASA; 






(5) Issue and rescind barring notices for NCR facilities under OSSP’s management; 






(6) Maintain the authority to approve or deny any security technology enhancements, 
security technology installations, access requests, and all other security-related 
matters in NCR facilities under OSSP’s management; 







(7) Oversee the USDA Active Shooter Program to include: 






(a) Policy and Active Shooter Response Plan and curriculum development; 








(b) Requests and approvals for training; 








(c) Approve training curriculum, exercises, and drills concepts, in consultation 
with the USDA Security Council; and 








(d) Coordinate with USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices for the 
effective and efficient delivery of the program; 








(8) Maintain physical security programs and policies in the HQ Complex, GWCC, and 
other USDA NCR facilities as assigned; 






(9) Liaise with law enforcement agencies in the NCR; and 






(10) Approve requests for any and all electronic data reports in the NCR (card reader 
activity, alarm reports, and video surveillance system footage). 






c. The OSSP FPD Director will: 

(1) Provide daily leadership, management, and oversight of physical security within 
FPD; 






(2) Develop and maintain USDA physical security policy and guidance; 






(3) Identify minimum training standards for all personnel assigned physical security 
responsibilities; 






(4) Respond to emergency Mission Area, agency, and staff office security requests for 
assistance; 






(5) Assist USDA Mission Area, agency, and staff offices in conducting physical 
security investigations and assessments by providing training or recommending 
external training resources to Mission Area, agency, and staff office Security 
Specialists; 






(6) Conduct compliance reviews of Mission Area, agency, and staff office physical 
security programs to include physical security assessment and risk mitigation plans; 






(7) Represent and act as liaison for the Department in contacts with other Federal 
security entities and organizations; 






(8) Manage and maintain USDA’s enterprise Physical Access Control System (ePACS) 
infrastructure; 







(9) Oversee policies and procedures for USDA Federal and non-Federal employees 
requiring a LincPass or AltLinc; 






(10) Develop and maintain an electronic physical security assessment database and 
repository that identifies and tracks all USDA Federal Facilities and assets with 
their corresponding Facility Security Level (FSL), assessment due date, completion 
data; and storage of their corresponding physical security assessments, FSL 
determinations, risk mitigation plans, and supporting documentation; and 






(11) Advise the Director of OSSP on physical security issues at USDA facilities to 
include the NCR. 






d. The OSSP Security Services Division (SSD) Director will: 

(1) Establish, maintain, and oversee security guard force program at USDA NCR 
facilities; 






(2) Advise the Director of OSSP on physical security issues at USDA NCR facilities; 






(3) Provide enforcement of prohibited items at USDA NCR facilities (Appendix D, 
USDA Prohibited Items Reference List); 






(4) Provide enforcement of visitor policy at USDA NCR facilities; (define visitors or 
reference visitor DR); 






(5) Develop and implement a security awareness program for employees in the NCR; 






(6) Ensure Security Plans are developed for NCR facilities that includes such annexes 
as Facility Security Plan and Clean Desk Policy for sensitive information; 






(7) Develop and maintain policies and procedures for enforcing parking restrictions at 
USDA NCR facilities; 






(8) Enforce barring notices at USDA NCR facilities; and 






(9) Conduct physical security investigations within the NCR. 






e. Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Heads will: 

(1) Designate a lead Mission Area, agency, staff office Security Officer (SO) to 
manage and maintain a comprehensive physical security program; 






(2) Designate a Designated Official (DO) for all USDA Federal Facilities and assets 
that the Mission Area, agency, or staff office head is responsible to manage on 
behalf of USDA; 







(3) Ensure that physical security assessments are conducted for all USDA Federal 
Facilities and assets identified in Section 5e(2), as outlined in ISC standards and 
timelines; 






(4) Ensure a design-phase security survey is conducted and meets the facility security 
level baseline security criteria for all new facility construction, major renovations, 
and new leases; 






(5) Provide Mission Area, agency, staff office facility(s) physical security assessment 
data to FPD as requested; 






(6) Ensure Security Plans are developed for all USDA Federal Facility that includes 
such annexes as Occupant Emergency Plan, Facility Security Plan, and Active 
Shooter Preparedness Plan, and Clean Desk Policy for sensitive information; 






(7) Provide adequate training to all personnel assigned physical security responsibilities 
for performing security functions; 






(8) Ensure performance measures are incorporated into the performance plans of 
individuals delegated physical security, and emergency management 
responsibilities; 






(9) Provide appropriate resources to the SO for the protection of USDA Federal and 
non-Federal employees, the public, facilities, lands, and assets; and 






(10) Issues and rescinds barring notices for USDA facilities identified in Section 5e(2). 






f. Mission Area, Agency, Staff Office SOs will: 

(1) Implement physical security policy and procedures, maintain records and files on 
physical security related information, and report physical security information when 
required; 






(2) Keep the ASA and senior management aware of any concerns that may impact 
USDA operations. 






(3) Develop Physical Security Threat Management Program to immediately respond to 
security threats or incidents directed at Mission Area, agency, and staff office 
employees, facilities, or assets. 






(4) Maintain a list of Mission Area, agency, staff office SOs, Physical Security 
Specialists, and facility DOs; 






(5) Identify and group, as appropriate, all Mission Area, agency, staff office assigned 
Federal Facilities and assets, as identified in USDA’s Corporate Property 







Automated Information System database, into defined USDA Federal Facilities and 
assets and provide FPD with an updated list annually; 






(6) Conduct preventative maintenance checks on all security countermeasures, as 
prescribed by manufacturers. All devices found to be inoperable or functioning 
improperly must be immediately documented. A risk mitigation plan must be 
drafted to identify the measures taken to cover the vulnerability while the 
equipment is being repaired or replaced; 






(7) Establish and monitor a lifecycle plan for all physical security countermeasure 
equipment; 






(8) Conduct physical security assessments in accordance with the ISC RMPs; 






(9) Document and address all recommendations in a corresponding Risk Mitigation 
Plan; 






(10) Follow the most recent ISC RMP guidance documents; 






(11) Develop written employee, contractor, and visitor access control procedures for 
each facility that complies with DR 4620-002 and ISC standards (e.g., visitor signin, 
100% visitor escort, foreign visitor screening); 






(12) Inspect all installed security countermeasures to ensure all manufacturers’ 
specifications and countermeasures performance levels are met before signing off 
on contract payment; 






(13) Conduct physical security investigations and assessments as required; 






(14) Protect all sensitive information (e.g., personally identifiable information (PII), 
proprietary information, intellectual property, Controlled Unclassified Information 
(CUI), classified information); and 






(15) Assist DOs with the review and training of facility Occupant Emergency Plans, 
Active Shooter Preparedness Plans, and Facility Security Plans. 






g. DOs will: 

(1) Provide for appropriate security countermeasures at their facility; 






(2) Appropriately secure all USDA Federal Facilities and property. For public facing 
facilities that cannot be secured (e.g., Service Centers, visitor centers), ensure 
entrances are monitored at all times by USDA personnel; 






(3) Develop written Risk Mitigation Plans within 60 days of completed security 
assessments to address all recommendations and findings (i.e., overall risks, 







identified vulnerabilities). All vulnerabilities must be addressed with one of the 
following categories: Mitigated, In-Process or Will be Mitigated, Accepted Level 
of Risk, Removed Risk. Risk Management Plans must be signed by a DO or 
designee with the authority to make such determinations; 






(4) Identify the FSL for Federal Facilities and provide appropriate resources to meet the 
FSL Baseline Criteria as defined by the ISC RMP; and 






(5) Develop and distribute written local facility Occupant Emergency Plans, Active 
Shooter Preparedness Plans, Facility Security Plans, Risk Mitigation Plans and 
Strategies and Items Prohibited from Federal Facilities. 






h. Employees will: 

(1) Wear a valid USDA identification badge at all times while in USDA facilities; the 
USDA identification must be worn above the waist in such a manner that the 
identity of the individual is clearly visible at all times; 






(2) Readily present their identification to USDA security personnel upon request; 






(3) Comply with any security or emergency-related verbal instructions from USDA 
security personnel; 






(4) Report lost Identification (ID) badges immediately to their supervisor and the 
Mission Area, agency, or staff office; 






(5) Escort visitors throughout the facility at all times; 






(6) Report all security incidents, violations or immediate concerns to Mission Area, 
agency, staff office SO; and 






(7) Understand and comply with all physical security policies and procedures. 






i. Visitors entering secured facilities with a security checkpoint will: 

(1) Process through the security checkpoint; 






(2) Provide valid photo identification and contact information prior to being signed in; 






(3) Wear a valid USDA Visitor Pass in the appropriate manner at all times; 






(4) Wait for their Point of Contact (POC) in a designated waiting area; 






(5) Be accompanied by a POC for the duration of their visit in the facility. Any visitor 
found without their POC will be escorted out of the facility or to the nearest visitor 
entrance; and 







(6) Comply with instructions of the USDA Security Personnel at all times. 






j. Visitors entering secured facilities will: 

(1) Provide valid photo identification and contact information prior to being signed in; 






(2) Wear a valid USDA Visitor Pass in the appropriate manner at all times; 






(3) Wait for their POC in a designated waiting area; 






(4) Be accompanied by a POC for the duration of their visit in the facility. Any visitor 
found without their POC will be escorted out of the facility or to the nearest visitor 
entrance; and 






(5) Comply with instructions of the USDA Security Personnel at all times. 






k. USDA HQ Cafeteria Visitors will: 

(1) Process through the electronic security checkpoint; 






(2) Provide valid photo identification prior to being signed in; 






(3) Wear a valid USDA Cafeteria Visitor “V” Pass in the appropriate manner at all 
times; 






(4) Remain within the confines of the cafeteria, the restrooms, and the designated 
corridor in which to ingress/egress to/from the cafeteria; and 






(5) Comply with the instructions of the USDA Special Police Officer at all times. 






6. BARRING NOTICES 

a. OSSP reserves the right to bar anyone from NCR facilities under OSSP control, who 
violates any portion of this policy and who is deemed a security threat to the 
Department, any individual within a Federal facility or asset, or themselves; 




b. Requests to bar an employee, contract employee, or any visitor to USDA facilities must 
be submitted in writing in memorandum format, by a Mission Area, agency, staff office 
Head or designee to the Director, OSSP; and 




c. Requests made on behalf of the USDA Child Development Center, Agricultural Federal 
Credit Union, Employee Services Recreation Association, or any contractor working in 
any USDA Facility must be made by the Contracting Officer’s Representation (COR) or 





their designee. Questions and concerns regarding barring notices should be directed to 
OSSP at 202-720-0000 or 




d. Anyone barred may submit a letter of appeal to the ASA. The ASA’s decision will be 
final. 




e. USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may perform Barring Actions at their 
respective locations outside the NCR. These actions will be done in accordance with 
USDA Mission Area, agency or staff office policies and will be reported to OSSP. 




7. ELECTRONIC REPORTS 

Internal or external Requests for any and all electronic data reports for NCR facilities under 
OSSP’s control (e.g., card reader activity, alarm reports, closed-circuit television footage) 
shall be submitted in writing in memorandum format to OSSP FPD. OSSP will approve or 
disapprove the request based on the intent for which the information is being used. 

8. INQUIRIES 

Questions regarding this DR should be directed to OSSP at 202-720-0000 or 
securityservicehelp@usda.gov. 

-END- 


APPENDIX A 
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 

ASA Assistant Secretary for Administration 

CFR Code of Federal Regulations 

CISA Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency 

COR Contracting Officer’s Representative 

CUI Controlled Unclassified Information 

DHS Department of Homeland Security 

DO Designated Official 

DG Departmental Guidebook 

DR Departmental Regulation 

EO Executive Order 

ePACS Enterprise Physical Access Control System 

FIPS PUB Federal Information Processing Standards Publication 

FLETC Federal Law Enforcement Training Center 

FOIA Freedom of Information Act 

FOUO For Official Use Only 

FPD Facility Protection Division (OSSP Component) 

FSC Facility Security Committee 

FSL Facility Security Level 

GRS General Records Schedule 

GS General Schedule 

GWCC George Washington Carver Center 

HQ Headquarters 

HSPD-12 Homeland Security Presidential Directive-12, Common Identification 

ID Identification 

IDS Intrusion Detection System 

ISC Interagency Security Committee 

NARA National Archives and Records Administration 

NCR National Capital Region 

NIPP National Infrastructure Protection Plan 

OSSP Office of Safety, Security, and Protection 

PACS Physical Access Control System 

PII Personally Identifiable Information 

PIV Personal Identity Verification 

PIV-I Personal Identity Verification – Interoperable 

POC Point of Contact 

PPD-21 Presidential Policy Directive-21, Critical Infrastructure Identification, 
Prioritization, and Protection 

PSS Physical Security Specialist 

RMP Risk Management Process 

SM Secretary’s Memorandum 

SO Security Officer 


SSD Security Services Division (OSSP Component) 

U.S.C. United States Code 

USDA United States Department of Agriculture 


APPENDIX B 
DEFINITIONS 

Agency. Organizational units of the Department, other than staff offices, whose head report 
to officials within the Office of the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Under Secretaries, Assistant 
Secretaries, and Assistant to the Secretary. (Source: USDA, Departmental Guidebook (DG) 
0100-002, USDA Departmental Directives Definitions Glossary) 

Agency Head. Agency Administrator or officer director, or the person acting as head. 

Asset. A resource requiring protection. (Person, structure, facility, information, material, or 
process that has value). 

Barring Notice. Implemented to prevent access to USDA facilities for any person who has 
exhibited behavior deemed harmful to the facility or its occupants. 

Building. An enclosed structure (above or below grade). 

Campus. Two or more Federal facilities located on one site and typically sharing some 
aspects of the environment, such as parking, courtyards, private vehicle access roads, or gates 
and entrances to connected buildings. A campus may also be referred to as a “Federal 
center” or “complex.” 

Close Proximity. The distance to another building, site, facility, asset, or Federal facility 
does not exceed a 2-mile radius. 

Commissioning. The testing of newly installed security countermeasures to ensure the 
performance of the equipment meets manufacturer’s published functionality and 
mitigates the vulnerability mentioned in the physical security assessment. 

Compliance Benchmarks. Mechanism to assess the degree to which Federal facilities 
have implemented the policies and standards of the ISC. They were written to 
correspond directly to the requirements set forth by: Risk Management Process for 
Federal Facilities: An ISC Standard; Items Prohibited from Federal Facilities: An ISC 
Standard; and Planning and Response to an Active Shooter: An ISC Policy and Best 
Practices Guide. They do not assess compliance with specific countermeasures or levels 
of protection. 

Container. An object that can be used to hold or transport something. 

Controlled Area. Areas that, if damaged or compromised, could have significant adverse 
consequences for the Mission Area, agency, or staff office’s mission or the health and safety 
of individuals within the building or the surrounding community. May also be referred to as 
“limited access areas,” “restricted areas,” or “exclusionary zones.” Critical areas do not 


necessarily have to be within Government-controlled space (e.g., generators located outside 
Government-controlled space). 

Critical Infrastructure. Tiered structures, systems and assets, whether physical or virtual, so 
vital to the United States that the incapacity or destruction would have a debilitating impact 
on security, national economic security, national public health or safety, or any combination 
of those matters. 

Designated Official (DO). The highest-ranking official of the primary tenant agency of 
a Federal facility or, alternatively, a designee selected by mutual agreement of tenant 
agency officials. (Source: 41 CFR § 102-71.20, 18 USC § 930(g)(1)) 

Designee. An individual formally delegated decision-making authority to act on behalf 
of another who is responsible. 

Employee. Defined in 5 U.S.C. § 2105, Employee, within a department or Mission Area, 
agency, and staff office. “Employee” means a person, other than the President and Vice 
President, employed by, detailed or assigned to, USDA, including members of the Armed 
Forces; an expert or consultant to USDA; an industrial or commercial contractor, licensee, 
certificate holder, or grantee of USDA, including all subcontractors; or any other category of 
person who acts on behalf of an Mission Area, agency, and staff office as determined by the 
Mission Area, agency, and staff office head. 

Facility Security Level (FSL). A categorization based on the analysis of several 
security-related facility factors, which serves as the basis for the implementation of 
countermeasures specified in ISC standards. 

Federal Employee. Personnel as defined by 5 U.S.C. § 2105. 

Federal Facility. A building or part thereof owned or leased by the Federal Government, 
where Federal employees are regularly present for the purpose of performing their 
official duties. 

Interagency Security Committee (ISC). The Interagency Security Committee (ISC), chaired 
by Department of Homeland Security (DHS), consists of 53 Federal departments and 
agencies, defines the criteria and processes that those responsible for the security of a facility 
should use to determine its facility security level and provides an integrated, single source of 
physical security countermeasures for all non-military Federal facilities. 

Lifecycle. The usefulness of a security countermeasure that includes acquisition, 
implementation and assignment, reporting, maintenance, and disposal. Most security 
countermeasures have a lifecycle of 3 to 5 years. 

LincPass. USDA has named their common ID card the LincPass, as it is designed to link a 
person’s identity to an identification card and the card to a person’s ability to access Federal 
buildings and computer systems, also called AltLinc when used for short term access. The 


spelling of LincPass and AltLinc is a tribute to President Abraham Lincoln, who created the 
Department of Agriculture, also known as the People’s Department in 1862. 

Mission Area. A group of agencies with related functions that report to the same Under or 
Assistant Secretary. Research, Education, and Economics (REE) is an example of a mission 
area. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002) 

Non-Critical Infrastructure. Structures, systems and assets, whether physical or virtual, 
if incapacitated, will not have a debilitating impact on USDA’s ability to perform 
mission critical functions. 

Non-Federal Employee. Personnel, not covered by Title 5 of the U.S.C., that either are 
contractors, volunteers, student interns, etc. that work for USDA. 

Personal Identify Verification – Interoperable (PIV-I). An identity card (“smart card”) 
also known as LincPass issued to an individual that contains stored identity credentials 
so that the claimed identity of the cardholder can be verified against the stored 
credentials by another person or by an automated process. 

Physical Access Control System (PACS). Electronic system consisting of card readers, 
biometric devices, locking devices and control panels that grants access to physical 
facilities through the use of a Personal Identify Verification (PIV) Credential such as the 
LincPass or AltLinc. 

Physical Security Assessment. A process that identifies threats, risks, vulnerabilities, 
and a risk mitigation to improve the security posture of a USDA infrastructure. 

Physical Security Specialist (PSS). A Mission Area, agency, or staff office person with 
physical security experience that holds a General Schedule (GS) 0080, Security 
Administration series or has been assigned as an additional duty with proper training, 
such as the course at the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center (FLETC) in Glynco, 
GA. 

Primary Federal Facility. The Federal facility in a campus environment that is 
considered the main building for mission operations. When assessing a site with 
multiple Federal facilities as a campus the assessor must identify the primary Federal 
facility as this will determine the FSL for the campus. 

Risk. Potential for an unwanted outcome resulting from an incident, event, or 
occurrence, as determined by its probability and the associated consequences. 

Risk-Based Decision Making. A determination of a course of action predicated 
primarily on the assessment of risk and the expected impact of that course of action on 
that risk. 


Risk Management Methodology. A set of methods, principles, or rules used to identify, 
analyze, assess, and communicate risk, and mitigate, accept, or control it to an acceptable 
level at an acceptable cost. 

Risk Mitigation Plan. A document that identifies risks and specifies the actions that have 
been chosen to manage those risks. 

Security Baseline. The minimum-security standards based on the facility security level 
(FSL) determination that are identified in the Interagency Security Council (ISC) 
security criteria. 

Security Countermeasure. A device or procedure that protects USDA assets or 
personnel. 

Security Sensitive Site. An entire facility or space within a facility itself that contains 
environments, equipment, or data normally not housed in typical office, storage, or public 
access facilities. Examples of special-use facilities include, but are not limited to, highsecurity 
laboratories, irradiators, aircraft, or unique storage facilities designed specifically for 
such things as chemicals and explosives. 

Site. The physical land area controlled by the Government by right of ownership, leasehold 
interest, permit, or other legal conveyance, upon which a facility is placed. 

Staff Office. Departmental administrative offices whose heads report to officials within the 
Office of the Secretary. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002) 

System. Any combination of facilities, equipment, personnel, procedures, and 
communications integrated for a specific purpose. 

Target. Asset, network, system, or geographic area chosen by an adversary to be impacted 
by an attack. 

Threat. Natural or man-made occurrence, individual, entity, or action that has or 
indicates the potential to harm life, information, operations, the environment or property. 

Visitor. An individual authorized to be in a controlled facility on a short-term and 
limited or controlled basis. 

Vulnerability. A weakness (avenue of approach) in the design or operation of a facility that 
an adversary can exploit. 

Work Environment. A space or area either in a facility or at an outside location where 
USDA personnel perform agency mission requirements. 


APPENDIX C 
AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES 

7 CFR § 2.94, Chief Security Director, Office of Safety, Security, and Protection 

7 CFR § 2.95, Director, Office of Homeland Security 

7 CFR § 2.96, Director, Office of Operations; responsibilities in the NCR 

41 CFR § 102-71.20, What definitions apply to GSA’s real property policies? 

41 CFR § 102-74.370, What items are subject to inspection by Federal agencies? 

41 CFR § 102-74.375, What is the policy on admitting persons to Government property? 

5 U.S.C. § 2105, Employee 

18 U.S.C Part I, Chapter 33, Section 701, Official badges, identification cards, other 
insignia; Federal ID cannot be Photocopied or Duplicated 

18 U.S.C. § 930, Possession of firearms and dangerous weapons in Federal facilities 

DHS, Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), ISC Risk-Management 
Process for Federal Facilities, November 2016 

DHS, CISA, ISC Risk-Management Process for Federal Facilities, Appendix A: Design- 
Basis Threat (FOUO), February 2016 

DHS, CISA, ISC Risk-Management Process for Federal Facilities, Appendix B: 
Countermeasures, January 2016 

DHS, CISA, ISC Risk-Management Process for Federal Facilities, Appendix C: Child Care 
Centers, January 2016 

DHS, CISA, ISC Planning and Response to an Active Shooter: An Interagency Security 
Committee Policy and Best Practices Guide (FOUO), July 2015 

DHS, CISA, National Infrastructure Protection Plan (NIPP), 2013 

Executive Order (EO) 12977, Interagency Security Committee, October 19, 1995 

EO 13286, Amendment of Executive Orders, and Other Actions, in Connection With the 
Transfer of Certain Functions to the Secretary of Homeland Security, February 28, 2003 


Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), 5 U.S.C. § 552, July 5, 1967, as amended 

Homeland Security Presidential Directive (HSPD) -12, Policy for a Common Identification 
Standard for Federal Employees and Contractors, August 27, 2004 

NARA, General Records Schedule (GRS) 5.6, Security Records, April 15, 2016 

National Institute of Standards and Technology, Federal Information Processing Standards 
Publication (FIPS PUB) 201-2, Personal Identity Verification (PIV) of Federal Employees 
and Contractors, Section 2.1 Control Objectives, August 2013 

Presidential Policy Directive (PPD) – 21, Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience, 
February 12, 2013 

USDA, DG 0100-002, USDA Departmental Directives Definitions Glossary, September 26, 
2018 

USDA, DR 3440-002, Control and Protection of “Sensitive Security Information,” January 
30, 2003 

USDA, DR 3440-003, Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) Program, September 13, 
2021 

USDA, DR 4620-002, Common Identification Standard for U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
June 24, 2021 

USDA, Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Coordination Policy Memorandum, 
Prioritization/Protection of USDA Facilities, January 23, 2012 

USDA, Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Coordination Policy Memorandum, 
Establishing a Center of Excellence for Physical Security Countermeasure Management, 
January 24, 2012 

USDA, Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Coordination Policy Memorandum, 
Standardization and Consolidation of Facility Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) for Alarm 
Monitoring, June 7, 2012 

USDA, Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Coordination Policy Memorandum, 
Revised Contract Security Force Management, August 23, 2012 

USDA, Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Coordination Policy Memorandum, 
Strengthening U.S. Department of Agriculture Visitor Policy, May 21, 2012 

USDA, Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Coordination Policy Memorandum, 
Prioritization/Protection of USDA Facilities, October 2012 


USDA, SM 1076-032, Office of Safety, Security and Protection, September 13, 2019 


APPENDIX D 
USDA NOTICE OF PROHIBITED ITEMS 


USDA Prohibited Items to include, but are not limited to: Guns and Firearms, unless meeting 
the exemptions listed in 18 U.S.C. § 930(d), Club-like items and Striking Devices, Sharp 
Bladed or Cutting Instruments, Destructive Devices, Explosives, or Combustible Chemical 
Compounds and Mixtures, Incendiaries, and Disabling Chemicals, Intoxicants, and Other 
Dangerous Items. 

Pursuant to the authority provided to the Interagency Security Committee (ISC) in Section 5 
of Executive Order (EO) 12977, Interagency Security Committee, as amended by EO 13286, 
Amendment of Executive Orders, and Other Actions, in Connection With the Transfer of 
Certain Functions to the Secretary of Homeland Security, this ISC Standard identifies a 
baseline list of prohibited items that each Facility Security Committee (FSC) or Designated 
Official (DO), with input from an appropriate legal authority (when applicable) shall 
customize to mitigate facility risk. The items that are prohibited in Federal facilities include 
any item prohibited by any applicable Federal, State, local and tribal law and/or ordinance, as 
well as firearms, dangerous weapons, explosives, or other destructive devices (including their 
individual parts or components) designed, redesigned, used, intended for use, or readily 
converted to cause injury, death, or property damage. This list applies to all facility 
occupants, contractors, and the visiting public. 

All employees are subject to random screening. 


 

U.S. Department of Agriculture 

Washington, D.C. 20250 

 

 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION 

 Number: 

DR 1650-002 

 SUBJECT: Building Safety/Security Occupant 
Emergency Program 

 

 DATE: 

October 7, 1992 

 OPI: 

Office of Operations, Real Property 
Management Division 



 1 PURPOSE 

The purpose of this regulation is to prescribe general facility protection policies for the 
Department of Agriculture (USDA) Nationwide. 

 

2 BACKGROUND 

This regulation revises the USDA Facility Protection Policy and adopts the provisions set 
forth in Section 101-20.103 of the Federal Property Management Regulations (FPMR), 
Title 41 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.), Subpart 101-20.1 (see Appendix A). This 
regulation also adopts the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 
standard, 29 C.F.R. 1910.38 (see Appendix B), as the requirement for the Occupant 
Emergency Program for those facilities where this regulation may conflict with standards 
imposed on occupants in a commonly occupied facility. 

 

3 CANCELLATION 

Departmental Regulation 1650-2, dated February 21, 1986, and Agriculture Property 
Management Regulations, Subchapter "N", Subpart 104-55.8 are hereby superseded. 

 

4 SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS 

Agencies occupying a facility owned or leased by the Federal Government are required to 
develop an Occupant Emergency Plan which provides for immediate positive and orderly 
action to safeguard life and property in the event of all emergencies, except enemy attack. 
To execute the plan agencies are required to staff and train an Occupant Emergency 
Organization. This can be under OSHA standards and/or with assistance from GSA. 

Section 101-20.103 of the FPMR applies to USDA agencies that occupy space owned, 
leased, or assigned by the General Services Administration (GSA). However those 


USDA agencies that own or lease space under their own authority shall comply with 
Section 101-20.103 to the extent feasible. 

Those agencies that occupy USDA-owned or leased space may acquire the services of 
GSA for standard protection and special protection on a reimbursable basis. 

The Rules and Regulations Regarding Public Buildings, as distributed in accordance with 
the Office of Operations letter, dated September 30, 1991 (see Appendix C), shall be 
posted in Federally-owned or leased facilities. Permission to post this notice in leased 
facilities should be received from the lessor. 

 

5 POLICY 

Each USDA agency shall comply with all pertinent facility regulations and procedures, 
assist in developing an Occupant Emergency Plan, recommend improvements to the 
Occupant Emergency Program, report all unlawful acts to the proper authorities, provide 
staffing for the Occupant Emergency Organization, and provide proper training for 
employees. 

 

6 RESPONSIBILITIES 

Agency heads and managers will ensure that the requirements of this regulation are 
complied with at their respective locations. 

Managing an emergency in a Federally-owned or leased facility is the responsibility of 
the highest ranking official of the agency having the largest number of employees in the 
building or facility, or an alternate high ranking official designated in advance by 
agreement of occupant agency officials. Known as the Designated Official, this person 
must supervise the development of the Occupant Emergency Plan and the staffing and 
training of the Occupant Emergency Organization. 

All agencies requiring a written and approved Occupant Emergency Plan and Occupant 
Emergency Organization (see Appendix B, Part 1910.38 (a)(5)(iii)) must maintain and 
make a copy of such Plan and Organization available at the affected facility for review 
upon request by any authorized GSA or USDA official. 

The Occupant Emergency Plan Designated Official may obtain assistance from GSA 
Federal Protection Service (FPS) in setting up the plan and in the coordination of the plan 
with the local police, fire, and other authorities. (see Appendix D for appropriate regional 
FPS offices). 

For the Federally-owned USDA Washington, D.C. complex, (the Administration, South, 
Auditors, and Cotton Annex buildings), the Office of Operations (OO) will appoint 
Designated Officials for each building. In addition, OO will appoint Emergency 
Coordinators, Floor Monitors, Damage Control Team personnel, Elevator Monitors, and 
other organizational members as needed. OO will request nominations of personnel from 
agencies for appointments as Area Monitors, Stairwell Monitors, and persons trained in 
emergency medical procedures, e.g. CPR, to respond to emergencies and to assist 
disabled employees. 


The OO, Facilities Management Division will provide personnel technically qualified in 
the operation of utility systems, firefighting apparatus, warning systems, etc., and will 
assist in training members of the emergency organization. 

In GSA-operated complexes and GSA-leased space, the Designated Official should 
contact the GSA Regional Office for assistance. The FPS will assist in coordinating the 
plan with the local police, fire, and other authorities. The GSA Buildings Manager or 
leasing official will provide personnel technically qualified in the operation of utility 
systems, firefighting apparatus, warning systems, etc., and will assist in the training of 
members of the emergency organization. 

For USDA agency direct leases, agency officials in charge of the leasing services will 
assist the Designated Official in coordinating emergency plans with the lessor and local 
authorities and may request assistance for the Designated Official from the FPS. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


APPENDIX A 

 

Federal Property Management Regulations 

101-20.102 Cleaning and maintenance. 

GSA shall provide: 

(a) Cleaning for all assigned space at a level equivalent to the cleaning furnished commercially for similar 
types of space. 

(b) Maintenance of building systems for heating and cooling, and maintenance of plumbing, electrical, and 
elevator systems. 

(c) Maintenance and repairs of exterior, grounds, sidewalks, driveways, and parking areas. 

(d) Maintenance of building equipment such as directory boards, clock systems, window shades, door 
locks, and door title cards. 

(e) Cyclic paintings of agency occupied space once every five years, and paintings of public areas once 
every three years, if needed. 

(f) Maintenance of all safety and fire protection devices, equipment, and systems in a state of readiness in 
conformance with applicable laws, regulations, and standards. 

(g) Maintenance of all food service activities in accordance with applicable U.S. Public Health Service 
standards and local regulations. 

(h) Arrangements for raising and lowering the United States flags at appropriate times. 

1 101-20.103 Physical protection and building security. 

1 101-20.103-1 Standard protection. 

For properties under its custody and control, GSA will provide standard protection services by: 

(a) Responding to criminal occurrences, incidents. and life threatening events through the use of Federal 
Protective Officers and local law enforcement officers where a response agreement is in effect. 

(b) Installing and maintaining perimeter security devices and systems if they are monitored to provide 
timely response by authorized personnel; 

(c) Implementing crime prevention activities, including tenant awareness programs; 

(d) Investigating crimes and violations of Federal statutes, recording and evaluating reports of criminal 
incidents, and referring findings and evidence to appropriate enforcement agencies; 

(e) Entering into cooperative agreements with local law enforcement agencies; 


(f) Performing physical security surveys and providing security advisory services; or 

(g) Coordinating a comprehensive Occupant Emergency Program. 

(h) Periodically evaluating the effectiveness of protection services by indepth inspections of procedures and 
records. 

1 101-20.103-2 Special protection. 

The degree of protection beyond standard levels required by the nature of an agency's activities or by 
unusual public reaction to an agency's program will be determined jointly by GSA and the occupant 
agency. Special protection will be provided on a reimbursable basis. The level of special protection will be 
determined on a facility-by-facility basis, after the conducting of appropriate security surveys and crime 
prevention assessments. In such determinations, GSA and occupant agencies will consider: 

(a) The characteristics of the facility, including size, configuration, exterior lighting, and presence of 
physical barriers; 

(b) The location of the facility and the history of criminal or disruptive incidents in the surrounding 
neighborhoods; and 

(c) The reimbursable funding and resources available to GSA for provision of protective service. 

(d) Tenant agency's mission. 

1 101-20.103-3 Responsibilities of occupant agencies. 

Occupants of facilities under the custody and control of GSA shall: 

(a) Cooperate to the fullest extent with all pertinent facility procedures and regulations; 

(b) Promptly report all crimes and suspicious circumstances occurring on GSA-controlled Property to the 
regional Law Enforcement Branch and other designed law enforcement agencies and then through internal 
agency channels; 

(c) Provide training to employees regarding protection and responses to emergency situations; and 

(d) Make recommendations for improving the effectiveness of protection in Federal facilities. 

1 101-20.103.4 Occupant Emergency Program. 

(a) The Designated Official (as defined in 101-20.003(&)) is responsible for developing, implementing, and 
maintaining an Occupant Emergency Plan (as defined in 101-20.003(w)). The Designated Official's 
responsibilities include establishing, staffing, and training an Occupant Emergency Organization with 
agency employees. GSA shall assist in the establishment and maintenance of such plans and organizations. 

(b) All occupant agencies of a facility shall fully cooperate with the Designated Official in the 
implementation of the emergency plans and the staffing of the emergency organization. 

(c) GSA shall provide emergency program policy guidance, shall review plans and organizations annually, 
shall assist in training of personnel, and shall otherwise ensure proper administration of Occupant 


Emergency Program (as defined in SS 10120.003(x)). In leased space, GSA will solicit the assistance of the 
lessor in the establishment and implementation of plans. 

(d) In accordance with established criteria, GSA shall assist the Occupant Emergency Organization (as 
defined in 101-20.003(v)) by providing technical personnel qualified in the operation of utility systems and 
protective equipment. 

(52 FR 11263, Apr. 8, 1987; 52 FR 24158, July 29,1987) 

101-20.103-5 Initiating action under 0ccupant Emergency Programs. 

(a) The decision to activate the Occupant Emergency Organization shall be made by the Designated 
Official, or by the designated alternate official. Decisions to activate shall be based upon the best available 
information, including an understanding of local tensions, the sensitivity of target agency(ies), and previous 
experience with similar situations. Advice shall be solicited, when possible, from the GSA buildings 
manager, from the appropriate Federal Protective Service official, and from Federal, State, and local law 
enforcement agencies. 

(b) When there is immediate danger to persons or property, such as fire, explosion, or the discovery of an 
explosive device (not Including a bomb threat), occupants shall be evacuated or relocated in accordance 
with the plan without consultation. This shall be accomplished by sounding the fire alarm system or by 
other appropriate means. 

(c) When there is advance notice of an emergency, the Designated Official shall initiate appropriate action 
according to the plan. 

(d) After normal duty hours, the senior Federal official present shall represent the Designated Official or 
his/her alternates and shall initiate action to cope with emergencies in accordance with the plans. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


APPENDIX B 

CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS 

Title 29 Part 1910.38 

1910.38 Employee emergency plans and fire prevention plans. 

(a) Emergency action plan-(1) Scope and application. This paragraph (a) applies to all emergency 
action plans required by a particular OSHA standard. The emergency action plan shall be in writing (except 
as provided in the last sentence of paragraph (a)(5)(iii) of this section) and shall cover those designated 
actions employers and employees must take to ensure employee safety from fire and other emergencies. 

(2) Elements. The following elements, at a minimum, shall be included in the plan: 

(i) Emergency escape procedures and emergency escape route assignments; 

(ii) Procedures to be followed by employees who remain to operate critical plant operations before they 
evacuate; 

(iii) Procedures to account for all employees after emergency evacuation has been completed; 

(iv) Rescue and medical duties for those employees who are to perform them; 

(v) The preferred means of reporting fires and other emergencies; and 

(vi) Names or regular job titles of persons or departments who can be contacted for further information or 
explanation of duties under the plan. 

(3) Alarm system. (i) The employer shall establish an employee alarm system which complies with 
1910.165. 

(ii) If the employee alarm system is used for alerting fire brigade members, or for other purposes, a 
distinctive signal for each purpose shall be used. 

(4) Evacuation. The employer shall establish in the emergency action plan the types of evacuation to be 
used in emergency circumstances. 

 (5) Training. (i) Before implementing the emergency action plan, the employer shall designate and train a 
sufficient number of persons to assist in the safe and orderly emergency evacuation of employees. 

(ii) The employer shall review the plan with each employee covered by the plan at the following times: 

(A) Initially when the plan is developed, 

(B) Whenever the employee's responsibilities or designated actions under the plan change, and 

(C) Whenever the plan is changed. 

(iii)The employer shall review with each employee upon initial assignment those parts of the plan which 
the employee must know to protect the employee in the event of an emergency. The written plan shall be 
kept at the workplace and made available for employee review. For those employers with 10 or fewer 


employees the plan may be communicated orally to employees and the employer need not maintain a 
written plan. 

(b) Fire prevention plan-(l) Scope and application. This paragraph (b) applies to all fire prevention plans 
required by a particular OSHA standard. The fire prevention plan shall be in writing, except as provided in 
the last sentence of paragraph (b)(4)(ii) of this section. 

(2) Elements. The following elements, at a minimum, shall be included in the fire prevention plan: 

(i) A list of the major workplace fire hazards and their proper handling and storage procedures, potential 
ignition sources (such as welding, smoking and, others) and their control procedures, and the type of fire 
protection equipment or systems which can control a fire involving them; 

(ii) Names or regular job titles of those personnel responsible for maintenance of equipment and systems 
installed to prevent or control ignitions or fires; and 

(iii) Names or regular job titles of those personnel responsible for control of fuel source hazards. 

(3) Housekeeping. The employer shall control accumulations of flammable and combustible waste 
materials and residues so that they do not contribute to a fire emergency. The 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 APPENDIX TO SUBPART E - MEANS OF 
EGRESS 

 This appendix serves as a nonmandatory guideline to assist employers in complying with the appropriate 
requirements of subpart E. 

1910.38 Employee emergency plans. 

 1. Emergency action plan elements. The emergency action plan should address emergencies that the 
employer may reasonably expect in the workplace. Examples are: fire; toxic chemical releases; hurricanes; 
tornadoes; blizzards; floods; and others. The elements of the emergency action plan presented in paragraph 
1910.38(a)(2) can be supplemented by the following to more effectively achieve employee safety and 
health in an emergency. The employer should list in detail the procedures to be taken by those employees 
who have been se1ected to remain behind to care for essential plant operations until their evacuation be 
comes absolutely necessary. Essential plant operations may include the monitoring of plant power supplies, 
water supplies, and other essential services which cannot be shut down for every emergency alarm. 
Essential plant operations may also include chemical or manufacturing processes which must be shut down 
in stages or steps where certain employees must be present to assure that safe shut down procedures are 
completed. 

The use of floor plans or workplace maps which clearly show the emergency escape routes should be 
included in the emergency action plan. Color coding will aid employees In determining their route 
assignments. 

The employer should also develop and explain in detail what rescue and medical first aid duties are to be 
performed and by whom. All employees are to be told what actions they are to take in these emergency 
situations that the employer anticipates may occur in the workplace. 

2. Emergency evacuation At the time of an emergency, employees should know what type of evacuation is 
necessary and what their role is in carrying out the plan. In some cases where the emergency is very grave, 
total and immediate evacuation of all employees is necessary. In other emergencies, a partial evacuation of 
nonessential employees with a delayed evacuation of others may be necessary for continued plant 
operation. In some cases, only those employees in the immediate area of the fire may be expected to 
evacuate or move to a safe area such as when a local application fire suppression system discharge 
employee alarm is sounded. Employees must be sure that they know what is expected of them in all such 
emergency possibilities which have been planned in order to provide assurance of their safety from fire or 
other emergency. 

The designation of refuge or safe areas for evacuation should be determined and identified in the plan. In a 
building divided into fire zones by fire walls. the refuge area may still be within the same building but in a 
different zone from where the emergency occurs. 

Exterior refuge or safe areas may include parking lots, open fields or streets which are located away from 
the site of the emergency and which provide sufficient space to accommodate the employees. Employees 
should be instructed to move away from the exit discharge doors of the building, and to avoid congregating 
close to the building where they may hamper emergency operations. 

3. Emergency action plan training. The employer should assure that an adequate number of employees are 
available at all times during working hours to act as evacuation wardens so that employees can be swiftly 
moved from the danger location to the safe areas. Generally, one warden for each twenty employees in the 
workplace should be able to provide adequate guidance and instruction at the time of a fire emergency. The 
employees selected or who volunteer to serve as wardens should be trained in the complete workplace 
layout and the various alternative escape routes from the workplace. All wardens and fellow employees 
should be made aware of handicapped employees who may need extra assistance, such as using the buddy 


system, and of haz- ardous areas to be avoided during emergencies. Before leaving, wardens should check 
rooms and other enclosed spaces in the workplace for employees who may be trapped or otherwise unable 
to evacuate the area. 

After the desired degree of evacuation is completed, the wardens should be able to account for or otherwise 
verify that all employees are in the safe areas. 

In buildings with several places of employment, employers are encouraged to coordinate their plans with 
the other employers in the building. A building-wide or standardized plan for the whole building is 
acceptable provided that the employers inform their respective employees of their duties and 
responsibilities under the plan. The standardized plan need not be kept by each employer in the multiemployer 
building, provided there is an accessible location within the building where the plan can be 
reviewed by affected employees. when multi-employer building-wide plans are not feasible, employers 
should coordinate their plans with the other employers within the building to assure that conflicts and 
confusion are avoided during times of emergencies. In multi-story buildings where more than one employer 
is on a single floor, it Is essential that these employers coordinate their plans with each other to avoid 
conflicts and confusion. 

4. fire prevention housekeeping. The standard calls for the control of accumulations of flammable and 
combustible waste materials. 

it is the intent of this standard to assure that hazardous accumulations of combustible waste materials are 
controlled so that a fast developing fire, rapid spread of toxic smoke, or an explosion will not occur. This 
does not necessarily mean that each room has to be swept each day. Employers and employees should be 
aware of the hazardous properties of materials In their work. places, and the degree of hazard each poses. 
Certainly oil soaked rags have to be treated differently than general paper trash in office areas. However, 
large accumulations of waste paper or corrugated boxes, etc., can pose a significant fire hazard. 
Accumulations of materials which can cause large fires or generate dense smoke that are easily ignited or 
may start from spontaneous combustion, are the types of materials with which this standard is concerned. 
Such combustible materials may be easily ignited by matches, welder's sparks, cigarettes and similar low 
level energy ignition sources. 

5. Maintenance of equipment under the fire prevention plan. Certain equipment is often installed in 
workplaces to control heat sources or to detect fuel leaks. An example is a temperature limit switch often 
found on deep-fat food fryers found in restaurants. There may be similar switches for high temperature dip 
tanks, or flame failure and flashback arrester devices on furnaces and similar heat producing equipment. If 
these devices are not properly maintained or if they become inoperative, a definite fire hazard exists. Again 
employees and supervisors should be aware of the specific type of control devices on equipment involved 
with combustible materials in the workplace and should make sure, through periodic inspection or testing, 
that these controls are operable. Manufacturers' recommendations should be followed to assure proper 
maintenance procedures. 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 APPENDIX C 

 September 30, 1991 

 SUBJECT: Posting of Rules and Regulations Regarding Public Buildings 

 TO: Directors, Administrative Services Divisions 

 This office was recently informed by the Office of Inspector General (OIG) that rules and regulations for 
the government of Federal property should be posted conspicuously at each public entrance to a Federal 
Facility (18 U.S.C. 930(9). The OIG further noted that an individual could only be federally prosecuted for 
possession of a firearm or other dangerous weapon in a Federally owned or leased facility if a prohibitive 
notice is clearly posted. 

 I am, therefore, directing that Rules and Regulations Regarding Public Buildings (copy attached) be posted 
in all buildings owned or leased by USDA. Permission to post this notice in a leased facility should be 
received from the lessor first. 

Any questions regarding this subject should be directed to James Sober, Real Property Management 
Division on 447-5225. 

MARILYN G. WAGNER 

Acting Director 

Attachment 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


APPENDIX D 

 OFFICE OF FEDERAL PROTECTION SERVICE MANAGEMENT REGIONAL OFFICE 
ADDRESSES AND TELEPHONE NUMBERS 

 

Central Office 

General Services Administration 

Office of Physical Security & Law Enforcement - PS 

18th and F Streets, NW., 

Room 2306 

Washington, DC 20405 

 FAX: (202) 501-1998 Comm: (202) 501-0887 

 

National Capital Region 

GSA, Federal Protective Division - WPS 

Building 159 E. Room 211 

Southeast Federal Center 

Third and M. Streets, SE. 

Washington, DC 20407 

FAX: (202) 690-9108 

 

Region 2 

GSA, Law Enforcement Branch - 2PS 

26 Federal Plaza, Room 17-130 

New York, NY 10278 

 FAX: (212) 264-9803 Comm: (212) 264-4252 

 


 Region 3 

GSA, Federal Protective Service Division - 3PS 

Wanamaker Building 

100 Penn Square Room 717 

Philadelphia, PA 19107 

FAX: (215) 656-6065 

 

Region 4 

GSA, Law Enforcement Branch - 4PS 

Peachtree Summit Building 

401 West Peachtree Street, NW., Suite 2339 

Atlanta, GA 30365-2550 

FAX: (404) 331-1106 Comm: (404) 331-5132 

 

Region 5 

GSA, Federal Protective Service Division - 5PS 

Kluczynski Federal Building 

230 South Dearborn Street, Room 2540 

Chicago, IL 60604 

FAX: (312) 353-0143 Comm: (312) 353-1496 

 

Region 6 

GSA, Law Enforcement Branch - 6PS 

1500 East Bannister Road, Room 2137 

Kansas City, MO 64131-3088 


 

FAX: (816) 926-5751 Comm: (816) 926-7025 

 

Region 7 

GSA, Federal Protective Service Division - 7PS 

819 Taylor Street, Room 14A14 

Fort Worth, TX 76102 

 FAX: FTS 334-8490 Comm: (817) 334-3559 

 

Region 8 

GSA, Federal Protective Service Division - 8PS 

Building, Denver Federal Center 

Post Office Box 25546 

Denver, CO 80225-0546 

 FAX: (303) 236-7711 Comm: (303) 236-5869 

 

 Region 9 

GSA, Federal Protective Service Division - 9PS 

525 Market Street, 30th Floor 

San Francisco, CA 94105 

FAX: (415) 484-5553 Comm: (415) 744-5090 

 

Region 10 

GSA, Federal Protective Service Division - 1OPS 

400 15th Street, SW 


Auburn, WA 98001 

FAX: (206) 553-7195 Comm: (206) 553-1885 

END 

 

 

 


