                      U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                             WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                              Number:
       DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                1630-002
SUBJECT:                                                     DATE:
Use of Alcoholic Beverages and Narcotics in USDA             December 13, 2012
Occupied Space
                                                             OPI: Office of Procurement &
                                                             Property Management, Property
                                                             Management Division

1.   PURPOSE

     This regulation establishes policies and procedures on use of alcoholic beverages
     and prohibits the use of narcotics, as defined in Federal Management Regulation
     102-74.400, in space occupied or under the control of the Department.


2.   SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATION

     This regulation replaces Departmental Regulation 1630-001 dated April 4, 2002.


3.   POLICY

     The use or possession of narcotics, as defined in Federal Management Regulation
     102-74.400, and/or alcoholic beverages is prohibited within space occupied or under
     the control of the Department.

     The provisions of this regulation do not apply to government-furnished quarters.

     An exemption to the prohibition on the use of alcoholic beverages within the
     Washington, D.C. Complex may be granted by the Subcabinet Official of the
     Agency sponsoring the event, if it is determined that the request is for an event that
     is an appropriate official function.

     An exemption to the prohibition on the use of alcoholic beverages in field locations
     owned by USDA may be granted by the Agency Head or designee if it is determined
     that the request is for an event that is an appropriate official function.

     An exemption to the prohibition on the use of alcoholic beverages in field locations
     leased by USDA or controlled by GSA may be granted by the Agency Head upon
     concurrence by the lessor or the appropriate GSA official.

     The official authorizing approval of the exemption is responsible for ensuring
     measures are taken for compliance with applicable laws, such as the prohibition
     against underage drinking, driving under the influence, and public intoxication.


4.   REQUEST FOR EXEMPTION

     Request for exemptions from prohibition against serving alcoholic beverages shall
     be submitted with sufficient time to permit processing and mailing. The request
     shall include the location of the function, the date, time, purpose and estimated
     number of attendees, and be signed by the requesting official.

     Washington, D.C. Complex requests are to be submitted to the appropriate
     Subcabinet Official. The authorizing official will notify the requesting office in
     writing whether or not the exemption is granted. In addition, if approved, a copy of
     the exemption shall be sent to the Office of Operations, Protective Operations
     Division Director for coordination with appropriate building management and
     security officials prior to the event. A copy of the exemption will also be sent to
     Departmental Management, Office of Procurement and Property Management,
     Property Management Division Chief.

     Field office requests are to be submitted to the appropriate Agency Head.
     The authorizing official will notify the requesting office in writing whether or not
     the exemption is granted. If approved, a copy of the exemption will be sent to the
     building manager who will inform the appropriate officials responsible for security
     of the facility. Additionally, a copy of the exemption will be sent to Department
     Management, Office of Procurement and Property Management, Property
     Management Division Chief.


5.   LIMITATIONS

     The Director, Office of Operations, will provide exemptions to non-Agriculture
     related groups using the Washington, D.C. Complex.

     An exemption shall not be granted for events where minors will be present.

     Agency Heads will set necessary limitations for field office use.


                                          -END-
