                                        U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                           Washington, D.C. 20250



                                                                                                Number:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                                         1633-001

SUBJECT: Parking - USDA Headquarters Complex                             DATE:
Washington, D.C.                                                         September 8, 1994

                                                                         OPI: Office of Operations




1 PURPOSE

                This document establishes the procedures governing parking facilities at the U. S.
                Department of Agriculture (USDA) Headquarters Complex. These procedures ensure
                USDA complies with the goals and objectives set forth by the General Services
                Administration (GSA) and other Federal regulatory and management agencies pertaining
                to the assignment and utilization of parking facilities, energy conservation, ridesharing,
                and other related objectives. This directive supersedes Departmental Regulation, Number
                1633-1, dated December 13, 1982, and any other instructions that conflict with its
                provisions.

2 SCOPE

                This procedure applies to parking facilities at the USDA Headquarters Complex. It also
                includes the GSA controlled facility known as the 12th & C Streets Lot where USDA has
                an allotment of parking spaces.

3 AUTHORITY

                The provisions of this directive are in accordance with the Federal Property Management
                Regulation (FPMR) 101-6.3, Ridesharing, and 101-20.104, Parking Facilities.

4 DEFINITIONS

                The following definitions shall be the official definitions pertaining to the parking
                program at the USDA Headquarters Complex:

                a Agency Parking Representative. An employee designated by their Director of
                Administrative Services or Administrative Officer to administer the parking program
                within their agency or staff office in accordance with these procedures.

                b Capacity. The maximum number of persons that can be transported one-way in the
                motor vehicle.

                c Carpool. A group of at least four (4) persons using a motor vehicle for transportation to
                and from work on a daily basis. At least fifty percent of the members must be USDA
                employees, as define under Employment Boundaries.
DR 1633-001                                                                          September 8, 1994


              d Contact Person. The member who is responsible for the information on the Parking
              Application (AD-697). The Contact Person ensures that the information is true to the best
              of their knowledge. The applicant is also responsible for ensuring that the Agency
              Parking Representative is notified immediately of any changes which occur in the
              carpool/vanpool, updating and submitting a revised parking application. The Contact
              Person must be a USDA employee, as identified under g Employment Boundaries. The
              box indicating "YES" must be shaded to denote Contact Person on the Parking
              Application (AD-697).

              e Court. South Building parking areas located between each wing.

              f Departmental Transportation Coordinator. An employee in the Office of Operations
              (OO), Washington Area Service Center (WASC), who is responsible for developing,
              maintaining, and implementing a Departmental Parking and Ridesharing Program for the
              USDA Headquarters Complex.

              g Employment Boundaries. Government agencies and offices located within a 1.5 mile
              radius of the USDA Headquarters Complex. Eligible USDA personnel must be employed
              at the USDA Headquarters Complex , or USDA facilities occupied within a 1.5 mile
              radius such as, L'Enfant Plaza, Portals, Aerospace, 501 School Street or Reporters
              Building. USDA employees working at locations outside of the 1.5 mile radius or in
              buildings where employee parking is provided will be considered under "Federal
              employee", as stated in Section 10a5c.

              h Executive Parking provided to the immediate Office of the Secretary and offices
              reporting directly to the Office of the Secretary. Spaces are used by individuals or
              carpools exempt from carpool requirements because of exigencies of Government
              business. These allocations are made by the Assistant Secretary for Administration to
              each Under/Assistant Secretary for use at their discretion. An Executive Parking Permit,
              AD-153C, is issued and must be properly displayed in all vehicles parking in Executive
              Parking space assignments.

              i Government Vehicle/Building Support. Parking spaces reserved for USDA-leased or
              USDA-owned vehicles utilized solely for the conduct of Government business. Also
              includes parking necessary to support the 24-hours-a-day operations and maintenance of
              the Headquarters Complex.

              j Physically Challenged Employee. A USDA employee working in the USDA
              Headquarters Complex who is so physically challenged that the use of public
              transportation and carpooling is unreasonably difficult or impossible due to the presence
              of a medically determinable impairment which significantly impairs ambulation (See
              Section 10d). A physically challenged employee is further defined as a person who:

                                (1) Is confined to a wheelchair;

                                (2) Requires the use of crutches at all times;

                                (3) Wears braces to permanently support their legs and/or hips; and/or

                                (4) Suffers from a disease so severe that even minimal walking and the
                                use of public transportation, including carpooling, is unreasonably
                                difficult or impossible, and would further jeopardize the health and
                                safety of the employee.



                                                  2
DR 1633-001                                                                            September 8, 1994


              k Headquarters Complex. The USDA Headquarters Complex is comprised of the
              Administration, South, Auditors, and Cotton Annex Buildings, associated grounds and
              parking lots; as well as parking allocated to USDA by GSA at the 12th and C Streets
              Parking Lot.

              l Keycard. An electronically coded plastic credit card shaped device, used to access the
              South Building courts on scheduled work days between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00
              p.m.

              m Lot. Parking areas having fixed boundaries that are located around the Administration,
              Cotton Annex, and Auditors Buildings. (South Building Parking Areas are called Courts.)

              n Parking Applications. An application that must be completed when applying for a
              USDA Headquarters parking space. All applications may be obtained from Agency
              Parking Representatives or the Departmental Transportation Coordinator.

              o Parking Permits . USDA parking permits are issued and must be displayed when
              entering and using parking facilities at the Headquarters Complex (see Section 5a for the
              types of parking permits).

              p Parking Space. An area allocated in a USDA parking facility to accommodate a motor
              vehicle.

              q Part-time Member. A person who does not ride to and from work on all scheduled work
              days, or travels less than six one way trips weekly, as defined by Regular Member below.

              r Regular Member. A person who travels at least six one way trips each week in a
              carpool/vanpool for a minimum distance of one mile to and from the USDA
              Headquarters Complex or to a work site within employment boundaries. Personnel
              assigned parking under Executive Parking, will not be used in scoring car/vanpool
              applications.

              s Staging Area. A parking area for temporary use to resolve parking problems in the
              complex such as building emergencies, temporary parking for vehicles displaced by
              illegal parking or snow emergencies.

              t Temporary Parking reserved by the Departmental Transportation Coordinator, designee,
              or an Agency Parking Representative, with a time limitation, usually one day or less.
              Temporary Parking is not reserved for the 12th & C Streets Parking Lot.

              u Transmitter. A radio transmitter used to activate the parking control arms located at the
              Administration and Cotton Annex Building parking lots.

              v USDA Parking. Vehicle parking spaces within the Headquarters Complex under the
              jurisdiction and/or control of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.

              w Vanpool. A group of eight (8) or more persons utilizing a van to commute daily to and
              from work. At least four regular members must be USDA employees housed in the
              Headquarters Complex or within employment boundaries. Although some automobiles
              may carry eight (8) or more passengers, they are not considered vanpools.

              x Official Visitor Parking reserved solely for the use of officials visiting the Department
              on official business. A form AD-153B, Temporary Parking Permit, is issued for visitor



                                                  3
DR 1633-001                                                                           September 8, 1994


              parking use. Visitor spaces are not intended to accommodate the daily or personal needs
              of employees who work in or near the complex. Parking Representatives are not
              authorized to utilize official visitor parking spaces, under any circumstances. These
              spaces are not available to private contractors for use in special agency or departmental
              events or similar circumstances. However, visitor spaces may be used by agencies to
              accommodate the physically challenged on a short-term (less than 30 days) emergency
              basis. See Criteria for Reserving Official Visitor Parking Spaces, Section 10 b.

5 FORMS

              a Parking Permits. Permits which are issued for entry and display while using USDA
              Headquarters Complex parking facilities are listed below. Permits must be displayed as
              defined in Section 7e(3).

                                (1) AD-153A, USDA Parking Permit. Parking Permits used for
                                assigned parking spaces, excluding Executive parking assignments.

                                (2) AD-153B, USDA Temporary Parking Permit. Parking Permits used
                                for temporary assignments such as visitor spaces and temporary
                                physically challenged assignments.

                                (3) AD-153C, USDA Executive Parking Permit. Parking Permits used
                                for Executive parking space assignments.

                                (4) AD-153D, USDA 12th & C Lot Parking Permit. Parking Permits
                                issued monthly after payment of the monthly fee for use of parking
                                facilities at the 12th & C Streets Parking Lot. A single AD-153D,
                                provided by USDA, is issued monthly by the parking lot attendant after
                                payment of the monthly fee.

              b Parking Applications. Form AD-697, Application for Parking Space, must be
              completed in pencil and submitted through the appropriate authority or Agency Parking
              Representative to the Departmental Transportation Coordinator in the Washington Area
              Service Center (WASC), room S-321, South Building. Agency Parking Representatives
              are specifically instructed to return incomplete or improperly prepared applications to the
              applicant. Applications are available from Agency Parking Representatives and from the
              Departmental Transportation Coordinator.

                                (1) AD-697A, Additional Vehicles. Form used to provide information
                                for additional vehicles to be used by members in carpools/vanpools,
                                physically challenged or executive parking. Applications must be
                                properly completed.

                                (2) AD-1079, Application for Agency Official Visitor Parking Space,
                                Forms are used by agencies when applying for official visitor parking
                                spaces.

                                (3) AD-1080, Application for Official Government Vehicle Parking
                                Space. Forms used by agencies to apply for official parking spaces for
                                government owned or leased vehicles . Agencies should submit a copy
                                of the purchase order to the Departmental Transportation Coordinator,
                                when requisitioning vehicles.




                                                 4
DR 1633-001                                                                          September 8, 1994


                               (4) AD-1081, Application for Designated Physically Challenged
                               Parking Space. In addition to submitting Form AD-697, this form must
                               also be completed in applying for a designated physically challenged
                               parking space. TDD services are also available to physically challenged
                               persons. Call 720-PARK and begin keying until the proper "GA"
                               response is received.

              C. Express Lane Commuter Information and Ridesharing. Form AD-697, Application for
              Parking Space, should be completed denoting "Ridefinder", and a computer printout will
              be sent to you with information pertaining to your commuting area.

6 PRIORITY OF ASSIGNMENT OF PARKING SPACES

              a Government Vehicle and Building Support Parking: Vehicle parking areas shall first be
              reserved for Government Vehicles and vehicles associated with the 24-hours-a-day
              operations and maintenance of the Headquarters Complex as defined in Section 4i.

              b Official Visitor Parking as defined in Section 4x. Visitor parking spaces will be
              assigned based on the availability of spaces and agency need. c Parking spaces not
              required for Government Vehicles, Building Support, or Official Visitors will be used for
              employee parking. Available parking spaces shall be assigned according to the following
              priorities:

                               (1) Designated Physically Challenged Parking will be assigned to
                               USDA physically challenged employees for whom an assigned parking
                               space is essential because the use of public transportation or carpooling
                               is unreasonably difficult or impossible; (See Sections 4j and 10d).
                               Designated Physically Challenged Parking will be made available in
                               accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, as outlined in the
                               Federal Register, Volume 56, No. 144, Friday, July 26, 1991.

                               (2) Executive parking as defined in Section 4h.

                               (3) Visitor parking as defined in Section 4t.

                               (4) Carpool/Vanpool parking as defined in Sections 4c and 4w. Priority
                               for assignment of spaces shall be based on whether a carpool/vanpool
                               has physically challenged regular members, the number of trips per pay
                               period, the distance traveled and the places of employment of the
                               members.

                               (5) Bi/motorcycle parking areas, subject to availability, on a first-come,
                               first-served, day-to-day basis.

7 RESPONSIBILITIES

                               a The Office of Operations (OO), Washington Area Service Center
                               (WASC), Departmental Transportation Coordinator will:

                                                 (1) Maintain written plans and procedures for the
                                                 assignment of parking spaces.




                                                 5
DR 1633-001                                                                         September 8, 1994


                                                 (2) Develop and implement an employee parking
                                                 program. This includes developing methods and
                                                 procedures to be followed by OO in the assignment
                                                 and management of employee parking spaces.

                                                 (3) Be responsible for assigning parking spaces under
                                                 the control of, the USDA Headquarters Complex.

                                                 (a) Review and verify parking application data;

                                                 (b) Investigate parking hotline complaints received
                                                 regarding the possible misuse of assigned parking;

                                                 (c) Allocate USDA parking spaces according to the
                                                 Department's Priority of Assignment of Parking
                                                 Spaces, (See Section 6);

                                                 (d) Manage visitor parking, reserving spaces as
                                                 requested by Agency Parking Representatives for use
                                                 by official visitors to the department, based on the
                                                 availability of spaces;

                                                 (e) Monitor the use of parking spaces in the
                                                 Headquarters Complex, and take enforcement action,
                                                 when necessary; and

                                                 (f) Develop and implement plans in accordance with
                                                 the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendment Requirements as
                                                 outlined in Section 20.

              b Agency Administrator's and/or Directors will:

                               (1) Provide the support necessary to implement Departmental Parking
                               Policies and Procedures identified in this regulation within their
                               agency.

                               (2) Promote flexibility in employee working hours to facilitate
                               ridesharing arrangements.

                               (3) Contact their Agency Parking Representative to reserve visitor
                               parking spaces needed by their agency.

              c Agency Administrative Services Directors and Administrative Officers will:

                               (1) Be responsible for providing the support necessary to implement
                               Departmental Parking Procedures through their respective Agency
                               Parking Representatives.

                               (2) Encourage and promote ridesharing and other Departmental parking
                               goals and objectives identified in this policy.

                               (3) Designate qualified representatives to implement parking
                               procedures and regulations for their agency.


                                                6
DR 1633-001                                                                           September 8, 1994


                               (4) Provide general administrative assistance on an agency level.

                               (5) Contact their Agency Parking Representative to reserve visitor
                               parking spaces needed by their agency.

                               (6) Ensuring the OO/WASC has been provided a copy of all purchase
                               orders requisitioning official government vehicles.

              d Agency Parking Representatives are responsible for administering the parking program
              within their agency by serving as their agencies' liaison with the Departmental
              Transportation Coordinator (DTC) in accordance with these procedures. Their
              responsibilities are to:

                               (1) Provide assistance within their respective agencies in resolving
                               routine parking problems, answering questions, etc.;

                               (2) Issue correspondence and provide applicants within their agency
                               with parking applications and copies of these parking procedures, etc.;

                               (3) With approval from the DTC, issue one day Temporary Parking
                               Permits to carpools within their agency or for use by official visitors;

                               (4) Obtain for the carpool/vanpool a replacement permit, when
                               appropriate;

                               (5) Review and process all parking applications for authenticity and
                               conformity with Departmental standards and procedures in a timely
                               manner;

                               (6) Contact agency participants in the parking program at the request of
                               the DTC to obtain or relay information or enforce policy and
                               procedures;

                               (7) Assure that all agency and departmental visitor parking spaces are
                               reserved in accordance with the criteria stated in Section 10b. Maintain
                               a Visitor Parking Log for agency visitor parking spaces and provide the
                               DTC with a copy of this log quarterly;

                               (8) Assist OO/WASC with Department-wide reassignments, necessary
                               reports and surveys;

                               (9) Number all parking applications before submitting them to the DTC
                               with the appropriate agency number (example: 00-004). Include pre-
                               assigned or new agency numbers as appropriate on updated or revised
                               applications;

                               (10) Immediately inform the DTC of changes in carpools, vanpools and
                               other agency needs and ensure that updated applications are submitted
                               within 30 days.

                               (11) Serve on the Appeals Committee, hearing information related to
                               member applications originating from their agency.




                                                7
DR 1633-001                                                                          September 8, 1994


                               (12) Contact the DTC when snow is forecasted and provide a list of
                               available agency assigned visitor and official parking spaces for use by
                               vehicles displaced due to snow.

              e Persons using USDA's parking facilities must:

                               (1) Read, understand and comply with the requirements of USDA's
                               Headquarters Complex;

                               (2) Keep all vehicle and membership information current by
                               immediately reporting all changes to Agency Parking Representatives
                               and updating and submitting revised applications to the Contact
                               Person's Agency Parking Representative. Failure to immediately report
                               changes and update membership information will result in loss of
                               parking privileges. Pools will have 30 days to replace lost members and
                               submit an updated application to retain assigned space. (See Section
                               13);

                               (3) Display the parking permit on the driver's side of the dashboard,
                               face up, so that all information is visible and readable through the
                               vehicle windshield.

                               (4) Replace fading permits to assure they are readable at all times.

                               (5) Park only in your assigned parking space.

                               (6) Know USDA parking permits are government property and must be
                               returned immediately upon cancellation, invalidation, transfer,
                               separation of the carpool, etc. PARKING PERMITS ARE NON-
                               TRANSFERABLE.

                               (7) Know that failing to properly display a valid parking permit will
                               result in the vehicle being ticketed and towed;

                               (8) Know that flagrant violations, such as falsifying applications,
                               applying for more than one space or appearing on applications in
                               excess of the maximum number of bi-weekly trips, counterfeiting,
                               altering, or reproducing permits, failing to turn in permits when the
                               pool membership no longer qualifies, and any act of circumventing
                               these procedures to gain favor, will result in the loss of parking
                               privileges for at least one year and notification in writing to the
                               violator's agency administrator or director.

                               (9) Know that each member in the pool represents an equal voice.

                               (10) Know that each member is responsible and accountable for
                               following these procedures and those identified on the reverse of the
                               parking permits.

                               (11) Know that members must work to resolve internal problems when
                               they arise.




                                                8
DR 1633-001                                                                           September 8, 1994


                                (12) Know that the Contact Person does not have sole authority in
                                decision making.

8 PARKING ASSIGNMENTS (REASSIGNMENTS)

              Applications for parking space assignments will be accepted on a continuous basis. All
              applicants must submit the appropriate forms through their Agency Parking
              Representatives. When applications exceed the number of spaces available, they will be
              placed on a waiting list until spaces become available:

              a Requests for all parking space assignments (excluding Executive Parking) must be
              submitted through Agency Parking Representatives on the appropriate application (i.e.,
              AD-697, AD-697A, AD-1079, AD-1080 and AD-1081, See Section 5b). These forms are
              available from Agency Parking Representatives and the Departmental Transportation
              Coordinator.

              b Reassignments shall take place periodically, usually annually. OO/WASC will issue a
              Departmental Notice announcing the reassignment. Agency Parking Representatives shall
              notify employees of applicable instructions, requirements and due dates.

              c Notification of parking assignments will be made to applicants by Agency Parking
              Representatives.

              d Qualified carpools/vanpools will be assigned parking spaces based on a point system.
              Applicants with the highest number of points will be assigned parking spaces within the
              USDA Courts and Lots until all available spaces have been assigned. The remaining
              assignments will be made, still based on the highest number of points, to as many
              applicants as possible until all available spaces at the 12th and C Streets Parking Lot have
              been assigned.

              e Each USDA member of a qualifying carpool will be required to appear in person, with
              photo I.D., in order to obtain the new parking permits. Members should plan to appear
              together.

              f A minimum of four USDA members of qualified vanpools will be required to appear
              together, with photo I.D. to obtain the new parking permit.

              g Approved applicants will be issued the appropriate USDA Parking Permit (one permit
              will be issued to each USDA driving member). Non-USDA personnel will not be issued
              permits to park in the USDA Headquarters Complex.

              h Permit holders shall surrender permits when:

                                (1) Use of the permit no longer meets one or more of the criteria upon
                                which it was issued;

                                (2) Requested to do so by OO/WASC as a result of a violation of the
                                rules governing parking at the USDA Headquarters Complex or to meet
                                other requirements.

                                (3) Employment status changes, such as retirement, termination, or
                                relocation outside USDA employment boundaries, as defined in
                                Section 4g.



                                                  9
DR 1633-001                                                                           September 8, 1994


9 PARKING PERMITS

              a Permits will be issued as appropriate to USDA driving members for all parking
              assignments (except 12th & C Streets Parking Lot, which will be issued only one
              monthly permit per assignment or pool):

                                (1) Government Vehicles and Building Support

                                (2) Designated Physically Challenged Parking

                                (3) Executive Parking

                                (4) Visitor Parking

                                (5) Carpool/Vanpool Parking

                                (6) Temporary Space Assignments

              b Permit holders are responsible for the parking permits and following the rules printed
              on the back of each permit and in this Departmental Order.




10 CRITERIA

              a Assigning Pool Parking Spaces. The following criteria are used to evaluate applications
              and assign spaces:

                                (1) Carpools must have at least fifty (50) percent USDA regular
                                members and a minimum of four (4) persons. The Contact Person must
                                be a USDA employee and identified as the Contact Person on the
                                application.

                                (2) Vanpools must have at least four (4) USDA regular members. The
                                Contact Person must be a USDA employee and identified as the
                                Contact Person on the application.

                                (3) Carpools/Vanpools having regular members that are USDA
                                physically challenged riders or USDA physically challenged drivers
                                will be entitled to five (5) additional points for each physically
                                challenged person in that pool. See definition, Section 4j for Physically
                                Challenged Employee.

                                (4) The average* number of miles traveled one-way, by the contact
                                person, will entitle carpools/vanpools to additional points. One
                                additional point will be given for each 10 miles traveled. (One-tenth
                                point increments, for each mile driven.) * The average will be
                                determined by dividing the total number of miles traveled bi-weekly by
                                the total number of trips made bi-weekly.

                                (5) Employment points will be calculated using the number of bi-
                                weekly one-way trips for all members:



                                                10
DR 1633-001                                                                           September 8, 1994


                                                  (a) Ten (10) points for each one-way trip, not to
                                                  exceed 160 points for a physically challenged USDA
                                                  employee;

                                                  (b) Four (4) points for each one-way trip, not to
                                                  exceed 64 points for any USDA employee;

                                                  (c) Two (2) points for each one-way trip, not to
                                                  exceed 32 points for each Federal employee; and

                                                  (d) One (1) point for each one-way trip, not to exceed
                                                  16 points for each non-Federal member.

                                (6) The maximum number of riders cannot exceed the maximum
                                capacity of a vehicle listed for the car/vanpool.

                                (7) If at anytime a tie occurs, the assignment of spaces will be
                                determined by a lottery. Applications will be randomly selected by the
                                Departmental Transportation Coordinator for placement on the waiting
                                list.

              b Reserving Official Visitor Parking Spaces Visitor parking spaces will be assigned to
              agencies based on the need and justification submitted. Agencies desiring allocated
              visitor parking spaces must complete an AD-1079, Application for Agency Official
              Visitor Parking Space, and submit it to their Agency Parking Representative. Visitor
              parking spaces shall be reserved solely for the use of Officials visiting the Department on
              official business. These spaces are not intended for USDA employees personal use, nor
              are they to be used by Executives not receiving parking accommodations from their
              respective Under/Assistant Secretary. All reservations for visitor parking spaces must be
              made by contacting your Agency Parking Representative. A completed AD-153B,
              Temporary Parking Permit, must be displayed face up on the driver's side of the vehicle
              for all visitor parking. Priority and procedures for reserving Visitor Parking Spaces:

                                (1) Temporary Physically Challenged Employees. Employees requiring
                                temporary physically challenged spaces must make requests following
                                the procedures outlined in Section 10d(3). Official Visitor parking
                                spaces may be temporarily assigned (for less than 30 days) to
                                physically challenged employees on an emergency basis only.

                                (2) Official visitors to the Department on official business.
                                Reservations should be made at least two (2) weeks in advance for use
                                of visitor parking spaces for official business.

              c Assignment of Executive Parking Spaces

                                (1) Executive Parking Spaces (including assignments based on unusual
                                work hours, but not including "shift work"), will be allocated by the
                                Assistant Secretary for Administration, who will take into account the
                                distribution of executive personnel and/or exigencies of Government
                                business.




                                                 11
DR 1633-001                                                                         September 8, 1994


                              (2) Executive Parking Space allocations shall be assigned to each
                              Under/Assistant Secretary for use within their immediate office as well
                              as by executives and other officials within their respective agencies.

              d Assignment of Designated Physically Challenged Parking Spaces

                              (1) Physically challenged employees applying for a Designated
                              Physically Challenged Parking Space must have a valid State or
                              District of Columbia Government Physically Challenged license plate
                              or permit from the appropriate Motor Vehicle Administration, in the
                              state where they reside. Copies of completed applications to obtain
                              state or local license plates or permits may be required. Applicants will
                              be required to present a copy of their vehicle registration or permit to
                              verify their status. (See Section 4j for definition of physically
                              challenged employee.)

                              (2) Procedures for Assignment of Physically Challenged parking are as
                              follows:

                                                (a) Employees must apply through their Agency
                                                Parking Representative, and submit the following:

                                                                  (1) A completed AD-1081,
                                                                  Application for Designated
                                                                  Physically Challenged Parking
                                                                  Space.

                                                                  (2) Proof of valid State or District
                                                                  Government Physically Challenged
                                                                  licensed plates or permit; and

                                                                  (3) A copy of their car registration
                                                                  as proof of Physically Challenged
                                                                  plates or permit.

                                                                  (4) Any valid METRO physically
                                                                  challenged commuter pass or other
                                                                  identification denoting physically
                                                                  challenged status.

                                                (b) Employees should not contact the Departmental
                                                Transportation Coordinator for information regarding
                                                their application. Employees should contact their
                                                Agency Parking Representative to obtain the status of
                                                the application.

                              (3) Procedures for Assignment of Temporary Physically Challenged
                              parking:

                                                (a) Employees must submit a completed AD-1081,
                                                Application for Designated Physically Challenged
                                                Parking Space, to their Agency Parking
                                                Representative, who will in turn submit the request to



                                              12
DR 1633-001                                                                            September 8, 1994


                                                  the Departmental Transportation Coordinator. The
                                                  amount of time parking accommodations will be
                                                  needed must also be entered on this form.

                                                  (b) If the need for physically challenged parking
                                                  accommodations exceeds three (3) months, the
                                                  employee must submit a copy of their temporary
                                                  physically challenged parking permit from the
                                                  city/state in which they reside.

                                                  (c) Temporary Physically Challenged parking
                                                  accommodations are only valid for a period of 30
                                                  days. Requests for extensions must be accompanied
                                                  by submitting an updated Application for Designated
                                                  Physically Challenged Parking Space (AD-1081).

                                                  (d) Employees must submit their completed
                                                  application through their Agency Parking
                                                  Representative.

11 BICYCLE AND MOTORCYCLE PARKING

              No parking permits are issued for bicycle or motorcycle parking. However, USDA ID's
              are required to gain access to the South Building Courts. Employees utilizing these
              facilities may only park in these designated areas.

              a Bicycle parking is available on a first-come, first-served basis at the South Building,
              Court 2; Auditors Building, Lot 14; Lot 10 and the Jefferson Drive side of the
              Administration Building. Cyclers are responsible for providing their own locks to secure
              their bicycles.

              b Motorcycle Parking is available on a first come, first serve basis at the South Building,
              Court 5; the Administration Building, Lot 8; and the Cotton Annex Building, Lot 7.

12 REASSIGNMENT PROCEDURES

              a Reassignment of individual parking spaces which become available will be made based
              on the priority of assignment of parking spaces as stated in Section 6. Spaces determined
              to be available for reassignment to carpools and vanpools will be assigned to pools on the
              established waiting list. (See Section 14 Interim Assignments)

              b Reassignments of all parking spaces in the Headquarters Complex will occur annually
              unless necessity dictates otherwise. Employees will be notified of reassignment schedules
              and requirements via Departmental Notice to all employees in the D.C. Headquarters
              Complex and USDA employees housed in buildings within a 1.5 mile radius.

              c When competing for parking spaces during a reassignment, employees must return
              completed application package to the Agency Parking Representative on or before the
              announced closing date. Agency Parking Representatives are instructed not to accept
              applications after the closing date.

              d Agency Parking Representatives will review each application for completeness and
              accuracy and assign an Agency Number (example FS-012) to each application for a



                                                 13
DR 1633-001                                                                            September 8, 1994


              parking space. Agency Parking Representatives will then prepare a recap sheet which
              summarizes all applications by type, and submit the listing and the applications to the
              Departmental Transportation Coordinator by the closing date.

              e The Departmental Transportation Coordinator will review the data, consolidate all the
              agency submissions, establish a cut-off point, assign spaces and notify Agency Parking
              Representatives of the results from the reassignment.

              f Agency Parking Representatives will notify applicants of the results of the
              reassignment, collect old and distribute new parking permits, and keycards to successful
              applicants as directed by the Washington Area Service Center.

13 LOSS OR CHANGE IN MEMBERSHIP

              a Loss or change in membership must be immediately reported to the Agency Parking
              Representative. The carpool will be given thirty days to replace the member(s) and
              submit a revised AD-697, Application for Parking Space, reflecting all changes. If the
              carpool does not have enough qualifying points after thirty days, their space will be
              reassigned to the next qualifying carpool.

              NOTE: If the carpool has enough qualifying points without an additional member, they
              will retain a USDA parking space, but not necessarily the same space. Failure to report
              changes will result in loss of parking privileges and notification of parking violation to
              your agency head for possible further disciplinary action.

              b The Departmental Transportation Coordinator is available to assist carpools/vanpools in
              locating new members.

14 INTERIM ASSIGNMENTS (TURNOVER OF PARKING SPACES)

              When spaces become vacant during the assignment period because of retirements,
              separations or any other reason, the Contact Person is responsible for notifying their
              Agency Parking Representative that the space is available for reassignment. Agency
              Parking Representatives shall notify the Departmental Transportation Coordinator who
              will in turn reassign the parking space to the next qualifying carpool/vanpool. Agency
              Parking Representatives are not permitted to reassign any parking spaces and are
              responsible for returning official spaces no longer required, to the Departmental
              Transportation Coordinator for reassignment.

15 RIDESHARING SERVICES

              a OO/WASC shall maintain current information concerning employee transportation
              services to the extent possible. These services shall include maintenance of an automated
              carpool/vanpool referral service, and shall interface with services provided by local
              ridesharing agencies and entities, such as the Council of Governments (COG) and the
              General Services Administration, National Ridesharing Office, when possible.

              b USDA employees may obtain ridesharing information from the Departmental
              Transportation Coordinator.

              c USDA employees who use TDD equipment may obtain information on joining or
              forming carpools/vanpools by calling 720-PARK.




                                                 14
DR 1633-001                                                                           September 8, 1994


16 ACCIDENTS AND COMMON PROBLEMS

              a Accidents. The Federal Protective Service of the General Services Administration has
              jurisdiction over the parking lots/courts in and around the Administration, South,
              Auditors, and Cotton Annex Buildings. Persons involved in an accident are responsible
              for reporting accidents occurring within or at the entrance of the lots/courts immediately
              to appropriate USDA guards and to the Federal Protective Service at (202) 708-1111.

              b Common Problems. If someone is parked in your space, note the license plate number;
              state of tag; type and color of vehicle; and, if a USDA parking permit is visible, the
              information on the permit; then proceed to Court 2 and give the information obtained on
              the vehicle in your space, along with your name, phone number, lot and space number to
              the guard. The guard will contact the parking office and obtain a staging parking space
              for your vehicle. You are responsible for moving your vehicle back to your assigned
              space, in a timely manner, if contacted by either the Departmental Transportation
              Coordinator or your Agency Parking Representative. Should a permit holder forget or
              lose their permit; they should:

                                (1) Notify the guard upon entering the court (South Building only);

                                (2) Park in their assigned space and immediately see their Agency
                                Parking Representative, who will obtain a One-Day Temporary Parking
                                Permit, or if the permit was lost, obtain a new one from the
                                Departmental Transportation Coordinator. There will be a one-hour
                                limit to obtain the Temporary Parking Permit from the Agency Parking
                                Representative. If your representative is not available the permit holder
                                should call 720-PARK to obtain a temporary permit. If the replacement
                                permit is not properly displayed in the vehicle within one hour, the
                                vehicle will be subject to ticketing and towing.

17 ENFORCEMENT and the APPEALS PROCESS

              a All applicants and permit holders are responsible for abiding by these parking
              procedures. By signing the parking application (Form AD-697), each applicant certifies
              that they have read and understand these parking procedures.

              b WASC will provide program participants with a written NOTICE OF INFRACTION
              for all violations.

              c Permit holders shall surrender permits when:

                                (1) Use of the permit no longer meets one or more of the criteria upon
                                which it was issued;

                                (2) Requested to do so by OO/WASC as a result of a violation of the
                                rules governing parking at the USDA Headquarters Complex or Ruling
                                of the Appeals Committee.

              d If any person's name appears on applications for more than one parking space (inside or
              outside of USDA) and the number of one-way trips is unreasonable or impossible, that
              person will be banned from the parking program for a period of not less than one year or
              reassignment period. The carpool will have thirty (30) days to replace the driver/rider or
              forfeit the space (there will be no exceptions to this rule).



                                                 15
DR 1633-001                                                                             September 8, 1994


              e WASC will make random investigations of parking assignments during the course of
              the assignment period. If, after the investigation, a space is found to be operating at other
              than the levels indicated on the parking application the space will be returned to the
              parking inventory for reassignment.

                                (1) Any member on an original application who provides fraudulent
                                information on behalf of the carpool/vanpool, shall be ineligible to
                                participate in a carpool/vanpool at the USDA Headquarters Complex
                                for at least one year or one reassignment period. Cases involving
                                fraudulent or forged parking applications or permits, will be treated as
                                falsification of a government document and will be reported to the
                                Office of Inspector General for investigation.

                                (2) Any infraction which endangers the lives of others, shall result in
                                the immediate revocation of parking privileges and permanent
                                banishment from the USDA Parking Program. Members invoking the
                                Appeals Process for infractions which endanger the lives of others,
                                shall be prohibited from continued parking during the Appeals Process.

                                (3) Examples of infractions which endanger the lives of others are:
                                excessive speeding, impeding or prohibiting the safe access and/or
                                egress to any USDA entrance, exit, court, lot or assigned parking space.

              f If, for any reason, an assigned space is occupied by someone other than the assignee,
              the Contact Person or carpool member should:

                                (1) Obtain the license number and state, type of car, lot or court, and
                                space number and all information displayed on any parking permits;

                                (2) Proceed to Court 2 and provide the Security Guard with the
                                information obtained in (1), and your name and phone number. The
                                Security Guard will contact the Departmental Transportation
                                Coordinator and request a temporary space for your vehicle.

                                (3) Park in the parking space as directed by the Security Guard.

                                (4) Return your vehicle to your assigned space when requested to do so
                                by your Agency Parking Representative or the Departmental
                                Transportation Coordinator.

                                (5) The illegally parked car will be ticketed and/or towed. The carpool
                                should not block the illegally parked vehicle or park in someone else's
                                space, they too may be ticketed and/or towed.

              g The Departmental Transportation Coordinator authorizes the issuance of District of
              Columbia, Department of Motor Vehicle tickets and the Chief, Executive Services
              Branch authorizes issuance of US Park Service tickets for Jefferson Drive permit holders.

                                (1) Tickets and towing may occur for the following reasons:

                                                   (a) Vehicle has no valid parking permit

                                                   (b) Permit is not displayed properly



                                                  16
DR 1633-001                                                                           September 8, 1994


                                                  (c) Illegally parked in designated physically
                                                  challenged space/area

                                                  (d) Illegally parked in no parking space/area

                                                  (e) Illegally parked in reserved or designated
                                                  space/area

                                                  (f) Parked in two (2) spaces

                                                  (g) Blocking driveway or access

                                                  (h) Other parking violations

                                (2) Loss of Parking Privileges. Two (2) violations will result in the
                                recipient's loss of parking privileges for a one year suspension period.
                                The one year begins upon notification from WASC or from your
                                Agency Parking Representative. All violations reported to WASC
                                count, regardless of whether they are accompanied by a parking ticket.

              h Illegally parked vehicles at the USDA Headquarters Complex receiving a District of
              Columbia Department of Motor Vehicle ticket, or that have outstanding DC Parking
              Violations may be booted or towed from USDA facilities at any time at the owners
              expense.

              i Tickets received at the USDA Headquarters Complex for parking violations are not
              generally "negotiable" and represent a legal matter between the DC Department of
              Traffic Adjudication or the US Park Service and the receiving individual.

              j South Building court parking spaces, adjacent to offices or court perimeter walls will be
              "Front End Parking" only.

              k Permits must be prominently displayed on driver's side of dashboard, face up, at all
              times. Failure to display valid permits may result in the vehicle being ticketed and towed
              at the owner's expense.

              l DO NOT block traffic lanes in courts while waiting for pool members. Remain in your
              assigned parking space until all members arrive.

              m DO NOT double park while waiting for riders.

              n DO NOT block traffic by allowing passengers to get into or out of vehicles on the
              ramp.

              o Hours of operation: South Building Courts 1 and 6 are open from 6:00 a.m. to 9:30 a.m.
              and 3:30 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. with keycard access from 9:30a.m. to 3:30 p.m., Court 2 is
              open 24-hours-a-day, and Courts 3, 4 and 5 are open from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.

              p All vehicles entering the South Building Courts or USDA parking lots are subject to
              search by security guards or appropriate officials of the Department.

              q 12th and C Streets Parking Lot



                                                 17
DR 1633-001                                                          September 8, 1994


              (1) Hours of Operation: Government carpools are authorized to park in
              the lot from 7:00 a.m. until 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except
              holidays.

              (2) Parking Permits: The monthly permit must be displayed on the
              drivers side of the dash, face up, with all information clearly in view. If
              the carpool does not have the permit with them upon entering the lot,
              they will be charged the daily rate for that day.

              (3) Parking Fees: Monthly permits are sold to USDA employees at a
              reduced rate. Permits will only be sold to carpool members with a valid
              Federal ID. Permits will only be sold during the last four (4) working
              days of the month. ALL MONTHLY PERMITS MUST BE
              PURCHASED BY NOON ON THE LAST WORKING DAY OF THE
              MONTH. If, for some reason the carpool does not pick-up their permit
              during the specified time, they will not be able to buy a permit until the
              following month and may have to reapply for a parking space.

              (4) Parking Procedures: You must park at the direction of the Parking
              Lot Attendants. If you park against the lot perimeter you must lock
              your car and take the key with you. You must have a spare door key
              with you anytime your vehicle is parked in this lot. Notify the Parking
              Lot Attendants departure time. They will direct you to an appropriate
              parking space. Whenever you park in front of another vehicle, you must
              leave the key accessible to the attendants. Remember to keep a spare
              door key. If an attendant moves your car during the day to a location
              within the lot where it is not blocking another vehicle, they may lock
              your car with the keys inside. You will need the spare door key to
              regain access to your car.

                                a Appeals. In cases where parking privileges have
                                been suspended or revoked or for any situation where
                                redress of a parking violation is desired, an oral or
                                written request should be provided , within 30 days
                                after notification, to the Agency Parking
                                Representative for review by the Appeals Committee.
                                A decision to reinstate or rescind parking privileges,
                                by the Appeals Committee, is final. Adjudicated
                                offenses will be removed from the permit holder's
                                violation record.

                                                   (1) The Appeals Committee will
                                                   consist of: the Agency Parking
                                                   Representative, the Departmental
                                                   Parking Coordinator, and a Union
                                                   Representative.

                                                   (2) Program participants will be
                                                   allowed to retain their parking
                                                   assignments while undergoing the
                                                   appeals process. Once a decision is
                                                   rendered by the Appeals
                                                   Committee, it is final.




                               18
DR 1633-001                                                                           September 8, 1994


                                                                    (3) Only valid NOTICES OF
                                                                    INFRACTION issued, will be used
                                                                    by the Appeals Committee.
                                                                    Previously adjudicated NOTICES
                                                                    OF INFRACTION, will be
                                                                    prohibited from use.

18 EVENING, WEEKEND AND HOLIDAY PARKING

              a Evening parking is available between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. only, during
              scheduled work days. Weekend and holiday parking begins at 6 p.m. and ends at 6:00
              a.m. on the next scheduled work day. Unauthorized vehicles using these facilities at other
              time frames will be ticketed and towed.

                                (1) Employees working on weekends and/or Holidays may park in Lots
                                7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 of the Headquarters Complex on an "as available
                                basis."

                                (2) Evening, Weekend and Holiday parking is available for USDA
                                employees in Court 2. Employees must have a valid USDA Access
                                Card (AD-1030) to gain access to Court 2 after hours (between 6 p.m.
                                and 6 a.m.). Spaces in Court 2 posted "Physically Challenged Parking
                                Reserved at All Times" and lot spaces posted "Reserved at All
                                Times",are exempt from evening, weekend and holiday parking rules
                                and regulations. These spaces are reserved for physically challenged
                                individuals 24-hours everyday.

19 PROCEDURES FOR KEYCARDS

              a Key cards are used to enter and exit the South Building Courts when the gates are not
              open. Key cards will only operate the gates between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
              No key cards are needed for Court 2 which is open 24-hours a day.

              b Key cards are issued to the Contact Person and next driver listed at the time of
              assignment. If additional key cards are needed for other USDA drivers they should be
              requested by contacting the Contact Person's Agency Parking Representative and provide
              them with the driver's name and agency for each card requested.

20 CLEAN AIR ACT AMENDMENT OF 1990 REQUIREMENTS

              Steps to reduce vehicle emissions and single-occupant vehicles (SOV's) are being
              undertaken by state and local jurisdictions. The Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990
              presently require every employer with 100 or more persons at any work site in a "'severe
              non-attainment" area to implement a Transportation Management Program (TMP) to
              increase the average passenger occupancy (APO) per vehicle by 25 percent over the
              area's average by 1997 and, although the Washington area is not presently a "severe non-
              attainment" area, the Federal Government, with its large concentration of facilities in the
              National Capital Region (NCR), we must continue to help set the example in
              transportation management planning to prevent deterioration of air quality in the area to
              the "severe" category. The National Capital Planning Commission (NCPC), Metropolitan
              Washington Council of Governments (COG) and GSA are working cooperatively to
              ensure:




                                                 19
DR 1633-001                                                                            September 8, 1994


              a All Federal agencies establish an APO baseline for each work site of more than 100
              persons by June 30, 1994;

              b Implementation of a vigorous TMP to achieve an increase in APO per vehicle by 25
              percent at each such worksite by October 1, 1997, recognizing that where great strides in
              transportation demand management have already been made, a more limited goal may be
              required;

              c Aggressive promotion of a wide range of TMP strategies to achieve the increased APO
              goal, including parking management, personalized assistance and ridematching,
              van/buspooling, transit, bicycling, walking, telecommuting, variable work hours, transit
              benefit program, guaranteed/emergency ride home, and commuter centers, and;

              d Promoting the use of shuttle bus service for Federal employees between Metrorail
              stations and Federal work sites to the extent permitted by law.

              e Strong support of the enactment of legislation to (1) extend authorization for the transit
              benefit program beyond the December 31, 1993 expiration date and (2) permit Federal
              agencies to operate shuttle bus service, where needed, between Metrorail stations and
              Federal work sites, and urges support for such legislation by local, state, regional, and
              Federal agencies in the NCR.

              f Direct circulation of these amendment resolutions to all Federal agencies in the NCR by
              letter, urging each agency to voluntarily implement the goals and policies as soon as
              possible.




                                                 20
