                           U. S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                               NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION DR 1650-001
                                                               DATE:
 SUBJECT: Departmental Physical Security Program               December 9, 2021
                                                               EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of Safety, Security, and Protection (OSSP)
                                                               December 9, 2026



Section                                                                                   Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                 1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                      1
3.   Scope                                                                                   2
4.   Policy                                                                                  2
5.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                              4
6.   Barring Notices                                                                        10
7.   Electronic Reports                                                                     11
8.   Inquiries                                                                              11

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                    A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                   B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                    C-1
Appendix D – USDA Notice of Prohibited Items                                               D-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of
     Agriculture (USDA) physical security policy for the protection and security of USDA
     Federal and non-Federal employees, facilities, lands, assets, and the public.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     a.   This DR supersedes DR 1650-001, Physical Security Program, dated March 16, 2016.

     b.   The Office of Safety, Security, and Protection (OSSP), Facility Protection Division
          (FPD) will maintain configuration control over this DR.

     c.   No language in this document may be construed to supersede any other Federal laws or
          regulations.
  d.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must align their physical security policies
       and procedures with this policy within 6 months of the publication date.

  e.   Further delineation for physical security policy for buildings in the National Capital
       Region (NCR), including USDA’s Headquarters (HQ) Complex and the George
       Washington Carter Center (GWCC), is provided per 7 Code of Federal Regulations
       (CFR) § 2.94, Chief Security Director, Office of Safety, Security, and Protection and the
       Facility Security Plans for both complexes.


3. SCOPE

  This DR establishes a uniform set of USDA minimum physical security standards, roles, and
  responsibilities which apply to all personnel including Federal employees, visitors,
  contractors, vendors, volunteers, and political appointees, who will access USDA facilities
  and lands, whether owned, leased, or managed.


4. POLICY

  The USDA Physical Security Program, which protects facilities, assets, personnel,
  customers and visitors, must be managed in an efficient, effective and uniform manner.
  USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should supplement this policy by
  developing security procedures that apply to their respective work environments and
  facilities. Mission Area, agency, or staff office policies may be more stringent than this
  DR but must still comply with this DR and all applicable Federal laws and regulations.

  a.   The Director, Office of Safety, Security and Protection is delegated the authority to
       implement physical security policy as stated in 7 CFR § 2.94.

  b.   The USDA Physical Security Program, under the Director’s leadership is responsible
       for:

       (1) The protection of Federal facilities, assets, personnel, customers, and visitors; and

       (2) Managing these resources in an efficient, effective, and uniform manner to protect
           against threats that may lead to potential harm, loss of life, damage to Government-
           owned or leased property, or disruption of operational capabilities.

  c.   All USDA Federal Facilities and assets must apply appropriate physical security
       countermeasures and post signage per Interagency Security Committee (ISC) baseline
       security criteria, as appropriate.




                                               2
d.   All USDA Federal Facilities and assets will establish employee and visitor access and
     escorting procedures that meet the standards outlined in DR 4620-002, Common
     Identification Standard for U.S. Department of Agriculture.

e.   Possession of firearms, dangerous weapons, explosives, or other destructive devices as
     identified by the ISC, are prohibited in USDA Federal facilities unless required for the
     lawful performance of official duties and only if such possession is authorized by law.

f.   Photography and the use of audio and video recording devices in non-public spaces is
     prohibited unless approved by the Mission Area, agency, or staff office Head, or
     designee.

g.   Packages, briefcases, and other containers in the immediate possession of visitors,
     employees, or other persons arriving on, working at, visiting, or departing from USDA
     Federal facilities and assets are subject to inspection. See 41 CFR § 102-74.370, What
     items are subject to inspection by Federal agencies?

     Refusal of inspection when attempting to enter a USDA Federal facility, will result in
     the denial of access.

h.   All Federal Facilities and assets must be assessed using the ISC Risk Management
     Process (RMP).

i.   USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must identify and develop adequate
     security measures to properly protect unique Federal Facilities and assets (e.g.,
     laboratories, animal research facilities, high hazard dams, air tanker bases, explosive
     magazines, plant material centers, other infrastructure and assets identified by the
     Mission areas, agencies, or staff offices that are not specifically covered by the ISC)
     while leveraging ISC standards, pertinent regulations, and laws.

j.   All Federal Facility and asset assessment information shall be maintained in a
     centralized electronic physical security assessment information repository.

k.   All physical security information or similar sensitive information is to be provided to
     OSSP and protected under DR 3440-002, Control and Protection of “Sensitive Security
     Information” and is potentially exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of
     Information Act (FOIA), 5 United States Code (U.S.C.) §§ 552(b)(7)(E) and (b)(7)(F).

l.   Security documents will be maintained in accordance with the National Archives and
     Records Administration (NARA) General Records Schedule (GRS) 5.6, Security
     Records.

m. Visitors not issued USDA credentials:

     (1) May be subject to security screening;




                                             3
       (2) Must be escorted at all times while in non-public spaces;

       (3) Must wear a valid USDA Visitor Badge in an appropriate manner at all times while
           in non-public spaces;

       (4) Must comply with the instructions of USDA Security Personnel at all times; and

       (5) Do not require an escort while accessing the USDA South Building Cafeteria.

  n.   Non-USDA Federal Employees:

       (1) May be subject to security screening;

       (2) Do not require an escort when non-public spaces; and

       (3) Must comply with the instructions of USDA Security Personnel at all times.


5. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA) will:

       (1) Oversee all physical security policies; and

       (2) Approve waivers and any exceptions to physical security policies.

  b.   The Director, OSSP will:

       (1) Serve as the senior official for physical security as outlined in Secretary’s
           Memorandum (SM) 1076-032, Office of Safety, Security, and Protection, dated
           September 13, 2019;

       (2) Develop and maintain the Physical Security Program and Policy;

       (3) Keep Senior Management informed of all security concerns that may impact
           USDA;

       (4) Receive, review, and make recommendations on all waivers and any exceptions to
           the ASA;

       (5) Issue and rescind barring notices for NCR facilities under OSSP’s management;

       (6) Maintain the authority to approve or deny any security technology enhancements,
           security technology installations, access requests, and all other security-related
           matters in NCR facilities under OSSP’s management;




                                              4
     (7) Oversee the USDA Active Shooter Program to include:

         (a) Policy and Active Shooter Response Plan and curriculum development;

         (b) Requests and approvals for training;

         (c) Approve training curriculum, exercises, and drills concepts, in consultation
             with the USDA Security Council; and

         (d) Coordinate with USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices for the
             effective and efficient delivery of the program;

     (8) Maintain physical security programs and policies in the HQ Complex, GWCC, and
         other USDA NCR facilities as assigned;

     (9) Liaise with law enforcement agencies in the NCR; and

     (10) Approve requests for any and all electronic data reports in the NCR (card reader
          activity, alarm reports, and video surveillance system footage).

c.   The OSSP FPD Director will:

     (1) Provide daily leadership, management, and oversight of physical security within
         FPD;

     (2) Develop and maintain USDA physical security policy and guidance;

     (3) Identify minimum training standards for all personnel assigned physical security
         responsibilities;

     (4) Respond to emergency Mission Area, agency, and staff office security requests for
         assistance;

     (5) Assist USDA Mission Area, agency, and staff offices in conducting physical
         security investigations and assessments by providing training or recommending
         external training resources to Mission Area, agency, and staff office Security
         Specialists;

     (6) Conduct compliance reviews of Mission Area, agency, and staff office physical
         security programs to include physical security assessment and risk mitigation plans;

     (7) Represent and act as liaison for the Department in contacts with other Federal
         security entities and organizations;

     (8) Manage and maintain USDA’s enterprise Physical Access Control System (ePACS)
         infrastructure;



                                            5
     (9) Oversee policies and procedures for USDA Federal and non-Federal employees
         requiring a LincPass or AltLinc;

     (10) Develop and maintain an electronic physical security assessment database and
          repository that identifies and tracks all USDA Federal Facilities and assets with
          their corresponding Facility Security Level (FSL), assessment due date, completion
          data; and storage of their corresponding physical security assessments, FSL
          determinations, risk mitigation plans, and supporting documentation; and

     (11) Advise the Director of OSSP on physical security issues at USDA facilities to
          include the NCR.

d.   The OSSP Security Services Division (SSD) Director will:

     (1) Establish, maintain, and oversee security guard force program at USDA NCR
         facilities;

     (2) Advise the Director of OSSP on physical security issues at USDA NCR facilities;

     (3) Provide enforcement of prohibited items at USDA NCR facilities (Appendix D,
         USDA Prohibited Items Reference List);

     (4) Provide enforcement of visitor policy at USDA NCR facilities; (define visitors or
         reference visitor DR);

     (5) Develop and implement a security awareness program for employees in the NCR;

     (6) Ensure Security Plans are developed for NCR facilities that includes such annexes
         as Facility Security Plan and Clean Desk Policy for sensitive information;

     (7) Develop and maintain policies and procedures for enforcing parking restrictions at
         USDA NCR facilities;

     (8) Enforce barring notices at USDA NCR facilities; and

     (9) Conduct physical security investigations within the NCR.

e.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Heads will:

     (1) Designate a lead Mission Area, agency, staff office Security Officer (SO) to
         manage and maintain a comprehensive physical security program;

     (2) Designate a Designated Official (DO) for all USDA Federal Facilities and assets
         that the Mission Area, agency, or staff office head is responsible to manage on
         behalf of USDA;



                                            6
     (3) Ensure that physical security assessments are conducted for all USDA Federal
         Facilities and assets identified in Section 5e(2), as outlined in ISC standards and
         timelines;

     (4) Ensure a design-phase security survey is conducted and meets the facility security
         level baseline security criteria for all new facility construction, major renovations,
         and new leases;

     (5) Provide Mission Area, agency, staff office facility(s) physical security assessment
         data to FPD as requested;

     (6) Ensure Security Plans are developed for all USDA Federal Facility that includes
         such annexes as Occupant Emergency Plan, Facility Security Plan, and Active
         Shooter Preparedness Plan, and Clean Desk Policy for sensitive information;

     (7) Provide adequate training to all personnel assigned physical security responsibilities
         for performing security functions;

     (8) Ensure performance measures are incorporated into the performance plans of
         individuals delegated physical security, and emergency management
         responsibilities;

     (9) Provide appropriate resources to the SO for the protection of USDA Federal and
         non-Federal employees, the public, facilities, lands, and assets; and

     (10) Issues and rescinds barring notices for USDA facilities identified in Section 5e(2).

f.   Mission Area, Agency, Staff Office SOs will:

     (1) Implement physical security policy and procedures, maintain records and files on
         physical security related information, and report physical security information when
         required;

     (2) Keep the ASA and senior management aware of any concerns that may impact
         USDA operations.

     (3) Develop Physical Security Threat Management Program to immediately respond to
         security threats or incidents directed at Mission Area, agency, and staff office
         employees, facilities, or assets.

     (4) Maintain a list of Mission Area, agency, staff office SOs, Physical Security
         Specialists, and facility DOs;

     (5) Identify and group, as appropriate, all Mission Area, agency, staff office assigned
         Federal Facilities and assets, as identified in USDA’s Corporate Property



                                              7
         Automated Information System database, into defined USDA Federal Facilities and
         assets and provide FPD with an updated list annually;

     (6) Conduct preventative maintenance checks on all security countermeasures, as
         prescribed by manufacturers. All devices found to be inoperable or functioning
         improperly must be immediately documented. A risk mitigation plan must be
         drafted to identify the measures taken to cover the vulnerability while the
         equipment is being repaired or replaced;

     (7) Establish and monitor a lifecycle plan for all physical security countermeasure
         equipment;

     (8) Conduct physical security assessments in accordance with the ISC RMPs;

     (9) Document and address all recommendations in a corresponding Risk Mitigation
         Plan;

     (10) Follow the most recent ISC RMP guidance documents;

     (11) Develop written employee, contractor, and visitor access control procedures for
          each facility that complies with DR 4620-002 and ISC standards (e.g., visitor sign-
          in, 100% visitor escort, foreign visitor screening);

     (12) Inspect all installed security countermeasures to ensure all manufacturers’
          specifications and countermeasures performance levels are met before signing off
          on contract payment;

     (13) Conduct physical security investigations and assessments as required;

     (14) Protect all sensitive information (e.g., personally identifiable information (PII),
          proprietary information, intellectual property, Controlled Unclassified Information
          (CUI), classified information); and

     (15) Assist DOs with the review and training of facility Occupant Emergency Plans,
          Active Shooter Preparedness Plans, and Facility Security Plans.

g.   DOs will:

     (1) Provide for appropriate security countermeasures at their facility;

     (2) Appropriately secure all USDA Federal Facilities and property. For public facing
         facilities that cannot be secured (e.g., Service Centers, visitor centers), ensure
         entrances are monitored at all times by USDA personnel;

     (3) Develop written Risk Mitigation Plans within 60 days of completed security
         assessments to address all recommendations and findings (i.e., overall risks,



                                             8
         identified vulnerabilities). All vulnerabilities must be addressed with one of the
         following categories: Mitigated, In-Process or Will be Mitigated, Accepted Level
         of Risk, Removed Risk. Risk Management Plans must be signed by a DO or
         designee with the authority to make such determinations;

     (4) Identify the FSL for Federal Facilities and provide appropriate resources to meet the
         FSL Baseline Criteria as defined by the ISC RMP; and

     (5) Develop and distribute written local facility Occupant Emergency Plans, Active
         Shooter Preparedness Plans, Facility Security Plans, Risk Mitigation Plans and
         Strategies and Items Prohibited from Federal Facilities.

h.   Employees will:

     (1) Wear a valid USDA identification badge at all times while in USDA facilities; the
         USDA identification must be worn above the waist in such a manner that the
         identity of the individual is clearly visible at all times;

     (2) Readily present their identification to USDA security personnel upon request;

     (3) Comply with any security or emergency-related verbal instructions from USDA
         security personnel;

     (4) Report lost Identification (ID) badges immediately to their supervisor and the
         Mission Area, agency, or staff office;

     (5) Escort visitors throughout the facility at all times;

     (6) Report all security incidents, violations or immediate concerns to Mission Area,
         agency, staff office SO; and

     (7) Understand and comply with all physical security policies and procedures.

i.   Visitors entering secured facilities with a security checkpoint will:

     (1) Process through the security checkpoint;

     (2) Provide valid photo identification and contact information prior to being signed in;

     (3) Wear a valid USDA Visitor Pass in the appropriate manner at all times;

     (4) Wait for their Point of Contact (POC) in a designated waiting area;

     (5) Be accompanied by a POC for the duration of their visit in the facility. Any visitor
         found without their POC will be escorted out of the facility or to the nearest visitor
         entrance; and



                                              9
       (6) Comply with instructions of the USDA Security Personnel at all times.

  j.   Visitors entering secured facilities will:

       (1) Provide valid photo identification and contact information prior to being signed in;

       (2) Wear a valid USDA Visitor Pass in the appropriate manner at all times;

       (3) Wait for their POC in a designated waiting area;

       (4) Be accompanied by a POC for the duration of their visit in the facility. Any visitor
           found without their POC will be escorted out of the facility or to the nearest visitor
           entrance; and

       (5) Comply with instructions of the USDA Security Personnel at all times.

  k.   USDA HQ Cafeteria Visitors will:

       (1) Process through the electronic security checkpoint;

       (2) Provide valid photo identification prior to being signed in;

       (3) Wear a valid USDA Cafeteria Visitor “V” Pass in the appropriate manner at all
           times;

       (4) Remain within the confines of the cafeteria, the restrooms, and the designated
           corridor in which to ingress/egress to/from the cafeteria; and

       (5) Comply with the instructions of the USDA Special Police Officer at all times.


6. BARRING NOTICES

  a.   OSSP reserves the right to bar anyone from NCR facilities under OSSP control, who
       violates any portion of this policy and who is deemed a security threat to the
       Department, any individual within a Federal facility or asset, or themselves;

  b.   Requests to bar an employee, contract employee, or any visitor to USDA facilities must
       be submitted in writing in memorandum format, by a Mission Area, agency, staff office
       Head or designee to the Director, OSSP; and

  c.   Requests made on behalf of the USDA Child Development Center, Agricultural Federal
       Credit Union, Employee Services Recreation Association, or any contractor working in
       any USDA Facility must be made by the Contracting Officer’s Representation (COR) or




                                                10
       their designee. Questions and concerns regarding barring notices should be directed to
       OSSP at 202-720-0000 or securityservicehelp@usda.gov.

  d.   Anyone barred may submit a letter of appeal to the ASA. The ASA’s decision will be
       final.

  e.   USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may perform Barring Actions at their
       respective locations outside the NCR. These actions will be done in accordance with
       USDA Mission Area, agency or staff office policies and will be reported to OSSP.


7. ELECTRONIC REPORTS

  Internal or external Requests for any and all electronic data reports for NCR facilities under
  OSSP’s control (e.g., card reader activity, alarm reports, closed-circuit television footage)
  shall be submitted in writing in memorandum format to OSSP FPD. OSSP will approve or
  disapprove the request based on the intent for which the information is being used.


8. INQUIRIES

  Questions regarding this DR should be directed to OSSP at 202-720-0000 or
  securityservicehelp@usda.gov.


                                            -END-




                                              11
                                  APPENDIX A

                    ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ASA        Assistant Secretary for Administration
CFR        Code of Federal Regulations
CISA       Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency
COR        Contracting Officer’s Representative
CUI        Controlled Unclassified Information
DHS        Department of Homeland Security
DO         Designated Official
DG         Departmental Guidebook
DR         Departmental Regulation
EO         Executive Order
ePACS      Enterprise Physical Access Control System
FIPS PUB   Federal Information Processing Standards Publication
FLETC      Federal Law Enforcement Training Center
FOIA       Freedom of Information Act
FOUO       For Official Use Only
FPD        Facility Protection Division (OSSP Component)
FSC        Facility Security Committee
FSL        Facility Security Level
GRS        General Records Schedule
GS         General Schedule
GWCC       George Washington Carver Center
HQ         Headquarters
HSPD-12    Homeland Security Presidential Directive-12, Common Identification
ID         Identification
IDS        Intrusion Detection System
ISC        Interagency Security Committee
NARA       National Archives and Records Administration
NCR        National Capital Region
NIPP       National Infrastructure Protection Plan
OSSP       Office of Safety, Security, and Protection
PACS       Physical Access Control System
PII        Personally Identifiable Information
PIV        Personal Identity Verification
PIV-I      Personal Identity Verification – Interoperable
POC        Point of Contact
PPD-21     Presidential Policy Directive-21, Critical Infrastructure Identification,
           Prioritization, and Protection
PSS        Physical Security Specialist
RMP        Risk Management Process
SM         Secretary’s Memorandum
SO         Security Officer



                                        A-1
SSD      Security Services Division (OSSP Component)
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                                  A-2
                                       APPENDIX B

                                      DEFINITIONS


Agency. Organizational units of the Department, other than staff offices, whose head report
to officials within the Office of the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Under Secretaries, Assistant
Secretaries, and Assistant to the Secretary. (Source: USDA, Departmental Guidebook (DG)
0100-002, USDA Departmental Directives Definitions Glossary)

Agency Head. Agency Administrator or officer director, or the person acting as head.

Asset. A resource requiring protection. (Person, structure, facility, information, material, or
process that has value).

Barring Notice. Implemented to prevent access to USDA facilities for any person who has
exhibited behavior deemed harmful to the facility or its occupants.

Building. An enclosed structure (above or below grade).

Campus. Two or more Federal facilities located on one site and typically sharing some
aspects of the environment, such as parking, courtyards, private vehicle access roads, or gates
and entrances to connected buildings. A campus may also be referred to as a “Federal
center” or “complex.”

Close Proximity. The distance to another building, site, facility, asset, or Federal facility
does not exceed a 2-mile radius.

Commissioning. The testing of newly installed security countermeasures to ensure the
performance of the equipment meets manufacturer’s published functionality and
mitigates the vulnerability mentioned in the physical security assessment.

Compliance Benchmarks. Mechanism to assess the degree to which Federal facilities
have implemented the policies and standards of the ISC. They were written to
correspond directly to the requirements set forth by: Risk Management Process for
Federal Facilities: An ISC Standard; Items Prohibited from Federal Facilities: An ISC
Standard; and Planning and Response to an Active Shooter: An ISC Policy and Best
Practices Guide. They do not assess compliance with specific countermeasures or levels
of protection.

Container. An object that can be used to hold or transport something.

Controlled Area. Areas that, if damaged or compromised, could have significant adverse
consequences for the Mission Area, agency, or staff office’s mission or the health and safety
of individuals within the building or the surrounding community. May also be referred to as
“limited access areas,” “restricted areas,” or “exclusionary zones.” Critical areas do not



                                             B-1
necessarily have to be within Government-controlled space (e.g., generators located outside
Government-controlled space).

Critical Infrastructure. Tiered structures, systems and assets, whether physical or virtual, so
vital to the United States that the incapacity or destruction would have a debilitating impact
on security, national economic security, national public health or safety, or any combination
of those matters.

Designated Official (DO). The highest-ranking official of the primary tenant agency of
a Federal facility or, alternatively, a designee selected by mutual agreement of tenant
agency officials. (Source: 41 CFR § 102-71.20, 18 USC § 930(g)(1))

Designee. An individual formally delegated decision-making authority to act on behalf
of another who is responsible.

Employee. Defined in 5 U.S.C. § 2105, Employee, within a department or Mission Area,
agency, and staff office. “Employee” means a person, other than the President and Vice
President, employed by, detailed or assigned to, USDA, including members of the Armed
Forces; an expert or consultant to USDA; an industrial or commercial contractor, licensee,
certificate holder, or grantee of USDA, including all subcontractors; or any other category of
person who acts on behalf of an Mission Area, agency, and staff office as determined by the
Mission Area, agency, and staff office head.

Facility Security Level (FSL). A categorization based on the analysis of several
security-related facility factors, which serves as the basis for the implementation of
countermeasures specified in ISC standards.

Federal Employee. Personnel as defined by 5 U.S.C. § 2105.

Federal Facility. A building or part thereof owned or leased by the Federal Government,
where Federal employees are regularly present for the purpose of performing their
official duties.

Interagency Security Committee (ISC). The Interagency Security Committee (ISC), chaired
by Department of Homeland Security (DHS), consists of 53 Federal departments and
agencies, defines the criteria and processes that those responsible for the security of a facility
should use to determine its facility security level and provides an integrated, single source of
physical security countermeasures for all non-military Federal facilities.

Lifecycle. The usefulness of a security countermeasure that includes acquisition,
implementation and assignment, reporting, maintenance, and disposal. Most security
countermeasures have a lifecycle of 3 to 5 years.

LincPass. USDA has named their common ID card the LincPass, as it is designed to link a
person’s identity to an identification card and the card to a person’s ability to access Federal
buildings and computer systems, also called AltLinc when used for short term access. The



                                             B-2
spelling of LincPass and AltLinc is a tribute to President Abraham Lincoln, who created the
Department of Agriculture, also known as the People’s Department in 1862.

Mission Area. A group of agencies with related functions that report to the same Under or
Assistant Secretary. Research, Education, and Economics (REE) is an example of a mission
area. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

Non-Critical Infrastructure. Structures, systems and assets, whether physical or virtual,
if incapacitated, will not have a debilitating impact on USDA’s ability to perform
mission critical functions.

Non-Federal Employee. Personnel, not covered by Title 5 of the U.S.C., that either are
contractors, volunteers, student interns, etc. that work for USDA.

Personal Identify Verification – Interoperable (PIV-I). An identity card (“smart card”)
also known as LincPass issued to an individual that contains stored identity credentials
so that the claimed identity of the cardholder can be verified against the stored
credentials by another person or by an automated process.

Physical Access Control System (PACS). Electronic system consisting of card readers,
biometric devices, locking devices and control panels that grants access to physical
facilities through the use of a Personal Identify Verification (PIV) Credential such as the
LincPass or AltLinc.

Physical Security Assessment. A process that identifies threats, risks, vulnerabilities,
and a risk mitigation to improve the security posture of a USDA infrastructure.

Physical Security Specialist (PSS). A Mission Area, agency, or staff office person with
physical security experience that holds a General Schedule (GS) 0080, Security
Administration series or has been assigned as an additional duty with proper training,
such as the course at the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center (FLETC) in Glynco,
GA.

Primary Federal Facility. The Federal facility in a campus environment that is
considered the main building for mission operations. When assessing a site with
multiple Federal facilities as a campus the assessor must identify the primary Federal
facility as this will determine the FSL for the campus.

Risk. Potential for an unwanted outcome resulting from an incident, event, or
occurrence, as determined by its probability and the associated consequences.

Risk-Based Decision Making. A determination of a course of action predicated
primarily on the assessment of risk and the expected impact of that course of action on
that risk.




                                            B-3
Risk Management Methodology. A set of methods, principles, or rules used to identify,
analyze, assess, and communicate risk, and mitigate, accept, or control it to an acceptable
level at an acceptable cost.

Risk Mitigation Plan. A document that identifies risks and specifies the actions that have
been chosen to manage those risks.

Security Baseline. The minimum-security standards based on the facility security level
(FSL) determination that are identified in the Interagency Security Council (ISC)
security criteria.

Security Countermeasure. A device or procedure that protects USDA assets or
personnel.

Security Sensitive Site. An entire facility or space within a facility itself that contains
environments, equipment, or data normally not housed in typical office, storage, or public
access facilities. Examples of special-use facilities include, but are not limited to, high-
security laboratories, irradiators, aircraft, or unique storage facilities designed specifically for
such things as chemicals and explosives.

Site. The physical land area controlled by the Government by right of ownership, leasehold
interest, permit, or other legal conveyance, upon which a facility is placed.

Staff Office. Departmental administrative offices whose heads report to officials within the
Office of the Secretary. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

System. Any combination of facilities, equipment, personnel, procedures, and
communications integrated for a specific purpose.

Target. Asset, network, system, or geographic area chosen by an adversary to be impacted
by an attack.

Threat. Natural or man-made occurrence, individual, entity, or action that has or
indicates the potential to harm life, information, operations, the environment or property.

Visitor. An individual authorized to be in a controlled facility on a short-term and
limited or controlled basis.

Vulnerability. A weakness (avenue of approach) in the design or operation of a facility that
an adversary can exploit.

Work Environment. A space or area either in a facility or at an outside location where
USDA personnel perform agency mission requirements.




                                              B-4
                                      APPENDIX C

                         AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


7 CFR § 2.94, Chief Security Director, Office of Safety, Security, and Protection

7 CFR § 2.95, Director, Office of Homeland Security

7 CFR § 2.96, Director, Office of Operations; responsibilities in the NCR

41 CFR § 102-71.20, What definitions apply to GSA’s real property policies?

41 CFR § 102-74.370, What items are subject to inspection by Federal agencies?

41 CFR § 102-74.375, What is the policy on admitting persons to Government property?

5 U.S.C. § 2105, Employee

18 U.S.C Part I, Chapter 33, Section 701, Official badges, identification cards, other
insignia; Federal ID cannot be Photocopied or Duplicated

18 U.S.C. § 930, Possession of firearms and dangerous weapons in Federal facilities

DHS, Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), ISC Risk-Management
Process for Federal Facilities, November 2016

DHS, CISA, ISC Risk-Management Process for Federal Facilities, Appendix A: Design-
Basis Threat (FOUO), February 2016

DHS, CISA, ISC Risk-Management Process for Federal Facilities, Appendix B:
Countermeasures, January 2016

DHS, CISA, ISC Risk-Management Process for Federal Facilities, Appendix C: Child Care
Centers, January 2016

DHS, CISA, ISC Planning and Response to an Active Shooter: An Interagency Security
Committee Policy and Best Practices Guide (FOUO), July 2015

DHS, CISA, National Infrastructure Protection Plan (NIPP), 2013

Executive Order (EO) 12977, Interagency Security Committee, October 19, 1995

EO 13286, Amendment of Executive Orders, and Other Actions, in Connection With the
Transfer of Certain Functions to the Secretary of Homeland Security, February 28, 2003




                                           C-1
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), 5 U.S.C. § 552, July 5, 1967, as amended

Homeland Security Presidential Directive (HSPD) -12, Policy for a Common Identification
Standard for Federal Employees and Contractors, August 27, 2004

NARA, General Records Schedule (GRS) 5.6, Security Records, April 15, 2016

National Institute of Standards and Technology, Federal Information Processing Standards
Publication (FIPS PUB) 201-2, Personal Identity Verification (PIV) of Federal Employees
and Contractors, Section 2.1 Control Objectives, August 2013

Presidential Policy Directive (PPD) – 21, Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience,
February 12, 2013

USDA, DG 0100-002, USDA Departmental Directives Definitions Glossary, September 26,
2018

USDA, DR 3440-002, Control and Protection of “Sensitive Security Information,” January
30, 2003

USDA, DR 3440-003, Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) Program, September 13,
2021

USDA, DR 4620-002, Common Identification Standard for U.S. Department of Agriculture,
June 24, 2021

USDA, Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Coordination Policy Memorandum,
Prioritization/Protection of USDA Facilities, January 23, 2012

USDA, Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Coordination Policy Memorandum,
Establishing a Center of Excellence for Physical Security Countermeasure Management,
January 24, 2012

USDA, Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Coordination Policy Memorandum,
Standardization and Consolidation of Facility Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) for Alarm
Monitoring, June 7, 2012

USDA, Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Coordination Policy Memorandum,
Revised Contract Security Force Management, August 23, 2012

USDA, Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Coordination Policy Memorandum,
Strengthening U.S. Department of Agriculture Visitor Policy, May 21, 2012

USDA, Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Coordination Policy Memorandum,
Prioritization/Protection of USDA Facilities, October 2012




                                           C-2
USDA, SM 1076-032, Office of Safety, Security and Protection, September 13, 2019




                                        C-3
                                      APPENDIX D

                       USDA NOTICE OF PROHIBITED ITEMS


USDA Prohibited Items to include, but are not limited to: Guns and Firearms, unless meeting
the exemptions listed in 18 U.S.C. § 930(d), Club-like items and Striking Devices, Sharp
Bladed or Cutting Instruments, Destructive Devices, Explosives, or Combustible Chemical
Compounds and Mixtures, Incendiaries, and Disabling Chemicals, Intoxicants, and Other
Dangerous Items.

Pursuant to the authority provided to the Interagency Security Committee (ISC) in Section 5
of Executive Order (EO) 12977, Interagency Security Committee, as amended by EO 13286,
Amendment of Executive Orders, and Other Actions, in Connection With the Transfer of
Certain Functions to the Secretary of Homeland Security, this ISC Standard identifies a
baseline list of prohibited items that each Facility Security Committee (FSC) or Designated
Official (DO), with input from an appropriate legal authority (when applicable) shall
customize to mitigate facility risk. The items that are prohibited in Federal facilities include
any item prohibited by any applicable Federal, State, local and tribal law and/or ordinance, as
well as firearms, dangerous weapons, explosives, or other destructive devices (including their
individual parts or components) designed, redesigned, used, intended for use, or readily
converted to cause injury, death, or property damage. This list applies to all facility
occupants, contractors, and the visiting public.

All employees are subject to random screening.




                                            D-1
