                                      U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                         Washington, D.C. 20250


                                                                                                 Number:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                                         DR 1650-002

SUBJECT: Building Safety/Security Occupant                             DATE:
Emergency Program                                                      October 7, 1992

                                                                       OPI:
                                                                       Office of Operations, Real Property
                                                                       Management Division

    1   PURPOSE

              The purpose of this regulation is to prescribe general facility protection policies for the
              Department of Agriculture (USDA) Nationwide.




2       BACKGROUND

              This regulation revises the USDA Facility Protection Policy and adopts the provisions set
              forth in Section 101-20.103 of the Federal Property Management Regulations (FPMR),
              Title 41 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.), Subpart 101-20.1 (see Appendix A). This
              regulation also adopts the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
              standard, 29 C.F.R. 1910.38 (see Appendix B), as the requirement for the Occupant
              Emergency Program for those facilities where this regulation may conflict with standards
              imposed on occupants in a commonly occupied facility.




3       CANCELLATION

              Departmental Regulation 1650-2, dated February 21, 1986, and Agriculture Property
              Management Regulations, Subchapter "N", Subpart 104-55.8 are hereby superseded.




4       SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS

              Agencies occupying a facility owned or leased by the Federal Government are required to
              develop an Occupant Emergency Plan which provides for immediate positive and orderly
              action to safeguard life and property in the event of all emergencies, except enemy attack.
              To execute the plan agencies are required to staff and train an Occupant Emergency
              Organization. This can be under OSHA standards and/or with assistance from GSA.

              Section 101-20.103 of the FPMR applies to USDA agencies that occupy space owned,
              leased, or assigned by the General Services Administration (GSA). However those
DR 1650-002                                                                              October 7, 1992


              USDA agencies that own or lease space under their own authority shall comply with
              Section 101-20.103 to the extent feasible.

              Those agencies that occupy USDA-owned or leased space may acquire the services of
              GSA for standard protection and special protection on a reimbursable basis.

              The Rules and Regulations Regarding Public Buildings, as distributed in accordance with
              the Office of Operations letter, dated September 30, 1991 (see Appendix C), shall be
              posted in Federally-owned or leased facilities. Permission to post this notice in leased
              facilities should be received from the lessor.




5      POLICY

              Each USDA agency shall comply with all pertinent facility regulations and procedures,
              assist in developing an Occupant Emergency Plan, recommend improvements to the
              Occupant Emergency Program, report all unlawful acts to the proper authorities, provide
              staffing for the Occupant Emergency Organization, and provide proper training for
              employees.




6      RESPONSIBILITIES

              Agency heads and managers will ensure that the requirements of this regulation are
              complied with at their respective locations.

              Managing an emergency in a Federally-owned or leased facility is the responsibility of
              the highest ranking official of the agency having the largest number of employees in the
              building or facility, or an alternate high ranking official designated in advance by
              agreement of occupant agency officials. Known as the Designated Official, this person
              must supervise the development of the Occupant Emergency Plan and the staffing and
              training of the Occupant Emergency Organization.

              All agencies requiring a written and approved Occupant Emergency Plan and Occupant
              Emergency Organization (see Appendix B, Part 1910.38 (a)(5)(iii)) must maintain and
              make a copy of such Plan and Organization available at the affected facility for review
              upon request by any authorized GSA or USDA official.

              The Occupant Emergency Plan Designated Official may obtain assistance from GSA
              Federal Protection Service (FPS) in setting up the plan and in the coordination of the plan
              with the local police, fire, and other authorities. (see Appendix D for appropriate regional
              FPS offices).

              For the Federally-owned USDA Washington, D.C. complex, (the Administration, South,
              Auditors, and Cotton Annex buildings), the Office of Operations (OO) will appoint
              Designated Officials for each building. In addition, OO will appoint Emergency
              Coordinators, Floor Monitors, Damage Control Team personnel, Elevator Monitors, and
              other organizational members as needed. OO will request nominations of personnel from
              agencies for appointments as Area Monitors, Stairwell Monitors, and persons trained in
              emergency medical procedures, e.g. CPR, to respond to emergencies and to assist
              disabled employees.



                                                  2
DR 1650-002                                                                               October 7, 1992


              The OO, Facilities Management Division will provide personnel technically qualified in
              the operation of utility systems, firefighting apparatus, warning systems, etc., and will
              assist in training members of the emergency organization.

              In GSA-operated complexes and GSA-leased space, the Designated Official should
              contact the GSA Regional Office for assistance. The FPS will assist in coordinating the
              plan with the local police, fire, and other authorities. The GSA Buildings Manager or
              leasing official will provide personnel technically qualified in the operation of utility
              systems, firefighting apparatus, warning systems, etc., and will assist in the training of
              members of the emergency organization.

              For USDA agency direct leases, agency officials in charge of the leasing services will
              assist the Designated Official in coordinating emergency plans with the lessor and local
              authorities and may request assistance for the Designated Official from the FPS.




                                                  3
DR 1650-002                                                                                  October 7, 1992


                                                                         APPENDIX A




Federal Property Management Regulations

101-20.102 Cleaning and maintenance.

GSA shall provide:

(a) Cleaning for all assigned space at a level equivalent to the cleaning furnished commercially for similar
types of space.

(b) Maintenance of building systems for heating and cooling, and maintenance of plumbing, electrical, and
elevator systems.

(c) Maintenance and repairs of exterior, grounds, sidewalks, driveways, and parking areas.

(d) Maintenance of building equipment such as directory boards, clock systems, window shades, door
locks, and door title cards.

(e) Cyclic paintings of agency occupied space once every five years, and paintings of public areas once
every three years, if needed.

(f) Maintenance of all safety and fire protection devices, equipment, and systems in a state of readiness in
conformance with applicable laws, regulations, and standards.

(g) Maintenance of all food service activities in accordance with applicable U.S. Public Health Service
standards and local regulations.

(h) Arrangements for raising and lowering the United States flags at appropriate times.

1 101-20.103 Physical protection and building security.

1 101-20.103-1 Standard protection.

For properties under its custody and control, GSA will provide standard protection services by:

(a) Responding to criminal occurrences, incidents. and life threatening events through the use of Federal
Protective Officers and local law enforcement officers where a response agreement is in effect.

(b) Installing and maintaining perimeter security devices and systems if they are monitored to provide
timely response by authorized personnel;

(c) Implementing crime prevention activities, including tenant awareness programs;

(d) Investigating crimes and violations of Federal statutes, recording and evaluating reports of criminal
incidents, and referring findings and evidence to appropriate enforcement agencies;

(e) Entering into cooperative agreements with local law enforcement agencies;




                                                      4
DR 1650-002                                                                                     October 7, 1992


(f) Performing physical security surveys and providing security advisory services; or

(g) Coordinating a comprehensive Occupant Emergency Program.

(h) Periodically evaluating the effectiveness of protection services by indepth inspections of procedures and
records.

1 101-20.103-2 Special protection.

The degree of protection beyond standard levels required by the nature of an agency's activities or by
unusual public reaction to an agency's program will be determined jointly by GSA and the occupant
agency. Special protection will be provided on a reimbursable basis. The level of special protection will be
determined on a facility-by-facility basis, after the conducting of appropriate security surveys and crime
prevention assessments. In such determinations, GSA and occupant agencies will consider:

(a) The characteristics of the facility, including size, configuration, exterior lighting, and presence of
physical barriers;

(b) The location of the facility and the history of criminal or disruptive incidents in the surrounding
neighborhoods; and

(c) The reimbursable funding and resources available to GSA for provision of protective service.

(d) Tenant agency's mission.

1 101-20.103-3 Responsibilities of occupant agencies.

Occupants of facilities under the custody and control of GSA shall:

(a) Cooperate to the fullest extent with all pertinent facility procedures and regulations;

(b) Promptly report all crimes and suspicious circumstances occurring on GSA-controlled Property to the
regional Law Enforcement Branch and other designed law enforcement agencies and then through internal
agency channels;

(c) Provide training to employees regarding protection and responses to emergency situations; and

(d) Make recommendations for improving the effectiveness of protection in Federal facilities.

1 101-20.103.4 Occupant Emergency Program.

(a) The Designated Official (as defined in 101-20.003(&)) is responsible for developing, implementing, and
maintaining an Occupant Emergency Plan (as defined in 101-20.003(w)). The Designated Official's
responsibilities include establishing, staffing, and training an Occupant Emergency Organization with
agency employees. GSA shall assist in the establishment and maintenance of such plans and organizations.

(b) All occupant agencies of a facility shall fully cooperate with the Designated Official in the
implementation of the emergency plans and the staffing of the emergency organization.

(c) GSA shall provide emergency program policy guidance, shall review plans and organizations annually,
shall assist in training of personnel, and shall otherwise ensure proper administration of Occupant




                                                        5
DR 1650-002                                                                                   October 7, 1992


Emergency Program (as defined in SS 10120.003(x)). In leased space, GSA will solicit the assistance of the
lessor in the establishment and implementation of plans.

(d) In accordance with established criteria, GSA shall assist the Occupant Emergency Organization (as
defined in 101-20.003(v)) by providing technical personnel qualified in the operation of utility systems and
protective equipment.

(52 FR 11263, Apr. 8, 1987; 52 FR 24158, July 29,1987)

101-20.103-5 Initiating action under 0ccupant Emergency Programs.

(a) The decision to activate the Occupant Emergency Organization shall be made by the Designated
Official, or by the designated alternate official. Decisions to activate shall be based upon the best available
information, including an understanding of local tensions, the sensitivity of target agency(ies), and previous
experience with similar situations. Advice shall be solicited, when possible, from the GSA buildings
manager, from the appropriate Federal Protective Service official, and from Federal, State, and local law
enforcement agencies.

(b) When there is immediate danger to persons or property, such as fire, explosion, or the discovery of an
explosive device (not Including a bomb threat), occupants shall be evacuated or relocated in accordance
with the plan without consultation. This shall be accomplished by sounding the fire alarm system or by
other appropriate means.

(c) When there is advance notice of an emergency, the Designated Official shall initiate appropriate action
according to the plan.

(d) After normal duty hours, the senior Federal official present shall represent the Designated Official or
his/her alternates and shall initiate action to cope with emergencies in accordance with the plans.




                                                      6
DR 1650-002                                                                                  October 7, 1992


                                                                         APPENDIX B

CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS

Title 29 Part 1910.38

1910.38 Employee emergency plans and fire prevention plans.

(a)      Emergency action plan-(1) Scope and application. This paragraph (a) applies to all emergency
action plans required by a particular OSHA standard. The emergency action plan shall be in writing (except
as provided in the last sentence of paragraph (a)(5)(iii) of this section) and shall cover those designated
actions employers and employees must take to ensure employee safety from fire and other emergencies.

(2)      Elements. The following elements, at a minimum, shall be included in the plan:

(i) Emergency escape procedures and emergency escape route assignments;

(ii) Procedures to be followed by employees who remain to operate critical plant operations before they
evacuate;

(iii) Procedures to account for all employees after emergency evacuation has been completed;

(iv) Rescue and medical duties for those employees who are to perform them;

(v) The preferred means of reporting fires and other emergencies; and

(vi) Names or regular job titles of persons or departments who can be contacted for further information or
explanation of duties under the plan.

(3) Alarm system. (i) The employer shall establish an employee alarm system which complies with
1910.165.

(ii) If the employee alarm system is used for alerting fire brigade members, or for other purposes, a
distinctive signal for each purpose shall be used.

(4) Evacuation. The employer shall establish in the emergency action plan the types of evacuation to be
used in emergency circumstances.

 (5) Training. (i) Before implementing the emergency action plan, the employer shall designate and train a
sufficient number of persons to assist in the safe and orderly emergency evacuation of employees.

(ii) The employer shall review the plan with each employee covered by the plan at the following times:

(A) Initially when the plan is developed,

(B) Whenever the employee's responsibilities or designated actions under the plan change, and

(C) Whenever the plan is changed.

(iii)The employer shall review with each employee upon initial assignment those parts of the plan which
the employee must know to protect the employee in the event of an emergency. The written plan shall be
kept at the workplace and made available for employee review. For those employers with 10 or fewer


                                                      7
DR 1650-002                                                                                    October 7, 1992


employees the plan may be communicated orally to employees and the employer need not maintain a
written plan.

(b) Fire prevention plan-(l) Scope and application. This paragraph (b) applies to all fire prevention plans
required by a particular OSHA standard. The fire prevention plan shall be in writing, except as provided in
the last sentence of paragraph (b)(4)(ii) of this section.

(2) Elements. The following elements, at a minimum, shall be included in the fire prevention plan:

(i) A list of the major workplace fire hazards and their proper handling and storage procedures, potential
ignition sources (such as welding, smoking and, others) and their control procedures, and the type of fire
protection equipment or systems which can control a fire involving them;

(ii) Names or regular job titles of those personnel responsible for maintenance of equipment and systems
installed to prevent or control ignitions or fires; and

(iii) Names or regular job titles of those personnel responsible for control of fuel source hazards.

(3) Housekeeping. The employer shall control accumulations of flammable and combustible waste
materials and residues so that they do not contribute to a fire emergency. The




                                                       8
DR 1650-002                                                                                   October 7, 1992


                                                       APPENDIX TO SUBPART E - MEANS OF
                                                       EGRESS

 This appendix serves as a nonmandatory guideline to assist employers in complying with the appropriate
requirements of subpart E.

1910.38 Employee emergency plans.

 1. Emergency action plan elements. The emergency action plan should address emergencies that the
employer may reasonably expect in the workplace. Examples are: fire; toxic chemical releases; hurricanes;
tornadoes; blizzards; floods; and others. The elements of the emergency action plan presented in paragraph
1910.38(a)(2) can be supplemented by the following to more effectively achieve employee safety and
health in an emergency. The employer should list in detail the procedures to be taken by those employees
who have been se1ected to remain behind to care for essential plant operations until their evacuation be
comes absolutely necessary. Essential plant operations may include the monitoring of plant power supplies,
water supplies, and other essential services which cannot be shut down for every emergency alarm.
Essential plant operations may also include chemical or manufacturing processes which must be shut down
in stages or steps where certain employees must be present to assure that safe shut down procedures are
completed.

The use of floor plans or workplace maps which clearly show the emergency escape routes should be
included in the emergency action plan. Color coding will aid employees In determining their route
assignments.

The employer should also develop and explain in detail what rescue and medical first aid duties are to be
performed and by whom. All employees are to be told what actions they are to take in these emergency
situations that the employer anticipates may occur in the workplace.

2. Emergency evacuation At the time of an emergency, employees should know what type of evacuation is
necessary and what their role is in carrying out the plan. In some cases where the emergency is very grave,
total and immediate evacuation of all employees is necessary. In other emergencies, a partial evacuation of
nonessential employees with a delayed evacuation of others may be necessary for continued plant
operation. In some cases, only those employees in the immediate area of the fire may be expected to
evacuate or move to a safe area such as when a local application fire suppression system discharge
employee alarm is sounded. Employees must be sure that they know what is expected of them in all such
emergency possibilities which have been planned in order to provide assurance of their safety from fire or
other emergency.

The designation of refuge or safe areas for evacuation should be determined and identified in the plan. In a
building divided into fire zones by fire walls. the refuge area may still be within the same building but in a
different zone from where the emergency occurs.

Exterior refuge or safe areas may include parking lots, open fields or streets which are located away from
the site of the emergency and which provide sufficient space to accommodate the employees. Employees
should be instructed to move away from the exit discharge doors of the building, and to avoid congregating
close to the building where they may hamper emergency operations.

3. Emergency action plan training. The employer should assure that an adequate number of employees are
available at all times during working hours to act as evacuation wardens so that employees can be swiftly
moved from the danger location to the safe areas. Generally, one warden for each twenty employees in the
workplace should be able to provide adequate guidance and instruction at the time of a fire emergency. The
employees selected or who volunteer to serve as wardens should be trained in the complete workplace
layout and the various alternative escape routes from the workplace. All wardens and fellow employees
should be made aware of handicapped employees who may need extra assistance, such as using the buddy



                                                      9
DR 1650-002                                                                                   October 7, 1992


system, and of haz- ardous areas to be avoided during emergencies. Before leaving, wardens should check
rooms and other enclosed spaces in the workplace for employees who may be trapped or otherwise unable
to evacuate the area.

After the desired degree of evacuation is completed, the wardens should be able to account for or otherwise
verify that all employees are in the safe areas.

In buildings with several places of employment, employers are encouraged to coordinate their plans with
the other employers in the building. A building-wide or standardized plan for the whole building is
acceptable provided that the employers inform their respective employees of their duties and
responsibilities under the plan. The standardized plan need not be kept by each employer in the multi-
employer building, provided there is an accessible location within the building where the plan can be
reviewed by affected employees. when multi-employer building-wide plans are not feasible, employers
should coordinate their plans with the other employers within the building to assure that conflicts and
confusion are avoided during times of emergencies. In multi-story buildings where more than one employer
is on a single floor, it Is essential that these employers coordinate their plans with each other to avoid
conflicts and confusion.

4. fire prevention housekeeping. The standard calls for the control of accumulations of flammable and
combustible waste materials.

it is the intent of this standard to assure that hazardous accumulations of combustible waste materials are
controlled so that a fast developing fire, rapid spread of toxic smoke, or an explosion will not occur. This
does not necessarily mean that each room has to be swept each day. Employers and employees should be
aware of the hazardous properties of materials In their work. places, and the degree of hazard each poses.
Certainly oil soaked rags have to be treated differently than general paper trash in office areas. However,
large accumulations of waste paper or corrugated boxes, etc., can pose a significant fire hazard.
Accumulations of materials which can cause large fires or generate dense smoke that are easily ignited or
may start from spontaneous combustion, are the types of materials with which this standard is concerned.
Such combustible materials may be easily ignited by matches, welder's sparks, cigarettes and similar low
level energy ignition sources.

5. Maintenance of equipment under the fire prevention plan. Certain equipment is often installed in
workplaces to control heat sources or to detect fuel leaks. An example is a temperature limit switch often
found on deep-fat food fryers found in restaurants. There may be similar switches for high temperature dip
tanks, or flame failure and flashback arrester devices on furnaces and similar heat producing equipment. If
these devices are not properly maintained or if they become inoperative, a definite fire hazard exists. Again
employees and supervisors should be aware of the specific type of control devices on equipment involved
with combustible materials in the workplace and should make sure, through periodic inspection or testing,
that these controls are operable. Manufacturers' recommendations should be followed to assure proper
maintenance procedures.




                                                     10
DR 1650-002                                                                                October 7, 1992




                                                                        APPENDIX C

September 30, 1991

SUBJECT: Posting of Rules and Regulations Regarding Public Buildings

TO: Directors, Administrative Services Divisions

 This office was recently informed by the Office of Inspector General (OIG) that rules and regulations for
the government of Federal property should be posted conspicuously at each public entrance to a Federal
Facility (18 U.S.C. 930(9). The OIG further noted that an individual could only be federally prosecuted for
possession of a firearm or other dangerous weapon in a Federally owned or leased facility if a prohibitive
notice is clearly posted.

 I am, therefore, directing that Rules and Regulations Regarding Public Buildings (copy attached) be posted
in all buildings owned or leased by USDA. Permission to post this notice in a leased facility should be
received from the lessor first.

Any questions regarding this subject should be directed to James Sober, Real Property Management
Division on 447-5225.

MARILYN G. WAGNER

Acting Director

Attachment




                                                    11
DR 1650-002                                                                      October 7, 1992


                                                                    APPENDIX D

OFFICE OF FEDERAL PROTECTION SERVICE MANAGEMENT REGIONAL OFFICE
ADDRESSES AND TELEPHONE NUMBERS




Central Office

General Services Administration

Office of Physical Security & Law Enforcement - PS

18th and F Streets, NW.,

Room 2306

Washington, DC 20405

FAX: (202) 501-1998                 Comm: (202) 501-0887




National Capital Region

        GSA, Federal Protective Division - WPS

        Building 159 E. Room 211

        Southeast Federal Center

        Third and M. Streets, SE.

        Washington, DC 20407

        FAX: (202) 690-9108




Region 2

        GSA, Law Enforcement Branch - 2PS

26 Federal Plaza, Room 17-130

New York, NY 10278

FAX: (212) 264-9803                                  Comm: (212) 264-4252




                                                 12
DR 1650-002                                                                     October 7, 1992


Region 3

        GSA, Federal Protective Service Division - 3PS

        Wanamaker Building

        100 Penn Square Room 717

        Philadelphia, PA 19107

        FAX: (215) 656-6065




Region 4

        GSA, Law Enforcement Branch - 4PS

        Peachtree Summit Building

        401 West Peachtree Street, NW., Suite 2339

        Atlanta, GA 30365-2550

        FAX: (404) 331-1106                              Comm: (404) 331-5132




Region 5

GSA, Federal Protective Service Division - 5PS

Kluczynski Federal Building

230 South Dearborn Street, Room 2540

        Chicago, IL 60604

        FAX: (312) 353-0143                              Comm: (312) 353-1496




Region 6

        GSA, Law Enforcement Branch - 6PS

        1500 East Bannister Road, Room 2137

        Kansas City, MO 64131-3088




                                                 13
DR 1650-002                                                                      October 7, 1992




        FAX: (816) 926-5751                               Comm: (816) 926-7025




Region 7

GSA, Federal Protective Service Division - 7PS

819 Taylor Street, Room 14A14

Fort Worth, TX 76102

FAX: FTS 334-8490                                 Comm: (817) 334-3559




Region 8

GSA, Federal Protective Service Division - 8PS

Building, Denver Federal Center

Post Office Box 25546

Denver, CO 80225-0546

FAX: (303) 236-7711                               Comm: (303) 236-5869




Region 9

GSA, Federal Protective Service Division - 9PS

525 Market Street, 30th Floor

San Francisco, CA 94105

FAX: (415) 484-5553                               Comm: (415) 744-5090




Region 10

        GSA, Federal Protective Service Division - 1OPS

400 15th Street, SW




                                                 14
DR 1650-002                                  October 7, 1992


Auburn, WA 98001

FAX: (206) 553-7195   Comm: (206) 553-1885

END




                      15
