                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                 NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                         DR 1720-001
 SUBJECT: Office of Inspector General Engagement                 DATE:
 Follow-up                                                       June 29, 2023
 OPI: Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Internal            EXPIRATION DATE:
 Control Division                                                June 29, 2028



Section                                                                                    Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                   1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                        1
3.   Scope                                                                                     2
4.   Background                                                                                2
5.   Policy                                                                                    2
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                                3
7.   Reporting                                                                                 7
8.   Inquiries                                                                                 7

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviation                                                      A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                    B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                     C-1
Appendix D – Process to Reach Management Decision                                           D-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the policy for United States Department
          of Agriculture’s (USDA) management to follow-up and report on final actions taken to
          resolve Office of Inspector General (OIG) engagements with recommendations. The
          report includes the disposition of disallowed costs and future monetary savings resulting
          from more efficient use of resources.

     b.   This DR also establishes definitions, roles, and responsibilities, for follow-up on OIG
          engagements that include recommendations for USDA.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     a.   Mission Area, agency, business unit, and staff office heads are responsible for informing
          their employees of the provisions of this regulation.
  b.   This regulation supersedes DR 1720-001, Audit Follow-up and Management Decision,
       dated November 2, 2011.

  c.   All Mission Areas, agencies, business units, and staff offices will align their policies and
       procedures within this DR upon the publication date.


3. SCOPE

  This DR applies to all Mission Areas, agencies, business units, and staff offices.


4. BACKGROUND

  a.   This DR applies to engagements conducted by, for, or under the direction of OIG per the
       Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended, 5 United States Code (U.S.C.) App. 3 (IG
       Act); and Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-50, Audit Follow-up
       (revised September 29, 1982).

  b.   USDA’s management, OIG, and the Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) will
       collaborate to carry out the requirements of this DR.


5. POLICY

  Per IG Act requirements, Mission Areas, agencies, business units, and staff offices must:

  a.   Propose a management decision to OIG within 60 calendar days of the report issuance
       date, if no management decision was reached at the time of report issuance;

  b.   USDA management must agree to action(s) taken or planned to fulfill the intent of the
       recommendation(s) within an established timeframe of 1 year past management
       decision;

  c.   Timely implement agreed-upon corrective actions associated with recommendations in
       accordance with the management decision; and

  d.   Provide a follow-up process that encourages the timely completion and reporting on the
       status of corrective actions for all OIG engagements with recommendations.




                                                2
6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Inspector General or Designee will:

       (1) Conduct and supervise engagements of programs and operations and recommend
           corrective actions to USDA management;

       (2) Determine when management decision has been reached. When management
           decision is reached, provide information to the Mission Area, agency, or staff office
           involved, with a copy to OCFO, confirming recommendations and its position about
           what documentation is needed by the Mission Area, agency, or staff office to meet
           the intent of the management decision for future final action. Discussions and
           meetings between OIG and Mission Area, agency, or staff office officials to resolve
           differences will begin at the lowest appropriate level and escalate to the highest
           levels until agreement is reached; and

       (3) Review and decide upon requests for changes in the original agreed management
           decision.

  b.   Under and Assistant Secretaries will:

       (1) Designate an Agency Audit Liaison Official (AALO) to serve as a point of contact
           for the unit with OIG and the OCFO. Otherwise, delegate this responsibility to the
           agency or staff office head, as appropriate;

       (2) Monitor responsible units’ completion of agreed upon corrective actions for
           longstanding unresolved recommendations, specifically engagements without final
           action 1 year after the management decision date; and

       (3) Periodically report to the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) on the status of all open
           recommendations, and annually provide a report with time-phased action plans for
           recommendations that remain open 1 year or more past the management decision
           date.

  c.   Agency and Staff Office Heads will:

       (1) Designate an AALO for their agency or staff office;

       (2) Hold appropriate Mission Area, agency, business unit, and staff office management
           officials accountable for follow-up responsibilities on OIG engagements;

       (3) Ensure that agency or staff office strategic or annual performance plans address
           appropriate major management challenges identified by OIG;

       (4) Consider internal control deficiencies cited in OIG reports when evaluating the
           effectiveness of internal control systems; and


                                               3
     (5) Identify material deficiencies as required by the Federal Managers’ Financial
         Integrity Act of 1982 (FMFIA), Public Law (P.L.) 97-255, as well as any system
         noncompliance as required by the Federal Financial Management Improvement Act
         of 1996, P.L. 104-208.

d.   AALOs will:

     (1) Promptly evaluate and report engagement findings and recommendations;

     (2) Use the Department’s automated tracking system to monitor and track the status of
         corrective actions for recommendations pending final action;

     (3) Submit periodic status updates on corrective actions pending completion in the
         system by the established deadlines;

     (4) Reach management decisions with OIG within the statutorily mandated 6-month
         period from the date of the engagement report issuance, include corrective actions
         with estimated completion dates, and information on monetary amounts, as
         applicable;

     (5) Ensure any agreed-upon management decision satisfies the intent of the
         engagement recommendation, addresses the engagement finding, is cost-effective,
         and is consistent with results-oriented management;

     (6) Ensure for any confirmed disallowed costs that are owed to the Government that:

         (a) A bill for collection is established at the time of management decision for all
             confirmed disallowed costs and is promptly recorded, unless otherwise
             negotiated between management and OIG; and

         (b) The proper management of claims and accounts receivable is established and
             managed in accordance with Departmental accounting standards and the Debt
             Collection Improvement Act of 1996, P.L. 104-134;

     (7) Ensure:

         (a) The corrective action associated with each management decision is completed
             within 1 year of the management decision date or by the estimated date of
             completion as agreed to by agency or staff office management and OIG;

         (b) Final action is achieved as agreed upon in the management decision unless a
             request for a change in management decision has been forwarded to the CFO
             and approved by OIG;




                                            4
         (c) Appropriate documentation to fully support a request for final action is
             provided to the CFO in a timely manner and is free of all personally
             identifiable information;

         (d) Actions being taken by the agency or staff office to implement and complete
             corrective actions on engagements without final action are on schedule;

         (e) Retain engagement follow-up files and supporting documentation for 5 years
             from the date of acceptance of final action on the engagement, after which
             time, they may be destroyed; accurate information regarding the collection of
             disallowed costs, as well as any associated interest or penalty collected, is
             maintained and reported to the CFO;

         (f) Monetary savings associated with recommendations referencing funds to be
             put to better use are reported as implemented or not implemented to the CFO
             as part of the final action process; and

         (g) A prompt response is provided to data and reporting calls issued in writing by
             the CFO.

e.   The USDA CFO will:

     (1) Oversee Mission Areas, agencies, business units, and staff offices to ensure that
         engagement follow-up processes are established and maintained;

     (2) Maintain the Department’s automated tracking system for monitoring follow-up
         activities on engagements that include recommendations, including Mission Area,
         agency, business unit, and staff office status reports on pending corrective actions;

     (3) Retain engagement follow-up files for 5 years from the date of acceptance of final
         action on the engagement;

     (4) Issue policy guidance and provide technical support to Mission Areas, agencies,
         business units and staff offices;

     (5) When a change in management decision is deemed appropriate by a CFO’s
         designee, forward a request to OIG for approval, and notify the Mission Area,
         agency, business unit or staff office of OIG's response;

     (6) Evaluate documentation of corrective actions implemented to determine if the intent
         of the recommendation has been met, in accordance with the management decision,
         and final action achieved;

     (7) Annually prepare and distribute the statutorily mandated reports to the President
         and Congress;




                                             5
     (8) Keep the agency or staff office’s CFO, Heads of Staff Office, the Secretary of
         Agriculture, and Under and Assistant Secretaries informed of the status of
         corrective actions for all outstanding engagements;

     (9) Issue reporting guidelines and data calls, as deemed necessary;

     (10) Reserve the right to perform follow-up reviews of actions taken to implement
          engagements with recommendations and reopen closed recommendations, as
          deemed necessary; and

     (11) Report on outstanding engagements to the Office of Budget and Program Analysis
          (OBPA) for budget purposes. The report must include a status for each open
          recommendation.

f.   The General Counsel will:

     (1) Promptly provide legal advice and assistance to Mission Areas, agencies, business
         units, and staff offices relating to requests for legislative or regulatory
         interpretations;

     (2) Issue formal legal opinions to Mission Areas, agencies, business units, and staff
         offices pertaining to issues concerning management decisions or claims collections,
         when necessary; and

     (3) Advise and concur on all Mission Area, agency, business unit and staff office claim
         referrals or requests for assistance from the Comptroller General or the U.S.
         Department of Justice (DOJ). This does not preclude OIG from submitting matters
         pertaining to its engagements or investigations to the Comptroller General or the
         DOJ.

g.   The Director, OBPA, will:

     (1) Collaborate with the CFO to report OIG engagements as part of the annual
         Congressional budget justification; and

     (2) Issue a report that identifies and list the status of recommendations which remain
         unimplemented for 1 year or more from the annual budget justification submission
         date as required by the Good Accounting Obligation in Government Act (GAO-IG),
         P.L. 115-414.




                                            6
7. REPORTING

  a.   The IG Act and OMB Circular A-136, Financial Reporting Requirements require USDA
       to prepare a report to identify engagements for which corrective actions have not been
       completed and the associated disallowed costs and funds to be put to better use.

  b.   Per P.L. 115-414, USDA must include, as part of the annual Congressional budget
       justification, OIG recommendations that remain unimplemented 1 year or more from the
       annual budget justification submission date.


8. INQUIRIES

  Direct all inquiries regarding this DR to OCFO at (202) 720-5539 or the OCFO, Internal
  Control Division at OCFO-Internal-Control-Staff@usda.gov.


                                            -END-




                                             7
                            APPENDIX A

                 ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AALO     Agency Audit Liaison Official
CFO      Chief Financial Officer
DOJ      Department of Justice
DR       Departmental Regulation
FMFIA    Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act
GAO-IG   Good Accounting Obligation in Government Act
IG Act   Inspector General Act
MCAT     Management Control and Audit Team (OCFO component)
OBPA     Office of Budget and Program Analysis
OCFO     Office of the Chief Financial Officer
OIG      Office of Inspector General
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
P.L.     Public Law
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                                A-1
                                          APPENDIX B

                                         DEFINITIONS


Business Unit. A section, division staff office, or other organizational component within U.S.
Department of Agriculture, e.g., the Farm Production and Conservation Business Center, Rural
Development Business Center.

Change in Management Decision. An approved change in the originally agreed-upon corrective
action(s) to be taken to implement an engagement recommendation.

Corrective Action. Measures taken to implement resolved audit (engagement) findings and
recommendations. (Source: OMB, Circular A-50)

Disallowed Cost. A questioned cost that management, in the management decision has sustained
or agreed should not be charged to the Government. (Source: Inspector General Act of 1978, 5
U.S.C. App. 5, § 5(f)(3))

Engagement. A work project conducted by OIG that generally results in a written product.
These engagements are typically classified as an audit, review, attestation, inspection, or non-
audit service.

Engagement Finding. Statement of problem identified by OIG in an engagement report that has
the elements of criteria, condition, cause, and effect, and meets the objective(s) of the OIG
engagement. Inspection reports typically include these elements in their findings, however, the
specific elements needed for an inspection finding depend entirely on the objectives of the
inspection.

Engagement Follow-up. The process to ensure prompt and responsive corrective action is taken
once management decision has been reached on recommendations contained in final OIG
engagement reports.

Engagement Recommendation. A statement of action recommended by OIG to correct an
engagement finding or a set of findings.

Final Action.

   a.   The completion of all actions that the management of an establishment has concluded, in
        its management decision, are necessary with respect to the findings and
        recommendations included in an audit report; and

   b.   In the event that the management of an establishment concludes no action is necessary,
        final action occurs when a management decision has been made.

   (Source: Inspector General Act of 1978, 5 U.S.C. App. 5, § 5(f)(6))


                                               B-1
Funds Be Put to Better Use. A recommendation by OIG that funds could be used more
efficiently if management took actions to implement and complete the engagement
recommendation, including:

   a.   Reductions in outlays;

   b.   Deobligation of funds from programs or operations;

   c.   Withdrawal of interest subsidy costs on loans or loan guarantees, insurance, or bonds;

   d.   Costs not incurred by implementing recommended improvements related to the
        operations of the establishment, a contractor, or grantee;

   e.   Avoidance of unnecessary expenditures noted in pre-award reviews of contract or grant
        agreements; or

   f.   Any other savings which are specifically identified.

   (Source: Inspector General Act of 1978, 5 U.S.C. App. 5, § 5(f)(4))

Inspectors General. OMB Circular A-50 indicates Inspectors General or other audit officials are
responsible for:

   a. Making independent audits and investigations of their agencies' programs, operations,
      activities, and functions;

   b. Overseeing the work of non-Federal auditors performed in connection with Federal
      programs; and

   c. Reviewing responses to audit reports and reporting significant disagreements to the audit
      follow-up official.

Management Decision. The evaluation by management of the findings and recommendations
included in an engagement report and the issuance of a final decision by management concerning
its response to such findings and recommendations, including actions concluded to be necessary.
(Source: Inspector General Act of 1978, 5 U.S.C. App. 5, § 5(f)(5))

Material Deficiency. Refers collectively to material weaknesses discussed in Section 2 of the
Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act of 1982 (FMFIA), P.L. No. 97-255, and financial
management system nonconformances discussed in Section 4 of the FMFIA. For further
explanation on FMFIA Section 2 material weaknesses and Section 4 system nonconformances,
refer to DR 1110-002, Management’s Responsibility for Internal and Control.




                                              B-2
Questioned Cost. A cost that is questioned by OIG because of:

   a.   An alleged violation of a provision of a law, regulation, contract, grant, cooperative
        agreement, or other agreement or document including loans governing the expenditure
        of funds;

   b.   A finding that, at the time of the engagement, such cost was not supported by adequate
        documentation; or

   c.   A finding that the expenditure of funds for the intended purposes is unnecessary or
        unreasonable.

   (Source: Inspector General Act of 1978, 5 U.S.C. App. 5, § 5(f)(1))

Resolved Engagement. An engagement report where management decision has been reached for
all recommendations contained in the OIG engagement report, but final action has not been
completed.

Timely. The Inspector General Act states that the head of a Federal Agency shall complete final
action on each management decision required with regard to a recommendation in an inspector
general’s report under Subsection (a)(1) within 12 months after the date of the inspector
general’s report.




                                              B-3
                                        APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990, P.L. No. 101-576, November 15, 1990, as amended

Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996, P.L. No. 104-134, April 26, 1996

Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act of 1994, P.L. No. 103-355, October 13, 1994

Federal Financial Management Improvement Act of 1996, P.L. No. 104-208, September 30,
1996

Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act of 1982 (FMFIA), P.L. No. 97-255, September 8,
1982

Good Accounting Obligation in Government Act (GAO-IG), P.L. No. 115-414, January 3, 2019

Government Performance and Results Act of 1993, P.L. No. 103-62, August 3, 1993

Inspector General Act of 1978, P.L. 95-452, as amended, codified at 5 U.S.C. App. 3, October
12, 1978

OMB, Circular A-50 (revised), Audit Follow up, September 29, 1982

OMB, Circular A-136 (revised), Financial Reporting Requirements, August 27, 2020

USDA, DR 1110-002, Management’s Responsibility for Internal Control, March 5, 2021




                                             C-1
                                    APPENDIX D

                 PROCESS TO REACH MANAGEMENT DECISION


Management Decision is reached on a given recommendation when both OIG and Mission
Area, agency, or staff office management agrees that the proposed corrective action will
resolve the issue(s) identified in the finding and that the corrective action should be
completed within 1 year or by the stated estimated completion date. After the management
decision has been reached for each recommendation in a given audit, the audit is resolved
and the "1-year clock" begins for reporting purposes on corrective actions.

Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices do not wait until all audit recommendations have
reached management decision to start the closure process. As corrective action is completed
on individual recommendations with management decision, Mission Areas, agencies, and
staff offices submit closure requests to OCFO. An audit is closed in its entirety when all
corrective actions for all recommendations in the audit are completed and supporting
documentation is submitted and approved by the OCFO Management Control and Audit
Team (MCAT).




                                          D-1
