                                          U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                             Washington, D.C. 20250


                                                                                                   Number:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                                           1710-001

SUBJECT: Interception and Monitoring of Telephone                          DATE:
and Non-telephone Conversations                                            February 6, 1984

                                                                           OPI: Office of Inspector General



 l. PURPOSE

 This regulation sets out Department policy relating to the surreptitious interception and monitoring of
telephone and non-telephone conversations.




2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/RESCISSIONS

                   a.      Agency and staff heads are responsible for informing their employees of the
                  provisions of this regulation.

                  b.      Directive Rescinded. Chapter 16, Section lO, Title l, Administrative
                  Regulations, dated October 26, 1978 is superseded by this regulation.




3. POLICY

                  a.        General. No officer or employee of the Department shall intercept (secretly
                  listen to) telephone or non-telephone conversations by mechanical, electronic or other
                  device or means.

                  b. Exception - Consensual Monitoring.

                                     (l)      Telephone Conversations. The Inspector General, or designee,
                                    may authorize monitoring of telephone conversations with the consent
                                    of a party to the conversation, when necessary in criminal
                                    investigations. The Inspector General is responsible for the control of
                                    such consensual monitoring by agents of the Department of
                                    Agriculture. Advance written or oral (when necessitated by exigent
                                    circumstances) authorization from the Inspector General is required
                                    before such monitoring is conducted.

                                    (2)     Non-telephone Conversations. The Inspector General, or
                                    designee may authorize consensual monitoring of non-telephone
                                    conversations when necessary in criminal investigations. The Inspector
DR 1710-001                                                                                    February 6, 1984


                                    General shall comply with Attorney General (Department of Justice)
                                    guidelines and amendments thereto with respect to the authorizations.




4. MONITORING TELEPHONE CALLS

 Except as provided in section 3 above, no officer or employee shall authorize, permit, or participate in the
monitoring of telephone conversations from, to, or within the Department, or with respect to official
business of the Department, for any purpose unless prior and adequate notice is given to, and agreement
received from, all participants to the conversation. This prohibits listening in for any reason without the
prior approval of all parties to the conversation.

                  a.       Identification

                                     (l)       Conference Call. If the telephone call is to be a conference
                                    call, all participants in the conference will be fully identified prior to
                                    the subject matter of the call being introduced.

                                    (2)       Monitored Call. If the call is monitored by a secretary or any
                                    other person for the purpose of taking either notes or a verbatim
                                    transcript of the conversation, the secretary or other person will be
                                    identified and the assent of all other parties to the conversation will be
                                    obtained prior to the subject matter being discussed. The monitoring
                                    shall be terminated as soon as the portion of the telephone conversation
                                    agreed upon for monitoring is terminated.

                  b.      Monitoring Device. If any electronic or mechanical device is used to monitor a
                  telephone conversation, the conditions as outlined above will be adhered to.




                                                      2
