                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                               NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                       DR 1700-002
 SUBJECT: Office of Inspector General Organization and         DATE:
 Procedures                                                    January 13, 2023
                                                               EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of Inspector General                              January 13, 2028



Section                                                                                     Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                    1
2.   Scope                                                                                      1
3.   Special Instructions/Cancellation                                                          1
4.   Policy                                                                                     2
5.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                                17
6.   Inquiries                                                                                 19

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                      A-1
Appendix B – Authorities and References                                                      B-1
Appendix C – OIG Organization Chart                                                          C-1
Appendix D – OIG General Contacts                                                            D-1


1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) updates the DR on Office of Inspector General (OIG)
     organization and procedures regarding cooperation between U.S. Department of Agriculture
     (USDA) officials and employees, and OIG; and identifies the related responsibilities of OIG
     and USDA officials and employees.


2. SCOPE

     This DR applies to USDA OIG; USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices; and all
     employees, contractors, and others working for or on behalf of the USDA.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATION

     a.   This DR supersedes DR 1700-002, OIG Organization and Procedures, dated June 17,
          1997.
  b.   Mission Area, agency, and staff office managers are responsible for making their
       employees aware of the contents of this DR.


4. POLICY

  a.   Inspector General (IG) General Supervision and Independence

       (1) The IG reports to and is under the general supervision of the Secretary, who can
           delegate the authority only to the Deputy Secretary. 5 U.S.C. § 403(a). The IG is
           not subject to oversight by any other USDA official or component.

       (2) The Secretary and Deputy Secretary cannot prevent or prohibit the IG from
           initiating, carrying out, or completing any audit or investigation, or from issuing
           any subpoena during the course of any audit or investigation. 5 U.S.C. § 403(a).

  b.   General Requirements

       (1) OIG and USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will comply with the
           policies and meet all responsibilities contained in this DR.

       (2) Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, employees, contractors, and others working
           for, or on behalf of, USDA are required to cooperate with OIG to facilitate the
           conduct of audits, investigations, reviews, and activities. Mission Area, agency,
           and staff office management officials will focus on and take prompt action
           concerning problems identified and recommendations made by OIG as soon as
           sufficiently actionable information has been provided.

       (3) The functions of OIG do not replace established lines of managerial or operational
           authority and responsibility within USDA and its Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
           offices, nor do they eliminate the need for functional supervision and line
           inspections as may be necessary for Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to
           discharge their assigned responsibilities. Full responsibility is vested with Mission
           Area, agency, and staff office officials for establishing, executing, and ensuring
           compliance with policies, plans, and procedures; developing and implementing
           systems of internal control that fulfill the objectives of the Federal Managers’
           Financial Integrity Act of 1982; preparing financial statements in accordance with
           the requirements of the Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990; and taking appropriate
           action on conditions needing improvements, including those reported by OIG.

  c.   OIG Access to Information

       (1) OIG is authorized to have timely access to all records, reports, audits, reviews,
           documents, papers, recommendations, or other materials that are available to
           USDA, which relate to the programs and operations with respect to which the



                                                 2
         Inspector General has responsibilities under chapter 4 of Title 5 of the United States
         Code (U.S.C.). 5 U.S.C. § 406(a)(1)(A).

     (2) OIG has this access provided under 5 U.S.C. § 406(a)(1)(A), notwithstanding any
         other law, except as limited by chapter 4 of Title 5 of the U.S.C. 5 U.S.C.
         § 406(a)(1)(B)-(C).

     (3) Additionally, OIG is authorized to request such information and assistance as may
         be necessary for carrying out the duties and responsibilities provided by chapter 4
         of Title 5 of the U.S.C. from any Federal, State, or local government agency or unit
         therof. 5 U.S.C. § 406(a)(3).

     (4) No USDA employee or other official subject to this DR will interfere with OIG’s
         access to records or information under chapter 4 of Title 5 of the U.S.C.

d.   Employee Cooperation with OIG

     (1) USDA employees are required to cooperate fully with OIG and to furnish signed
         sworn statements or affidavits when requested to do so. OIG will provide the
         employee with applicable warnings concerning their constitutional and other rights,
         as appropriate. Furnishing false or misleading information or refusing to answer
         questions may result in disciplinary action against the employee.

     (2) If questioned on a matter that may lead to noncriminal disciplinary action, an
         employee may request that a personal representative be present. If the requested
         personal representative is a subject or witness in the case, they will not be allowed
         to be present during the interview, and the employee will be allowed to designate
         another personal representative. Regardless of whether or not a personal
         representative is present during the interview, the employee will be required to
         furnish pertinent information.

     (3) If questioned on a matter that may lead to criminal prosecution, an employee may,
         where applicable, invoke the self-incrimination privilege of the Fifth Amendment to
         the United States Constitution. If the employee is in custody, OIG will advise the
         employee of their right to remain silent, their right to contact an attorney before
         being questioned, and, if the employee cannot afford an attorney, their right to have
         an attorney appointed to represent the employee before being questioned.

     (4) An employee of a USDA Mission Area, agency, or staff office that has a collective
         bargaining agreement with a union has the right to request union representation at
         an investigatory examination conducted by an OIG special agent or other OIG
         official where the employee reasonably believes that the examination may result in
         disciplinary action against him or her. The employee must request union
         representative in order to exercise this right. The right to a union representative is
         not affected by the employee exercising their right to have an attorney present; the
         employee may request both.



                                               3
e.   Reporting Matters to OIG

     (1) Significant Matters That Must Be Reported

         (a) The following are examples of significant matters which, if known, suspected,
             or alleged, must be reported to OIG:

             1    Violation of Federal criminal statutes.

             2    Allegations of criminal conduct involving any employee. See Section 4f
                  regarding the processing of other employee misconduct matters.

             3    All employee misconduct allegations involving the following types of
                  USDA employees:

                  a    Presidential appointees;

                  b    Members of the Senior Executive Service or equivalent employees
                       under other pay systems; and

                  c    Schedule C employees.

             4    Allegations of research misconduct involving USDA funds. See Research
                  Institutions Conducting USDA-Funded Extramural Research; Research
                  Misconducts, 2 CFR pt. 422.

             5    Forest Service (FS) firefighter deaths that are allegedly caused by wildfire
                  entrapment or burnover. Due to the need to obtain evidence in a timely
                  fashion, such notice must be given as soon as possible but not later than 24
                  hours after a fatality occurs.

         (b) Providing notice to OIG under this subsection 4e(1)(a) does not prohibit USDA
             officials and employees from also providing notice to other USDA Mission
             Areas, agencies, or staff offices, such as the Office of Human Resources
             Management or Office of the General Counsel (OGC), as may be appropriate.

     (2) Reporting Bribery or Attempted Bribery of USDA Employees.

         Bribery includes the offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting of anything of value to
         influence an official act of an employee. Bribery or attempted bribery includes
         situations where a forthright offer was not made, but it is suspected that the
         employee is being probed or tested, or where an offer of a bribe could reasonably be
         inferred. Since bribery allegations are especially sensitive and require special
         reporting procedures, the following procedures will be used:




                                               4
(a) Any Employee. Any employee, as well as any Federal contractor,
    subcontractor, grantee, or subgrantee or personal services contractor, who is
    offered a bribe or who believes that a bribe was offered to, solicited by, or
    accepted by another employee will immediately report that information directly
    (i.e., not through supervisory channels) to OIG in one of the following two
    ways:

    1    During normal business hours, contact the appropriate OIG Special
         Agent-in-Charge (SAC) handling the geographic location where the offer
         was made (see Appendix D). Employees located in USDA Headquarters
         offices should contact the SAC for the Northeast Region, New York, New
         York (see Appendix D).

    2    Outside of normal business hours, contact the OIG Bribery/Assault Line in
         Washington, D.C. (see Appendix D). The Bribery/Assault Line will be
         used only to report actual or potential bribery situations.

(b) USDA Officials. USDA officials who receive any bribery allegation not
    previously reported to OIG must immediately report it to OIG.

(c) Coordination with Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). OIG will coordinate
    investigative activities with the FBI, as appropriate.

(d) Action After Reporting. After reporting the bribery or attempted bribery, the
    employee or USDA official must follow the instructions of OIG or the FBI on
    what action to take to avoid jeopardizing any subsequent investigation. Also
    avoid disclosing the information or the fact that it was reported to OIG to
    anyone without the prior approval of OIG.

(e) Channels for Reporting Fraud, Waste, Abuse, Mismanagement, and USDA
    Employee Misconduct. OIG has established several channels for USDA
    employees and the general public to report fraud, waste, abuse, and
    mismanagement in USDA programs, or misconduct by a USDA employee.
    These include a general hotline, a Bribery/Assault Line, and (for USDA
    employees) a Whistleblower Coordinator. Details regarding each channel are
    set forth in this section, and contact information is provided in Appendix D.

(f) OIG Hotline.

    1    General Hotline Complaints. OIG has established a hotline for USDA
         employees and the general public to report fraud, waste, abuse, and
         mismanagement in USDA programs, or misconduct by a USDA
         employee. A complaint may be filed with the Hotline by calling on the
         telephone, writing a letter, or completing an online complaint via the
         Hotline portal on OIG’s public website. Complaints can be submitted
         anonymously.



                                    5
         2   Hotline Complaints Against Senior Executive Service Officials. The OIG
             Hotline will refer all allegations and complaints in which one or more
             subjects are Senior Executive Service employees to OIG’s Office of
             Investigations for investigative consideration. As appropriate, OIG will
             subsequently notify the Office of the Assistant Secretary for
             Administration and the General Counsel of the allegations and complaints.

    (g) Bribery/Assault Line. As set forth in Section 4e(2), any USDA employee, as
        well as any Federal contractor, subcontractor, grantee, or subgrantee or
        personal services contractor, who is offered a bribe or who believes that a bribe
        was offered to, solicited by, or accepted by another employee is required to
        immediately report the matter to OIG. The Bribery/Assault Line is available
        for submitting such reports 24 hours a day.

    (h) OIG Whistleblower Protection Coordinator. The Coordinator is separate and
        distinct from the general hotline for USDA employees and members of the
        public to report allegations of fraud, waste, and abuse, etc. (see Section
        4e(3)(a)). The Coordinator has a specific role: to educate USDA employees
        about prohibitions on retaliation for protected disclosures, and educate USDA
        employees who have made or are contemplating making a protected disclosure
        about the rights and remedies against retaliation for protected disclosures. The
        Coordinator is prohibited from acting as an employee’s or former employee’s
        legal representative, agent, or advocate. Contact information is contained in
        Appendix D. Additional information is available on the Whistleblower
        Protection Coordinator page on OIG’s public website.

    (i) Confidentiality and Identity Protection for USDA Employees. When OIG
        receives an allegation, complaint, or information from a Department employee,
        OIG is prohibited from disclosing the identity of the employee without their
        consent unless the IG determines it is unavoidable during the course of the
        investigation. Additionally, Department employees are prohibited from taking
        or threatening to take any personnel action as reprisal against employees for
        making a complaint or disclosing information to OIG unless the complaint was
        made or the information disclosed with the knowledge that it was false or with
        willful disregard for its truth or falsity. See 5 U.S.C. § 407.

(3) Reporting Based on Agreements. OIG has entered into individualized agreements
    (e.g., memoranda of understanding) with some USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and
    staff offices, and those agreements describe in detail the matters that must be
    reported to OIG as opposed to matters that may be handled by a Mission Area’s,
    agency’s, or staff office’s compliance or enforcement unit.

(4) When Reporting is Not Required. Reporting to OIG is not required for certain
    matters as discussed in Sections 4f through g.




                                         6
f.   Matters That USDA Mission Areas, Agencies, and Staff Offices Are Authorized to
     Address

     (1) Employee Misconduct Investigations. In accordance with USDA regulations,
         Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are authorized to conduct certain types of
         inquiries and investigations of possible misconduct by their employees involving
         violations of rules, regulations, or laws that, if proved, will not likely result in
         criminal prosecution. Examples of such matters which may be addressed by the
         Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices include the following:

         (a) Absence without leave and other attendance irregularities.

         (b) Conducting personal business during duty hours.

         (c) Fighting, threatening, or using abusive language to coworkers, supervisors, or
             the public. To the extent that such actions appear to be a situation involving
             workplace violence and OIG is contacted, OIG may coordinate efforts with
             appropriate Federal, State, or local law enforcement authorities.

         (d) Refusal or failure to follow instructions or procedures.

         (e) Neglect of duty.

         (f) Misuse of government vehicles.

         (g) Off-duty conduct, unrelated to employment, resulting in arrest or conviction.

         (h) Use of government facilities, supplies, equipment, services, telephones, or
             personnel for other than official business.

         (i) Sexual harassment.

         (j) Falsification of application for employment.

         (k) Intoxication or consumption of alcohol or drugs while on duty.

         If the Mission Area, agency, or staff office believes that an investigation by OIG of
         these types of misconduct is necessary for some specific reason, the Mission Area,
         agency, or staff office may request that OIG consider conducting such investigation.

     (2) Accidents and Resulting Claims for Damage. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
         offices generally will conduct their own inquiries of accidents involving
         government-owned vehicles or privately-owned vehicles used for official business.
         However, OIG may agree to conduct an investigation if OIG receives a specific
         request from OGC or the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ), or when it appears that
         criminal activity may be a contributing factor to the accident.



                                              7
     (3) Other Matters. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will conduct their own
         inquiries into breaches of contract, negligence by warehouse operators or others,
         and noncriminal violations of USDA programs involving contractors, permittees,
         producers, borrowers, or others. If professional fact-finding assistance is needed on
         a high impact matter (i.e., a matter of such significance related to USDA assets and
         resources, health and safety, government costs, Congressional or public interest, or
         program vulnerability that addressing, assessing, and assuring the effectiveness of
         internal control systems will be instrumental in avoiding crisis conditions), Mission
         Areas, agencies, and staff offices may request OIG assistance and OIG will conduct
         audits, investigations, or both, where warranted.

g.   Investigative Matters to Be Reported to Entities Other than OIG

     (1) Property Crimes. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must report to the local
         law enforcement agency with jurisdiction, the Federal Protective Service, or the
         FBI, as appropriate, any unlawful act (for example, theft or willful damage)
         committed on or against Federal property or premises. Concurrently Mission Area,
         agency, and staff office personnel must notify the SAC of the geographical location
         impacted if:

         (a) There is any indication that a USDA employee is involved as a perpetrator; or

         (b) There is any indication of organized activity, such as expressions of civil
             disobedience, civil rights violations and hate crimes, or terrorist acts.

     (2) Assaults. This subsection applies to assaults and other crimes threatened or
         committed against a USDA employee if there is any indication that the threat or
         crime was related to the employee’s job or the performance of official duties. Such
         assaults and crimes should be reported as follows:

         (a) Assaults and Crimes that Occur at Non-USDA Locations. Immediately report
             the assault or crime to the local law enforcement agency with jurisdiction. As
             soon as practical thereafter, notify the SAC with responsibility for the
             geographic location where the assault or crime occurred.

         (b) Assaults and Crimes that Occur in USDA Facilities.

              1    USDA Headquarters Offices. Immediately contact the USDA Office of
                   Safety, Security and Protection (OSSP). OSSP will notify local law
                   enforcement. As soon as practical thereafter, OSSP will notify the SAC,
                   Investigations Liaison and Special Operations Division, OIG.

              2    USDA Field Offices and Other Facilities. Immediately report the assault
                   or crime to the local law enforcement agency with jurisdiction as well as
                   to Federal Protective Services or general building security. As soon as



                                              8
                   practical thereafter, notify the SAC with responsibility for the geographic
                   location where the assault or crime occurred.

     (3) Discrimination. Allegations of discrimination because of race, color, religion,
         national origin, age, sex, , disability, marital or familial status, political beliefs,
         parental status, receipt of public assistance, or protected genetic information are to
         be addressed in accordance with USDA regulations.

     (4) Prohibited Political Activity. Forward allegations of prohibited political activity to
         the U.S. Office of Special Counsel, and provide a copy of the referral to the USDA
         Office of Ethics. If the allegations involve an OIG employee, also forward a copy
         of the referral to OIG’s Office of Compliance and Integrity. USDA employees who
         are unsure about whether a specific activity is prohibited and should be referred
         may contact the USDA Office of Ethics for advice.

h.   Requests for Audits, Investigations, and Office of Analytics and Innovation (OAI)
     Assistance

     (1) Audits. Mission Area, agency, and staff office heads and other authorized officials
         will direct requests for audits to the Assistant Inspector General (AIG) for Audit.
         Requests for audits at the State or local level will be forwarded to the cognizant
         Audit Director (see Appendix D).

     (2) Investigations. Requests for domestic investigative services will be directed to the
         SAC with responsibility for the geographic location concerned (see Appendix D).
         Requests for investigations of foreign programs and for investigative services of
         extremely sensitive or unusual situations will be directed to the AIG for
         Investigations, Deputy AIG for Investigations, Deputy IG, or IG.

     (3) OAI. Mission Area, agency, and staff office heads and other authorized officials
         will direct requests for data analytics, computer matching, and continuous
         monitoring to the AIG for Analytics and Innovation.

     (4) Preparing Requests. Requests must be in writing, cite known pertinent facts, and
         specify concerns to be audited, investigated, or reviewed. When time is of the
         essence, the request may be made by telephone and confirmed by memorandum.
         OIG will acknowledge requests for assistance within 10 business days of receipt.

i.   Notification of Audits, Investigations, and Other Activities.

     The OIG Annual Plan issued at the beginning of each fiscal year describes anticipated
     audit, investigative, and other initiatives. OIG collaborates with Departmental and
     Mission Area, agency, and staff office officials to determine the audits to be included in
     the plan. OIG also gives advance notice of specific audits, investigations, or other
     activities to appropriate Mission Area, agency, and staff office officials, except in




                                                9
     unusual circumstances where time or other considerations make notification
     impracticable.

     (1) Audits. OIG management will notify Mission Area, agency, and staff office
         officials of OIG’s intent to begin an audit and will arrange an entrance conference
         with Mission Area, agency, and staff office officials to advise them of the purpose
         and objectives of the audit, its scope, and the general methodology and procedures
         to be followed.

     (2) Investigations. OIG will issue a case opening memorandum to the appropriate
         officials. Upon receipt of notice that an investigation has been initiated, Mission
         Area, agency, and staff office officials will notify employees who have a “need to
         know” of the investigation (unless they are subjects of an investigation or are the
         subjects of a complaint or allegation of wrongdoing). In response to any inquiry
         regarding an OIG investigation, employees may not acknowledge that an
         investigation is being conducted or provide any other information unless OIG has
         notified them that such confirmation may be made or information provided. Any
         publicity about the allegations being investigated, or even about the existence of a
         planned investigation, may interfere with the investigation or with necessary legal,
         administrative, contractual, or personnel action.

     (3) OAI Reviews and Activities. As appropriate, OIG will notify Mission Area,
         agency, and staff office officials when OAI initiates reviews or other activities
         involving the use of predictive data analysis, computer matching, continuous
         monitoring, data mining, and data warehousing of USDA programs and operations
         in support of OIG audits, investigations, and other activities.

     (4) Other Activities. As appropriate, OIG will notify Mission Area, agency, and staff
         office officials when OIG initiates other types of reviews and activities involving
         Department programs and operations.

j.   Administrative Action by Mission Areas, Agencies, and Staff Offices. Mission Areas,
     agencies, and staff offices must not take administrative or enforcement actions
     concerning matters under investigation by OIG without first coordinating with OIG.
     However, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must contact OIG if they believe
     expedited administrative action is required to protect the Government’s interest.

k.   Using Non-Federal Personnel for Audits

     (1) Approval or Agreement for the Use of Non-Federal Personnel. Non-Federal
         personnel will not conduct audits of Departmental operations without the prior
         approval of OIG in a written agreement signed by OIG and the Mission Area,
         agency, or staff office.

     (2) OIG Use of Non-Federal Personnel for Audits. When essential to the
         accomplishment of the USDA OIG audit mission, OIG may enter into contracts for



                                              10
    audit services with State audit staffs, independent public accountants, and other
    organizations outside the Department.

(3) Limitations on the Use of Non-Federal Personnel for Audits. USDA program
    participants (either individuals or entities) that are funded by the Department may
    be subject to audit by non-Federal auditors in accordance with departmental
    regulations. OIG may review the quality of audits completed by non-Federal
    personnel by conducting periodic reviews of the work of such personnel. It is the
    policy of OIG to rely on these audits to the fullest extent practicable. However, for
    all audits that they have required, USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices
    must ensure the following:

    (a) Stipulate that audits conducted by non-Federal auditors be performed in
        accordance with the generally accepted Government auditing standards issued
        by the Comptroller General of the United States. For single audits, there must
        be further stipulation that the requirements of 2 CFR part 200, subpart F are
        met.

    (b) Require that all irregularities involving potential fraud, abuse, or illegal acts
        discovered by non-Federal auditors, regardless of materiality, be reported by
        the auditors to the Federal agency arranging for the audit and to OIG for
        appropriate action.

    (c) Provide for OIG (and the Government Accountability Office; (GAO)) to have
        access to all audit-related documents, including audit reports, correspondence,
        workpapers, and management letters prepared by non-Federal auditors.
        Further, the results of peer reviews and partners’ inspections made by national
        or State accounting organizations must be made available to OIG upon request.

    (d) Establish an audit tracking and monitoring system, based on the universe of
        organizations subject to audit, in order to ensure that Mission Area, agency,
        and staff office audit requirements are met.

    (e) Maintain systems and procedures for programmatic reviews of all audit reports,
        including analysis and evaluation of the activity and follow-up of findings and
        recommendations.

    (f) Refer to OIG those audit reports where clarification or technical advice is
        needed, the independence of the auditor is questioned, a financial interest is
        suspected, or substandard work is suspected.

    (g) For Single Audit Act entities, provide that additional audits be planned and
        carried out in a manner that builds upon the single audit, and are arranged and
        paid for by the Mission Area, agency, or staff office. Additional audits are
        those which do not duplicate audit work performed during other audits of
        Federal awards.



                                         11
         (h) Establish policy for frequency of audits required by the Mission Area, agency,
             or staff office (e.g., annual, semiannual).

l.   Corrective Action on OIG Reports

     (1) Audit Recommendations. DR 1720-001, Audit Follow-up and Management
         Decision, prescribes the procedures for management decisions and final actions on
         OIG audit reports. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must implement
         adequate audit resolution procedures for audits made by both Federal and non-
         Federal auditors to ensure that audit findings and recommendations are evaluated
         and acted on in a timely manner.

     (2) Reports of Investigation (ROI). The OIG office that issues an ROI is responsible
         for following to conclusion all matters reported.

         (a) Action Addressee. This official will inform OIG and OGC of all
             administrative action planned or taken against offending employees and
             outside violators (e.g., program participants). Legal action must be
             coordinated with OIG, OGC, and DOJ.

         (b) Closing Action. OIG will consider an investigative matter subject to “closure”
             action when either of the following conditions are met:

              1   Pre-appellate criminal and civil legal actions are completed or declined by
                  DOJ, or OGC if the report was sent to OGC. A final judgment or
                  settlement obtained by DOJ in a civil case is considered the completion of
                  legal action, even though the amount has not been collected.

              2   Impacted Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices have reported back to
                  OIG the results of any administrative action taken in the matter (e.g., an
                  amount of indebtedness is determined and arrangements are made for its
                  payment; personnel actions or contractual remedies are initiated and
                  accomplished; suspension, or debarment is completed; a Department
                  service, license, permit, or authorization is withheld, suspended, or
                  revoked; Mission Area, agency, and staff office determined that no action
                  would be taken).

              It is expected that Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices that are
              responsible for taking or following any additional action necessary subsequent
              to the receipt of an OIG ROI, such as collecting periodic payments, will
              promptly take such action.

     (3) Closure of OAI Request. OIG will consider an OAI request closed when impacted
         Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices have provided requested information and
         taken appropriate actions which are responsive to the OAI request. It is expected



                                             12
         that Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will take actions to promptly provide
         the requested information.

m. Media Inquiries. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must refer all news media
   inquiries about any OIG activities to the OIG Office of Counsel.

n.   Release of OIG Reports and Other Products or Documents. OIG reports and other
     products and documents should not be released publicly without prior approval from
     OIG. Procedures governing specific OIG products are set forth in this section.

     (1) General Restrictions on Release of ROIs

         (a) ROIs are FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY. ROIs are part of an OIG system of
             records that is governed by the Privacy Act (5 U.S.C. § 552a). OIG’s current
             system of records notices are published in the Federal Register (87 FR 62066).
             To maintain security and confidentiality of ROIs, distribution is generally
             limited to those USDA officials who have an official “need to know” the
             results of investigations.

         (b) ROIs and their contents must neither be discussed or distributed outside USDA
             agencies or staff offices nor duplicated without prior written approval from
             OIG. This includes any potential release of an ROI in either disciplinary or
             program-related administrative proceedings, or civil or criminal litigation.

         (c) Direct all requests for release or duplication of an ROI by USDA agencies or
             staff offices to the OIG Office of Counsel.

         (d) As a general rule, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should destroy or
             delete ROIs once appropriate criminal, civil, or administrative action has been
             taken. The ROIs should be destroyed by shredding the documents or deleting
             electronic files, as applicable. However, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
             offices are authorized to maintain a record copy of the ROI in their files, if
             needed. Any record copy that is maintained by the Mission Area, agency, or
             staff office must be destroyed at the end of the relevant retention period for the
             ROI. See Request for Records Disposition Authority, Job No. N1-016-00-003,
             Items 1b(2), 1c(2), 1d(2), and 1e(2) (Oct. 17, 2001) (cases that resulted in
             criminal and/or civil prosecutive or administrative action are destroyed after 10
             years; cases that did not result in prosecutive or administrative action are
             destroyed after 5 years).

     (2) Public and Limited Outside Release of Certain Investigative Reports. In
         accordance with Federal law, certain investigative reports and findings may be
         released publicly or to a limited set of non-USDA entities and individuals, as
         follows:




                                              13
    (a) A summary of findings during an investigation of FS firefighter deaths that are
        caused by wildfire entrapment or burnovers conducted pursuant to 7 U.S.C.
        §§ 2270b and 2270c, is routinely published on OIG’s Freedom of Information
        Act (FOIA) Requests page.

    (b) Pursuant to 5 U.S.C. § 1213, the U.S. Office of Special Counsel (OSC) may
        refer allegations of whistleblower reprisal to the Secretary of Agriculture for
        investigation. In turn, the Secretary may ask OIG to conduct the investigation
        and prepare an ROI that sets forth its findings. OSC may post and publicly
        release a copy of OIG’s final ROI along with other information on OSC’s
        Public Files page.

    (c) In accordance with the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) of 2013, as
        amended (41 U.S.C. § 4712), ROIs relating to the investigation of alleged
        whistleblower reprisal against employees of a contractor, subcontractor,
        grantee, subgrantee, or personal services contractor are released to the person
        who filed the complaint, the contractor or grantee concerned, and the head of
        the Mission Area, agency, or staff office. As appropriate, reports are redacted
        in accordance with the Privacy Act and the 2013 NDAA.

    (d) In accordance with FOIA, 5 U.S.C. § 552, OIG publicly releases copies of
        ROIs that have been released under FOIA and which OIG determines have
        become or are likely to become the subject of additional FOIA requests. See
        5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(3)(D). These reports are published on OIG’s FOIA Requests
        page.

(3) Routine Release of Audit Reports.

    (a) Draft reports must not be released, shared, or discussed with any individual
        outside the Department except with the specific advance written authorization
        of OIG. Circulation within the Department must be limited only to those
        officials having a “need to know.” When preparing a response to a draft
        report, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must exclude identifiers to
        individual persons, pursuant to the Privacy Act, because such responses are
        attached to final reports and, thus, made part of the official record, which then
        are published and distributed publicly.

    (b) OIG provides all final audit reports to relevant Congressional committees and
        Members of Congress after issuance to the Secretary and the head of the
        Mission Area, agency, or staff office. With few exceptions, within 3 days of a
        final audit report being issued, OIG will release and post the report on OIG’s
        Reports web page. In a limited number of instances (e.g., reports that contain
        sensitive security information), release of a final audit report may be confined
        to USDA action Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices, other USDA
        Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices having an official interest, entities
        receiving USDA funding that were the subject of the audit (e.g., State



                                         14
              agencies), and central guidance agencies such as GAO, OMB, and Congress.
              In such circumstances, OIG will release and post a summary of the report’s
              findings on OIG’s Reports page.

     (4) Release of OIG Recommendations for Corrective Action. In accordance with
         5 U.S.C. § 404(e)(1,) whenever OIG issues a recommendation for corrective action
         to a USDA Mission Area, agency, or staff office, OIG is required to submit the
         document making the recommendation to the Secretary, congressional committees
         of jurisdiction, and the individual or entity who requested the recommendation (if
         not the IG); may submit the document to any Member of Congress upon request;
         and is required to post the document on OIG’s public website within 3 days of
         submitting it to the Secretary. However, prior to any such release, OIG will
         withhold from any such document any information that it is prohibited from release
         by law.

     (5) Outside Requests for OIG Reports. Any request that agencies or staff offices
         receive from the public, outside the Department, or from entities or individuals not
         included in OIG’s original or subsequent distribution(s) for copies of OIG audit or
         investigative reports, or other OIG products that have not previously been released
         and published on OIG’s public website must be referred to the OIG Office of
         Counsel for review pursuant to the FOIA or Privacy Act.

     (6) Requests for Authenticated OIG Documents. A request for an authenticated copy
         of an OIG document must be sent to the OIG Office of Counsel at the address set
         forth in Appendix D. Such requests will be processed in accordance with 7 CFR
         § 1.10.

     (7) Release by OGC or USDA Mission Areas, Agencies, and Staff Offices. OGC or a
         USDA Mission Area, agency, or staff office may determine that an OIG report or
         other OIG product is needed in order to defend the Department’s interests in
         adversarial proceedings such as litigation, judicial proceedings, or administrative
         hearings and that the report may need to be released outside the Department in such
         proceedings or other contexts. In such cases, the OGC attorney or Mission Area,
         agency, and staff office representative must contact the OIG Office of Counsel to
         discuss the requested release. The OIG Office of Counsel will timely review the
         requested report or other OIG product and make a final determination regarding
         whether the report or other OIG product will be released.

o.   Approval and Oversight of Mission Area, Agency, or Staff Office Audit or Investigative
     Functions

     (1) A Mission Area, agency, or staff office proposing to establish a unit staffed by
         auditors or investigators must submit a formal request to the AIG for Investigations
         or AIG for Audit, as appropriate, seeking advance consultation and agreement prior
         to the establishment of such a unit.




                                              15
     (2) If OIG agrees that it is appropriate for a Mission Area, agency, or staff office to
         establish such a unit and conduct audit or investigative functions with its own
         personnel (other than as authorized in this DR), the arrangement must be
         documented by a written agreement signed by OIG and the Mission Area, agency,
         or staff office. The agreement will explain why the Mission Area, agency, and staff
         office deems it necessary to perform the functions and define the responsibilities of
         the Mission Area, agency, and staff office and OIG with respect to these functions.
         The agreement will include a specific date when it must be renewed by mutual
         agreement by both parties or it will expire. OIG will retain general compliance
         oversight responsibility for such Mission Area, agency, and staff office unit
         functions.

p.   Relationship with the FBI

     (1) Liaison. OIG is the USDA liaison with the FBI except that the Director, OHS, is
         the liaison official on matters which involve the USDA personnel security program.
         The IG has delegated to the AIG for Investigations the authority to carry out
         USDA’s operational liaison with the FBI.

     (2) Control of Information. OIG receives information from the FBI in the form of
         investigative reports, letters, memoranda, and other means. The AIG for
         Investigations is responsible for receipt, handling, and prompt referral of documents
         to interested USDA agencies. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must
         establish controls to ensure that FBI documents, or copies or parts thereof, are
         adequately safeguarded while in agency custody and are destroyed as soon as
         agency needs are served.

     (3) Use of FBI Information. Reports and other communications received from the FBI,
         or the contents of these documents, may be disseminated only to USDA employees
         who need the information in execution of their official duties. Advance written
         permission must be obtained from OHS (for personnel security program matters) or
         from OIG (for all other matters) before an FBI document is referenced, copied,
         reproduced, paraphrased, quoted, portions extracted therefrom, or used as a part of
         an exhibit to any Department report, file, or other record which may have a
         distribution broader than that outlined in this subsection. FBI reports cannot be
         made available to any other individual or entity unless advance written permission
         is obtained from the FBI by OIG and the release does not violate the Privacy Act.




                                              16
5. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Secretary will provide general supervision to the IG. 5 U.S.C. § 403(a).

  b.   The Deputy Secretary will provide general supervision to the IG when delegated to do
       so by the Secretary. 5 U.S.C. § 403(a).

  c.   The Inspector General will:

       (1) Report to the Secretary and, to the extent such authority has been delegated, the
           Deputy Secretary, in accordance with chapter 4 of Title 5 of the U.S.C. 5 U.S.C.
           § 403(a); and

       (2) Exercise, oversee, and manage all authorities, duties, and responsibilities under
           chapter 4 of Title 5 of the U.S.C., and other relevant Federal authorities (see
           Appendix B).

  d.   The Assistant Inspector General (AIG) for Investigations will:

       (1) Supervise all investigative activities of OIG. 5 U.S.C. § 403(d)(2); and

       (2) Coordinate USDA’s operational liaison activities with the FBI.

       (3) As appropriate, coordinate with OGC regarding DOJ initiating litigation matters on
           behalf of USDA, pursuant to OIG cases. In general, absent factors that would
           indicate an alternate timing or manner of coordination with OGC, such coordination
           will be accomplished via an email notification from OIG Investigations to the
           relevant OGC Regional Attorney, with a copy to the career Deputy General
           Counsel, no later than upon DOJ acceptance of such matter for prosecution.

  e.   The AIG for Audit will supervise all audit activities of OIG. 5 U.S.C. § 403(d)(1).

  f.   The Counsel to the Inspector General will:

       (1) Provide independent legal counsel to the IG. 5 U.S.C. § 403(g);

       (2) Serve as OIG’s liaison with USDA’s OGC;

       (3) Manage OIG’s congressional, media, FOIA, and ethics programs; and

       (4) Coordinate the review and processing of all requests for OIG records and
           information, including requests submitted pursuant to the FOIA (5 U.S.C. § 552) or
           Privacy Act (5 U.S.C. § 552a).

  g.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Heads will:




                                                17
(1) Render all possible assistance during audits, investigations, and other activities by
    providing records and information that are available to USDA which relate to the
    programs and operations with respect to which the Inspector General has
    responsibilities under 5 U.S.C. § 406(a)(1)(A), and explaining controls, systems,
    and practices relating to matters under review.

(2) Appoint an Agency Liaison Officer (ALO). Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
    offices may appoint one ALO or may choose to appoint separate individuals for
    audits, investigations, reviews, and other activities. Keep the relevant AIG
    informed in writing of the name and title of the person(s) designated, including any
    changes in the designation.

(3) If requested by OIG, assign technical advisors to assist OIG staff.

(4) Report matters to OIG and other appropriate authorities in accordance with Sections
    4e and g.

(5) Instruct Mission Area, agency, and staff office personnel that they must report
    expeditiously to OIG or other appropriate officials all known or suspected
    violations of law or regulations in accordance with Section 4.

(6) Upon receipt of notice that an OIG investigation has been initiated, only notify
    employees who have a “need to know” about the investigation (unless they are
    subjects of an investigation or are the subjects of a complaint or allegation of
    wrongdoing).

(7) Not acknowledge to outside parties or other USDA officials or employees who do
    not have an official “need to know” that an OIG investigation is being conducted or
    provide any other information without prior approval from OIG.

(8) Refer all media inquiries relating to OIG activities as well as other requests for OIG
    documents and information, to OIG’s Office of Counsel.

(9) Establish controls to ensure that FBI documents, or copies or parts thereof, that the
    Mission Area, agency, or staff office receives from OIG or USDA’s Office of
    Homeland Security (OHS) are adequately safeguarded while in Mission Area,
    agency, or staff office custody and are destroyed as soon as Mission Area, agency,
    or staff office needs are served.

(10) Contact OIG prior to taking administrative or enforcement actions concerning
     matters under investigation by OIG, and coordinate as necessary.

(11) Prior to establishing a unit staffed by auditors or investigators, seek advance
     consultation and agreement from the appropriate AIG.




                                          18
  h.   The Director, OHS will serve as USDA’s liaison with the FBI on matters which involve
       the USDA personnel security program.

  i.   The ALO will:

       (1) Be the initial and primary contact between OIG and the Mission Area, agency, and
           staff office to coordinate audit, investigative, and review matters within the Mission
           Area, agency, and staff office and to handle GAO reports and related
           correspondence; and

       (2) Keep OIG informed of significant changes within the Mission Area, agency, and
           staff office that affect OIG planning (e.g., changes in organization, legislation,
           program emphasis, and funding).

  j.   Employees, Contractors, and Others Working For or On Behalf of USDA will:

       (1) Render all possible assistance during audits, investigations, and other activities by
           providing records and explaining controls, systems, and practices relating to matters
           under review; and

       (2) Report matters to OIG and other appropriate authorities in accordance with Sections
           4e and g.

  k.   Records and Information Control will:

       (1) Not acknowledge to outside parties or other USDA officials or employees who do
           not have an official “need to know” that an OIG investigation is being conducted or
           provide any other information without prior approval from OIG;

       (2) Refer all media inquiries relating to OIG activities as well as other requests for OIG
           documents and information, to OIG’s Office of Counsel; and

       (3) Contact OIG prior to taking administrative or enforcement actions concerning
           matters under investigation by OIG, and coordinate as necessary.


6. INQUIRIES

  All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should direct questions and inquiries
  regarding this DR to the OIG Office of Counsel at (202) 720-9110. Additional contact
  information for individual OIG components can be found on the contact page of the OIG’s
  public website, as well as in Appendix D.


                                               -END-




                                                19
                           APPENDIX A

              ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AIG      Assistant Inspector General
ALO      Agency Liaison Officer
CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
DOJ      Department of Justice
DR       Departmental Regulation
FBI      Federal Bureau of Investigation
FOIA     Freedom of Information Act
FS       Forest Service
GAO      Government Accountability Office
IG       Inspector General
NDAA     National Defense Authorization Act
OAI      Office of Analytics and Innovation
OGC      Office of the General Counsel
OHS      Office of Homeland Security
OIG      Office of Inspector General
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
OSC      U.S. Office of Special Counsel
OSSP     Office of Safety, Security and Protection
SAC      Special Agent-in-Charge
ROI      Report of Investigation
TDD      Telecommunication Device for the Deaf
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture
WBP      Whistleblower Program




                                   A-1
                                       APPENDIX B

                          AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


The following is a non-exhaustive list of existing Federal laws and regulations that set forth
the IG’s authorities and responsibilities.


Availability of Information to the Public, 7 CFR 2620

Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990, 31 U.S.C. §§ 3521, 9105

Delegations of Authority to the Inspector General, 7 CFR § 2.33

Disclosures of violations of law, gross mismanagement, and certain other matters, 5 U.S.C.
§ 1213(c)

Enhancement of contractor protection from reprisal for disclosure of certain information,
41 U.S.C. § 4712

Federal Financial Management Improvement Act of 1996, 31 U.S.C. § 3512 note

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014, 44 U.S.C. §§ 3551-3557

Forfeiture and Denial of Property Rights, 7 CFR § 271.5(e)

Forfeiture of property involved in illegal benefits trafficking, 7 U.S.C. § 2024(e), (f)

Government Management Reform Act of 1994, 31 U.S.C. §§ 3515, 3521

IG Investigation of FS Firefighter Deaths, 7 U.S.C. §§ 2270b, 2270c

Improper Payments Information Act of 2002, as amended by the Improper Payment
Elimination and Recovery Improvement Act of 2012, 31 U.S.C. § 3321 note

Inspectors General, 5 U.S.C. §§ 401-424

Law Enforcement Authorities, 7 CFR pt. 1a

Organization, Functions, and Delegations of Authority, 7 CFR 2610

Privacy Act of 1974; Systems of Records, 87 FR 62066

Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act of 1986, 31 U.S.C. §§ 3801-3812



                                               B-1
Reports Consolidation Act of 2000, 31 U.S.C. § 3516

Research Institutions Conducting USDA-Funded Extramural Research; Research
Misconducts, 2 CFR pt. 422

Section 1(12) of the Federal Managers Financial Integrity Act of 1982, 31 U.S.C.
§ 3512(c)-(d)

Section 3 of the Improper Payment Elimination and Recovery Act of 2010, 31 U.S.C. § 3321
note

Section 1337 of the Agriculture Food Act of 1981, 7 U.S.C. § 2270, as amended.

Single Audit Act of 1984, 31 U.S.C. §§ 7501-7506

USDA, Audit Follow-up and Management Decision, DR 1720-001




                                            B-2
                                     APPENDIX C

                          OIG ORGANIZATIONAL CHART
                                 (as of March 2022)


•   Inspector General
    o Counsel to the Inspector General; reports to the Inspector General
        ▪ Deputy Counsel to the Inspector General; two positions, both report to the
             Counsel to the Inspector General

•   Deputy Inspector General; reports to the Inspector General
    o Director, Office of Civil Rights; reports to the Deputy Inspector General

    o   Director, Office of Compliance and Integrity; reports to the Deputy Inspector
        General

    o   Assistant Inspector General for Audit; reports to the Deputy Inspector General
        ▪ Deputy Assistant Inspector General for Audit; two positions, both report to
            Assistant Inspector General for Audit. Each Deputy Assistant Inspector General
            for Audit manages five work units.

    o   Assistant Inspector General for Investigations; reports to the Deputy Inspector
        General
        ▪ Deputy Assistant Inspector General for Investigations; reports to the Assistant
            Inspector General for Investigations. Manages two headquarters divisions, one
            sensitive investigations office, five regional offices, and one Whistleblower
            Protection (WBP) coordinator.

    o   Assistant Inspector General for Management; reports to the Deputy Inspector
        General
        ▪ Deputy Assistant Inspector General for Management; reports to the Assistant
            Inspector General for Management. Manages four headquarters divisions and
            six regional offices.

    o    Assistant Inspector General for Analytics and Innovation; reports to the Deputy
         Inspector General
        • Deputy Assistant Inspector General for Analytics and Innovation; reports to the
             Assistant Inspector General for Analytics and Innovation. Manages four branch
             offices.




                                          C-1
C-2
                                   APPENDIX D

                            OIG GENERAL CONTACTS


A. Reporting Suspected Wrongdoing in USDA Programs.

   Bribery/Assault Line: (202) 720-7257 (24 hours a day)

   Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline:

   1. File complaint online via OIG’s Hotline page.

   2. Telephone:
      a. (800) 424-9121
      b. (202) 690-1622
      c. (202) 690-1202 (TDD)

   3. Fax: 202-690-2474

   4. Write: United States Department of Agriculture
             Office of Inspector General
             P.O. Box 23399
             Washington, D.C. 20026-3399

   Whistleblower Coordinator: USDA employees may contact the Coordinator via email
   at OIGombudsman@oig.usda.gov. Additional information about the Coordinator is
   available on OIG’s Whistleblower Protection Coordinator page.

B. Audit Contacts.

   1. Office of the Assistant Inspector General for Audit, and Headquarters Elements and
      Divisions

      USDA Office of Inspector General
      Office of Audit
      1400 Independence Avenue SW
      USDA Stop 2311
      Washington, D.C. 20250
      Telephone: (202) 720-6945
      Facsimile: (866) 432-0535




                                         D-1
      2. Audit Regions

   Region & Area Covered                              Address/Telephone
   Eastern                                            5601 Sunnyside Avenue
   Alabama, Arkansas, Connecticut,                    Suite 2-2230 (Mail Stop 5300)
   Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida,           Beltsville, MD 20705-5300
   Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky,              Fax Number: (866) 432-0535
   Louisiana, Maine, Maryland,
   Massachusetts, Michigan, Mississippi,
   New Hampshire, New Jersey, New
   Mexico, New York, North Carolina,
   Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Puerto
   Rico, Rhode Island, South Carolina,
   Tennessee, Texas, Vermont, Virgin
   Islands, Virginia, West Virginia, and
   Wisconsin
   Midwestern                                         8930 Ward Parkway
   Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Missouri,                  Suite 3016
   Montana, Minnesota, Nebraska, North                Kansas City, MO 64114
   Dakota, South Dakota, Utah, and                    Fax Number: (866) 432-0535
   Wyoming
   Western                                            1333 Broadway
   Alaska, Arizona, California, Hawaii,               Suite 400
   Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, Territory of                Oakland, CA 94612
   Guam, Trust Territories of Pacific, and            Fax Number: (866) 432-0535
   Washington

  C. Investigations Contacts.

      1. Office of the Assistant Inspector General for Investigations, and Headquarters
         Elements and Divisions

   Office/Division Name                               Address/Telephone
Immediate Office of the AIG for                       1400 Independence Ave., SW
   Investigations                                     Room 148-W
Investigations Liaison and Special Operations         Washington, D.C. 20250
   Division                                           Main Number: (202) 720-3306
   Sensitive Investigations Office                    Fax Number: (202) 690-3935
   Technical Crimes Division                          8930 Ward Parkway,
                                                      Suite 3016
                                                      Kansas City, MO 64114
                                                      Main Number: (816) 926-6077
                                                      Fax Number: (816) 926-7596




                                                D-2
   2. Investigations Regions

 Region & Area Covered                             Address/Telephone
 Midwest                                           111 N. Canal Street
 Illinois (northern and central judicial           Suite 325
 districts), Indiana, Iowa, Michigan,              Chicago, IL 60606-7296
 Minnesota, North Dakota, Ohio, South              Main Number: (312) 353-1358
 Dakota, and Wisconsin                             Fax Number: (312) 353-8963
 Northeast                                         26 Federal Plaza
 Connecticut, Delaware, District of                Room 1409
 Columbia, Maine, Maryland,                        New York, NY 10278-0004
 Massachusetts,                                    Main Number: (212) 264-8400
 New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York,              Fax Number: (212) 264-8416
 Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont,
 Virginia, and West Virginia
 Southeast                                         401 W. Peachtree Street NW
 Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Illinois               Room 2329
 (southern judicial district), Kentucky,           Atlanta, GA 30308
 North Carolina, Puerto Rico, South                Main Number: (404) 730-3170
 Carolina, Tennessee, and the Virgin               Fax Number: (404) 730-3181
 Islands
 Southwest                                         101 South Main
 Arkansas, Kansas, Louisiana, Mississippi,         Room 311
 Missouri, Nebraska, New Mexico,                   Temple, TX 76501
 Oklahoma, and Texas                               Main Number: (254) 743-6535
                                                   Fax Number: (254) 298-1358
 Western                                           1333 Broadway
 Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado,            Suite 400
 Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Nevada,                   Oakland, CA 94612
 Oregon, Territory of Guam, Trust                  Main Number: (510) 208-6860
 Territories of the Pacific, Utah,                 Fax Number: (510) 208-3751
 Washington, and Wyoming

D. OAI Contacts.

   USDA Office of Inspector General
   Office of Analytics and Innovation
   1400 Independence Avenue SW
   Room 44-E
   Washington, D.C. 20250
   Telephone: (202) 720-5168




                                             D-3
E. Office of Counsel Contacts.

   General Contacts:
   USDA Office of Inspector General
   Office of Counsel
   1400 Independence Avenue SW
   STOP 2308
   Washington, D.C. 20250-2308
   Telephone: (202) 720-9110
   Facsimile: (202) 690-1528

   FOIA Requests:
   USDA, Office of Inspector General
   Office of Counsel
   1400 Independence Avenue SW
   STOP 2308
   Washington, D.C. 20250-2308
   Email: FOIASTAFF@oig.usda.gov
   Facsimile: (202) 690-6305

F. Office of Compliance and Integrity Contacts.

   USDA Office of Inspector General
   Office of Compliance and Integrity
   1400 Independence Avenue SW
   STOP 2302
   Washington, D.C. 20250-2302
   Email: OCI@oig.usda.gov
   Facsimile: (202) 260-8993




                                        D-4
