                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                              NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                      DR 2130-006
                                                              DATE:
 SUBJECT: Debt Management and Collections                     August 27, 2021
 OPI: Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Fiscal Policy    EXPIRATION DATE:
 Division                                                     August 27, 2026



Section                                                                                Page

1.   Purpose                                                                              1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                   1
3.   Scope                                                                                2
4.   Background                                                                           2
5.   Policy                                                                               3
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                           3
7.   Inquiries                                                                            4

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                 A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                 C-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) provides the policy and responsibilities of the United
     States Department of Agriculture (USDA) for debt management and the collection of debt.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     a.   This regulation supersedes DR 2130-006, Debt Collection – Write Offs of
          Uncollectible Claims, dated August 14, 1991; and

     b.   This regulation supersedes DR 2520-001, Interest Rates on Delinquent Debts
          dated November 27, 2006.
3. SCOPE

  a.   This directive combines the Debt Management regulations outlined in the Department of
       the Treasury (“Treasury”) guidance Managing Federal Receivables (TMFR); 7 Code of
       Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 3, Debt Management; and Departmental policies for
       debt collection write-offs of uncollectable claims, and interest rates on delinquent debt.

  b.   If the head of a Mission Area, agency, or staff office of the Department adopts
       regulations separate from this regulation pursuant to independent statutory debt
       settlement authority, the procedures thereby established, rather than those set out in this
       regulation, must be followed for the collection of the claims and debts to which the
       separate regulations apply.

  c.   The debts covered under this regulation relate to non-salary debts. For salary related
       debts, refer to DR 2570-002, Waiver of Employee Claims from Erroneous Payments of
       Pay and Allowances.


4. BACKGROUND

  a.   Prior to the enactment of the Federal Claims Collection Act of 1966 (FCCA), Public
       Law (P.L.) 89-508, the authority to compromise and suspend or end collection action on
       debts owed to and claims in favor of the Government rested solely with the Attorney
       General of the United States. Under the FCCA, Federal agencies received the authority
       to compromise debts and claims, as well as to suspend or end collection action on debts
       and claims with principal amounts (i.e., exclusive of interest, penalties, and
       administrative costs) of no more than $20,000 and that did not involve fraud,
       misrepresentation, false claim, or mutual mistake of fact (31 United States Code
       (U.S.C.) § 3711(a)(2); 31 U.S.C. § 3711(d)). Under Section 8(b), Claims of the
       Government, of the Administrative Dispute Resolution Act, P.L. 101-552, enacted
       November 15, 1990, this amount was increased to $100,000.

       Absent statutory authority setting forth a higher Federal agency limit, the authority to
       compromise, suspend or terminate Federal agency debts and claims in excess of
       $100,000 remains with the Attorney General of the United States. The Attorney General
       also retains sole authority to compromise and suspend or end collection action regarding
       debts and claims involving fraud, misrepresentation, false claim, or mutual mistake of
       fact.

  b.   Additionally, the Debt Collection Act of 1982, P.L. 97-365, as amended (codified at 31
       U.S.C. § 3717, Interest and penalty on claims), requires Federal agencies, unless
       prohibited or restricted by statute or contract, to charge interest on outstanding debts
       owed to the United States by persons including State or local governments.




                                                2
5. POLICY

  a.   Manage and Report Debt:

       Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must manage and report debt timely and in
       accordance to guidelines.

  b.   Debt Collection-Write Offs of Uncollectable Claims:

       Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must implement write off procedures that
       identify and remove uncollectible debts or claims from accounts receivable in a timely
       manner after all currently available means of collection have been exhausted Mission
       Areas, agencies, and staff offices must adhere to Treasury TMFR guidance, the Office of
       Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-129, Policies for Federal Credit Programs
       and Non-Tax Receivables, and 7 CFR Part 3 as it relates to debt management.

  c.   Regarding Interest Rates on Delinquent Debts:

       (1) USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must charge a minimum annual
           interest on delinquent debts owed to the United States that is equal to the U.S.
           Treasury Current Value of Funds Rate, published annually by the Secretary of the
           Treasury in the Federal Register and available at the Treasury Interest Rates
           website.

       (2) A Mission Area, agency, or staff office may assess a higher rate of interest, such as
           prompt payment interest rate, if it is reasonably determined that a higher rate is
           necessary to protect the rights of the United States. The rate of interest remains
           fixed for the duration of the delinquency.

  d.   This policy does not apply to:

       (1) Debts where a statute, regulation required by statute, loan agreement, or contract
           either prohibits interest charges for delinquent debt or fixes interest to be charged;

       (2) Debts arising under contracts that were executed before or were in effect on
           October 25, 1982; or

       (3) Debts with interest rates dictated by a higher statute.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Heads will:

       (1) Charge interest on delinquent debts unless prohibited by statutes or contracts;



                                                3
       (2) Develop and implement internal Mission Area, agency, or staff office strategies,
           directives and procedures that reflect debt collection practices and internal controls
           consistent with statutes, regulations, policies, and guidance in Sections 5, Policy;
           Section 6, Roles and Responsibilities; and Appendix C, Authorities and References
           of this DR;

       (3) Review debt collection practices, techniques and controls periodically to determine
           compliance with governing statutes, regulations, policies, standards and goals;

       (4) Confer with Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) Fiscal Policy Division
           (FPD) on changes in debt collection policies and procedures, controversial issues,
           and problems prior to discussions with OMB and Treasury;

       (5) Provide the necessary staffing to carry out a robust Debt Management Program, as
           it relates to Treasury’s TMFR, USDA’s 7 CFR Part 3, and data calls realized;

       (6) Provide to OCFO FPD the names, emails, and phone numbers of employees (points
           of contact (POC)) assigned to carry out the duties associated with their Debt
           Management Program; and

       (7) Provide OCFO with updates to the POC list as attrition and organizational
           realignments occur.

  b.   The Chief Financial Officer (CFO) will:

       (1) Provide oversight and department-wide compliance reviews to Mission Areas,
           agencies, and staff offices as it relates to Treasury Guidance Managing Federal
           Receivables USDA’s 7 CFR Part 3, and related Treasury data call requirements;

       (2) Represent USDA as the central point of contact on matters related to debt collection
           with OMB and Treasury;

       (3) Work with Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices through the Debt Collection
           Improvement Act (DCIA) or Managing Federal Receivables Workgroup to define
           and establish cost effective debt collection processes and procedures on delinquent
           debts; and

       (4) Communicate to Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices information related to
           regulations, requirements, and procedures promulgated by OMB and Treasury.


7. INQUIRIES

  Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should direct questions and inquiries regarding this
  DR to the OCFO, FPD at SM.OCFO.FPDOCFO@usda.gov.



                                               4
-END-




  5
                               APPENDIX A

                   ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


CFO        Chief Financial Officer
CFR        Code of Federal Regulations
DCIA       Debt Collection Improvement Act
DR         Departmental Regulation
FCCA       Federal Claims Collection Act
FPD        Fiscal Policy Division (OCFO Component)
OBPA       Office of Budget and Program Analysis
OCFO       Office of the Chief Financial Officer
OMB        Office of Management and Budget
P.L.       Public Law
POC        Point of Contact
TMFR       Treasury Guidance: Managing Federal Receivables
Treasury   United States Department of the Treasury
U.S.C.     United States Code
USDA       United States Department of Agriculture




                                    A-1
                                          APPENDIX B

                                         DEFINITIONS


Close Out. An agency closes out a debt when it determines that further debt collection actions
are prohibited (for example, a debtor is released from liability in bankruptcy) or the agency does
not plan to take any future actions (either active or passive) to try to collect the debt. At close
out, an agency may be required to report to the IRS the amount of the debt as potential income to
the debtor on IRS Form 1099. (Source: U.S. Treasury Bureau of Fiscal Service, Treasury
Financial Manual, Glossary, undated)

Prompt Payment Rule. If a vendor submits a proper and valid invoice to the right people in a
federal agency, the agency must pay the invoice on time. If not, the payment is late. (Source: 5
CFR Part 1315, Prompt Payment)

Uncollectible Debt or Claim. An account of money or property determined by an appropriate
official to be owed to the United States from any person, organization, or entity, except another
Federal agency, which meets the requirements of the Federal Claims Collection Standards for
suspension or termination of collection activity, as described in 31 CFR Part 903.

Write Off. An accounting action that results in reporting the debt/receivable as having no value
on the agency’s financial and management reports. The agency may need Department of Justice
approval to write off a debt since the agency is adjusting its accounting records. Additionally,
statutory authority may be required to write off debts owed by foreign governments. (Source:
U.S. Treasury Bureau of Fiscal Service, Treasury Financial Manual)




                                               B-1
                                     APPENDIX C

                         AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


31 CFR Part 903, Standards for Suspending or Terminating Collection Activity

7 CFR § 2.28, Chief Financial Officer

7 CFR Part 3, Debt Management

31 U.S.C. § 3711, Collection and compromise

31 U.S.C. § 3717, Interest and penalty on claims

Administrative Dispute Resolution Act, P.L. 101-552, November 15, 1990

Debt Collection Act of 1982, P.L. 97-365, October 25, 1982, as amended, codified at 31
U.S.C. § 3717

Federal Claims Collection Act of 1966 (FCCA), P.L. 89-508, July 19, 1966

OMB, Circular A-129, Policies for Federal Credit Programs and Non-Tax Receivables,
January 2013

Treasury, Bureau of the Fiscal Service, Interest Rates website

Treasury, Bureau of the Fiscal Service, Managing Federal Receivables, March 2015

USDA, DR 2570-002, Waiver of Employee Claims from Erroneous Payments of Pay and
Allowances, January 5, 2001




                                           C-1
