     August 1, 2005                                                         DR 2100-003




     public. The results of the evaluation will be documented on the “CFO Biennial
     Review of Charges for Things of Value – Potential Charges” web site. The
     evaluation should: (1) identify the things of value provided free of charge by the
     agency, (2) provide a title and description of the things of value, (3) determine
     the full cost of providing the things of value, (4) determine the potential for
     charges, and (5) develop proposals for new charges or provide
     recommendations and justifications for exceptions to imposing new charges.
     Legislative proposals should be prepared in accordance with OMB Circular No.
     A-19, “Legislative Coordination and Clearance,” and OMB Circular No. A-25.

c.   Schedule of Review for All Things of Value. As part of the review, the agency
     CFO will develop a timetable for the review of each thing of value provided for
     a charge or free of charge. The timetable will be documented on the “CFO
     Biennial Review of Charges for Things of Value” web site. The timetable
     should: (1) identify all things of value provided for a charge of free of charge by
     the agency, (2) provide a title and description of the things of value, and (3)
     specify the fiscal year when the documentation of the reviews will be submitted
     to OCFO (via the web site).

     The mission area or the preparing agency should retain the original completed
     forms with signatures and supporting documentation of their Biennial Review
     for at least 36 months after the review. The documentation should contain
     sufficient information to support the data reported on the “CFO Biennial
     Review of Charges for Things of Value” web site. This may include items such
     as: descriptions and copies of transactions, records, and reports (e.g. elements of
     costs, source data reports, invoices, contracts, memorandums, unit volume
     information, and market price and trend information).

     Full cost is one of many factors to be considered when developing pricing.
     Pricing is a complex management policy decision not discussed or covered in
     this document.

     OCFO will review and consolidate the responses from the agency CFOs and
     submit them to interested parties, such as the Office of the Inspector General
     (OIG) and the Government Accountability Office, as requested. OCFO will
     conduct examinations of the agencies’ reviews on a sample basis annually.




                                              5
