                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                 NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                         DR 2255-001
 SUBJECT: Indirect Cost Rates Applicable to USDA                 DATE:
 Federal Awards                                                  April 28, 2022
                                                                 EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO)
                                                                 April 28, 2027



Section                                                                                     Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                   1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                        1
3.   Scope                                                                                     2
4.   Background                                                                                2
5.   Policy                                                                                    4
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                                8
7.   Inquiries                                                                                10

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                      A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                     B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                      C-1
Appendix D – Indirect Cost Limitation                                                        D-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of
     Agriculture’s (USDA) indirect cost guidance for Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     a.   This DR supersedes DR 2255-001, Indirect Cost Rates Applicable to USDA Federal
          Awards, dated August 5, 2016.

     b.   This DR is effective as of the publication date and will remain in effect until superseded
          or expiration.

     c.   In case of any discrepancy with the guidance in this document, Title 2 of the Code of the
          Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 200, Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost
          Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards (2 CFR Part 200) will govern.
3. SCOPE

  a.   This DR applies to Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices responsible for managing
       Federal financial assistance awards.

  b.   This DR explains the requirements for acceptance of a Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate
       Agreement (NICRA) and a de minimis rate of 10% of modified total direct costs
       (MTDC) from the following recipients:

       (1) Non-Federal entities (NFE);

       (2) For-Profit organizations; and

       (3) Foreign Public Entities or Foreign organizations, except where the Federal
           awarding agency or staff office determines that the application of 2 CFR Part 200
           would be inconsistent with the international obligations of the United States or the
           statute or regulations of a foreign government. The statutes or regulations of a
           foreign government or immunities granted under international law overrule 2 CFR
           Part 200.

  c.   This DR provides servicing options for Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices that
       manage indirect cost rate negotiations when they are the Federal cognizant agency for
       indirect costs:

       (1) External issuance;

       (2) Internal USDA issuance; or

       (3) Agency self-issuance.


4. BACKGROUND

  a.   On August 13, 2020, 2 CFR Part 200 was revised. The revisions streamlined indirect
       cost regulations in 2 CFR § 200.414, Indirect (F&A) costs. This DR complies with 2
       CFR Part 200 and is revised to reflect these changes.

  b.   On December 19, 2014, USDA adopted 2 CFR Part 200 along with an agency specific
       addendum in 2 CFR Part 400, Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles,
       and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards.

  c.   Indirect costs are costs incurred by the recipient for a common or joint purpose that
       benefits more than one cost objective. Indirect costs are not readily assigned to specific




                                               2
     cost objectives as a direct cost. 2 CFR Part 200 requires a recipient must have a current
     (NICRA) or a de minimis rate of 10% of MTDC for indirect costs to be allowable.

d.   Grant programs designated by Federal statute or regulation can have an indirect cost
     limitation. The indirect cost limitation limits the reimbursement of indirect costs. The
     allowable indirect cost reimbursement is typically the lesser of:

     (1) The current NICRA or the de minimis rate of 10% of MTDC; or

     (2) The statutory limitation. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must ensure
         recipients follow any indirect cost limitation identified in the Federal statute or
         regulation. Recipients must comply with any indirect cost limitation identified in
         the award.

e.   Since 1981, Department of Agriculture Appropriation bills have instituted a limit on
     indirect costs for cooperative agreements with nonprofit institutions. For purposes of
     this limitation, the indirect cost limitation applies to cooperative agreements with
     Institutions of Higher Education (IHE) and other nonprofit organizations as defined in 2
     CFR Part 200. Currently, recipients may charge the lesser of their:

     (1) Current NICRA or de minimis rate of 10% of MTDC; or

     (2) 10% of the total direct costs (TDC). Note: Before applying this limitation, ensure
         the current Agriculture Appropriation bill contains this indirect cost limitation.
         (Refer to Appendix D, Indirect Cost Limitation.)

f.   Recipients that choose to apply indirect costs in their award must have a NICRA, unless
     the recipient elects to use the de minimis indirect cost rate, as authorized in 2 CFR Part
     200.414(f). A NICRA ensures they are compensated for costs incurred for allowable,
     allocable, and reasonable facilities and administrative costs that benefit USDA’s awards.
     For example, functions necessary for the general operations of the organization, such as
     space costs, utilities, accounting services, human resource services, etc.

g.   The recipient is responsible for negotiating the rate agreement with the cognizant
     Federal agency. The cognizant Federal agency is the agency that typically provides the
     most direct funding to the recipient. The cognizant Federal agency will negotiate an
     indirect cost rate agreement on behalf of all Federal agencies. The recipient must
     provide the NICRA to all grant programs.

h.   Recipients of awards that receive funding from USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and
     staff offices that finance specific physical assets rather than financing entire programs or
     operations will follow USDA Mission Area, agency, or staff office specific
     requirements.




                                              3
5. POLICY

  a.   USDA Federal financial assistance awards provide for compensation of actual,
       allowable program or project costs incurred. If indirect costs are allowable under an
       award, it is the applicant’s discretion to request indirect costs in their application.

  b.   The USDA awarding agency or staff office must be satisfied that the recipient’s
       accounting system, using Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP), can
       adequately identify and support all costs as direct costs to the program or project when
       recipients do not charge indirect costs in their award. This includes the recipient’s
       ability to, using GAAP standards, identify and segregate costs based on a process that
       assigns costs consistent with the benefits provided to individual projects or programs.
       For foreign entities, the USDA awarding agency or staff office must be satisfied that
       their financial statements and account records comply with the financial regulations,
       rules, policies, and procedures of the foreign entity and internationally accepted
       accounting standards.

  c.   Recipients can draw down indirect costs if they have one of the following current
       approved negotiated indirect cost rates in place at the time of award:

       (1) Final;

       (2) Fixed;

       (3) Predetermined;

       (4) Provisional; or

       (5) De minimis rate of 10% of MTDC.

  d.   The Federal awarding agency must accept the NICRA. The Federal awarding agency
       may use a rate different from the negotiated rate for a class of Federal awards or a single
       Federal award only when required by Federal statute or regulation, or when approved by
       a Federal awarding agency head or delegate based on documented justification as
       described in Section 5f. (See 2 CFR § 200.414(c)(1).)

  e.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must ensure the agency head or delegate
       notifies the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) of any approved deviation from
       the acceptance of the negotiated indirect cost rate for a class of Federal awards or a
       single award. (See 2 CFR § 200.414(c)(2).) At USDA, the awarding agency or staff
       office head or delegate must notify OMB when using a rate different from the negotiated
       indirect cost rate for a class of Federal awards or a single award unless required by
       Federal statute or regulation. The USDA awarding agency or staff office will prepare a
       written justification signed by the agency head or delegate to the appropriate OMB
       official. (Refer to Section 6b(2)(k)).




                                               4
f.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must make publicly available the policies,
     procedures, and general decision-making criteria their programs will follow to seek and
     justify deviations from negotiated indirect cost rates. (See 2 CFR § 200.414(c)(3).)

g.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must include in the notice of funding
     opportunity policies relating to indirect cost rate reimbursement, if there are any limits
     on indirect costs, cost sharing or matching applicable to the opportunity. For example,
     whether the statutory limitation applies or whether unrecovered indirect costs may be
     counted toward matching requirements. (See 2 CFR § 200.204, Notices of funding
     opportunities, 2 CFR § 200.306, Cost sharing or matching, 2 CFR § 200.414(c)(4), and
     Appendix I to 2 CFR Part 200 – Full Text of Notice of Funding Opportunity.)

h.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must include in all awards the indirect cost
     rate and base (including if the de minimis rate is charged or the indirect cost cap
     determined by Federal statute or regulation). (See 2 CFR § 200.211(b)(15).)

i.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should include in the award the program,
     authority, rate and base applied to the award when indirect costs are limited by Federal
     statute or regulation.

j.   The cognizant agency for indirect costs is the Federal agency responsible for reviewing,
     negotiating, and approving cost allocation plans, or indirect cost proposals developed
     under this part on behalf of all Federal agencies. The cognizant agency for indirect cost
     is not necessarily the same as the cognizant agency for audit. (See 2 CFR § 200.1,
     Definitions.)

k.   For assignments of cognizant Federal agencies refer to the following:

     (1) IHEs: Appendix III to 2 CFR Part 200—Indirect (Facilities and Administrative
         (F&A) Costs Identification and Assignment, and Rate Determination for IHEs,
         (paragraph C.11).

     (2) Nonprofit organizations: Appendix IV to 2 CFR Part 200—Indirect (F&A) Costs
         Identification and Assignment, and Rate Determination for Nonprofit
         Organizations, (paragraph C.2.a).

     (3) State and local governments: Appendix V to 2 CFR Part 200—State/Local
         Governmentwide Central Service Cost Allocation Plans, (paragraph F.1).

     (4) Indian tribes: Appendix VII to 2 CFR Part 200—States and Local Government and
         Indian Tribe Indirect Cost Proposals, (paragraph D.1).

l.   The USDA awarding agency or staff office may allow a NFE receiving a Federal award,
     with a current NICRA, to voluntarily choose to waive indirect costs or charge a rate less
     than the NICRA. (Refer to Section 5p.)




                                             5
     (1) The NFE should consult with the awarding agency or staff office.

     (2) The decision must be made solely by the NFE that is eligible for indirect cost rate
         reimbursement. It must not be encouraged or coerced in any way by the awarding
         agency or staff office.

     (3) The USDA awarding agency cannot use a voluntary waiver of all or part of an
         NFE’s indirect cost rate as a factor during the merit review of applications or
         proposals, unless authorized by statute or regulation and specified in the notice of
         funding opportunity. (See 2 CFR § 200.306(a).)

     (4) The USDA awarding agency or staff office must clearly include within the award
         terms and conditions the NFE’s decision to waive indirect costs or charge a rate less
         than the approved NICRA. There is no need to notify OMB nor is there a need for
         the USDA awarding agency or staff office head or delegate to sign off.

     (5) The lower indirect cost rate represents the NFE’s maximum billing rate under the
         award.

m. An NFE without a current NICRA, except for those described in Appendix VII to 2 CFR
   Part 200 – State and Local Government and Indian Tribe Indirect Cost Proposals,
   (paragraph D.1.b)), may elect to charge a de minimis rate of 10% of MTDC. (See 2
   CFR § 200.414(f).)

     (1) De minimis rate of 10% of MTDC may be used indefinitely.

     (2) No documentation is required to substantiate costs to justify the 10% de minimis
         indirect cost rate. The requirement to document the actual indirect costs would
         eliminate the benefits of using the 10% de minimis indirect cost rate.

     (3) Costs must be consistently charged as either indirect or direct costs. Costs may not
         be double charged or inconsistently charged as both. This methodology, if chosen,
         must be used consistently for all Federal awards until the NFE chooses to negotiate
         for a rate, which they may apply to do at any time.

     (4) The NFE must report in its Schedule of Expenditures for Federal Awards (SEFA)
         whether it elected to use the 10% de minimis rate for its Federal awards. (See 2
         CFR Part § 200.510, Financial statements.)

n.   The USDA awarding agency or staff office may allow a NFE that qualifies for a 10% de
     minimis rate to voluntarily use a lower rate than the 10% de minimis rate.

     (1) The NFE should consult with the awarding agency or staff office.




                                             6
     (2) The decision must be made solely by the NFE that is eligible for a 10% de minimis
         rate. It must not be encouraged or coerced in any way by the awarding agency or
         staff office.

     (3) The USDA awarding agency or staff office must clearly include within the award
         terms and conditions the NFE’s decision to use a lower rate than the 10% de
         minimis rate. There is no need to notify OMB nor is there a need for the USDA
         awarding agency or staff office head or delegate to sign off.

     (4) The rate lower rate represents the NFE’s maximum billing rate under the award.

o.   An NFE with a current federally negotiated indirect cost rate may apply for a one-time
     extension of the rates in their agreement for a period up to 4 years. This extension will
     be subject to the review and approval of the cognizant agency for indirect costs. (See 2
     CFR § 200.414(g).)

p.   Unrecovered indirect costs, including indirect costs on sharing or matching may be
     included as part of cost-sharing or matching only with the prior approval of the USDA
     awarding agency or staff office. (See 2 CFR § 200.306(c).)

q.   At USDA, the cognizant Federal agency for indirect costs is the USDA awarding agency
     or staff office that provides the largest dollar value of direct Federal awards to the NFE,
     for-profit organization, foreign public entity, or foreign organization. When a USDA
     awarding agency or staff office is not the cognizant agency for indirect costs, the
     recipient must be referred to the cognizant Federal agency for indirect costs.

r.   The USDA awarding agency or staff office designated as the cognizant agency for
     indirect costs will:

     (1) Facilitate indirect cost rate issuance for the entity (Refer to Section 5t); and

     (2) Provide the negotiated indirect cost rate to the Office of the Chief Financial Officer
         (OCFO) upon request.

s.   The federally negotiated indirect rate, distribution base, and rate type for a NFE except
     for the Indian tribes or tribal organizations, as defined in the Indian Self Determination,
     Education and Assistance Act, 25 United States Code (U.S.C.) § 5304 (1) must be
     available publicly on an OMB designated Federal website. (See 2 CFR § 200.414(h).)

t.   USDA awarding agencies designated as the cognizant agency for indirect costs have the
     following servicing options:

     (1) External Issuance can be an option by entering into an Interagency Agreement
         (IAA) with the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), Program
         Support Center, Financial Management website or the Department of the Interior
         (DOI), Indirect Cost Services website to negotiate and establish indirect cost rates



                                              7
           with its grantees. DOI provides indirect cost rate negotiation services for foreign
           public entities and foreign organizations.

       (2) Internal USDA agency issuance can be an option.

           (a) Enter an IAA with another USDA agency to negotiate the indirect cost rate on
               their behalf.

           (b) Obtain the services of the Forest Service (FS), Audit and Assurance Staff
               website. Send inquiries to the FS, Branch Chief, Resource Audit Branch.

       (3) Agency self-issuance can be an option when an agency is appropriately staffed with
           training, accounting, and budget personnel to negotiate the indirect cost rate. The
           approval of the negotiated indirect cost rate must be signed by the authorized
           representative of the USDA agency and by the NFE.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Chief Financial Officer (CFO) will:

       (1) Act as USDA’s primary point of contact for coordinating indirect cost rate issues
           within USDA; and

       (2) Ensure USDA’s requirements for indirect costs align with 2 CFR Part 200.

  b.   USDA Agency Administrators and Staff Office Directors will:

       (1) Serve as the liaison between the USDA agency and CFO. The agency administrator
           or staff office director may delegate the indirect cost liaison role and notify the CFO
           of liaison appointments and subsequent replacements.

       (2) Ensure designated Mission Area, agency, and staff office personnel:

           (a) Coordinate with recipients at the beginning of award negotiations to determine
               cognizance and indirect cost rate determination requirements;

           (b) Maintain procedures for compliance with indirect cost rate considerations and
               applicable cost principles in the award and administration of the award;

           (c) Require recipients provide a copy of their current NICRA if requesting indirect
               costs with their application;

           (d) If applicable, include in the award terms and conditions the indirect cost;




                                               8
(e) If applicable, include in the award terms and conditions the NFE’s decision to
    waive indirect costs or charge less than the NICRA;

(f) If applicable, include in the award terms and conditions the NFE’s decision to
    apply the 10% de minimis rate or use a lower rate than the 10% de minimis
    rate;

(g) If applicable, when indirect costs are limited by Federal statute or regulation,
    include in the award terms and conditions the program, authority, rate and base
    applied to the award;

(h) Ensure recipients comply with the award terms and conditions;

(i) Provide the CFO a copy of the recipient’s negotiated indirect cost rate in the
    event of an audit or other inquiry;

(j) Provide the CFO a copy of the recipient’s award terms and conditions in the
    event of an audit or other inquiry;

(k) Provide the CFO a copy of the written notification signed by the agency head
    or delegate, to the appropriate OMB official, the request to use a rate different
    from the negotiated indirect cost rate for a class of Federal awards or a single
    award. The written justification should explain the program, include whether a
    deviation related to the program has been granted in the past, and the process
    for negotiating and or communicating to recipients the indirect cost rate
    requirements under the program. The program must make its documentation,
    rate deviations, and other program information publicly available (for example,
    notice of funding opportunity, agency outreach, agency website);

(l) Keep on file documentation regarding the number of agency exceptions to the
    provision of Federal agency acceptance of negotiated indirect cost rates and the
    number of extensions approved by the Federal cognizant agency for indirect
    costs;

(m) Keep on file documentation regarding the number of NFEs voluntarily
    choosing to waive or charge less than the NICRA on Federal awards and
    voluntarily electing to use a rate lower than the 10% de minimis rate;

(n) Will provide information to the CFO as needed; and

(o) Must make available publicly on an OMB designated Federal website the
    federally negotiated indirect rate, distribution base, and the rate type for a NFE
    except Indian tribes or tribal organizations, as defined in the Indian Self
    Determination, Education and Assistance Act, 25 U.S.C. § 5304 (l)).




                                    9
7. INQUIRIES

  Questions and inquiries regarding this DR should be directed to OCFO, Transparency and
  Accountability Reporting Division (TARD) at FFAC@usda.gov, 202-720-8978.


                                         -END-




                                           10
                             APPENDIX A

                 ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


CFO      Chief Financial Officer
CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
DG       Departmental Guidebook
DHHS     Department of Health and Human Services
DOI      Department of the Interior
DR       Departmental Regulation
F&A      Facilities and Administrative
FAR      Federal Acquisition Regulations
FASB     Financial Accounting Standards Board
FGCAA    Federal Grant and Cooperative Agreement Act of 1977
FS       Forest Service
GAAP     Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
GASB     Governmental Accounting Standards Board
GOCO     Government Owned, Contractor Operated
IAA      Interagency Agreement
IHE      Institution of Higher Education
MTDC     Modified Total Direct Cost
NFE      Non-Federal Entity
NICRA    Negotiated Indirect Cost Rate Agreement
OCFO     Office of the Chief Financial Officer
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
PTE      Pass-through Entity
R&D      Research and development
SCSU     Spring City State University
SEFA     Schedule of Expenditures for Federal Awards
SF       Standard Form
SFA      Student Financial Aid
TARD     Transparency and Accountability Reporting Division
TDC      Total Direct Cost
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                                  A-1
                                      APPENDIX B

                                      DEFINITIONS


a.   Agency. Organizational units of the Department, other than staff offices, whose heads
     report to officials within the Office of the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Under
     Secretaries, Assistant Secretaries, and Assistant to the Secretary. (Source: USDA,
     Departmental Guidebook (DG) 0100-002, USDA Departmental Directives Definitions
     Glossary)

b.   Agency Head. The administrator, chief, or director of an agency who is the official
     named or designated to have primary responsibility for the management of the agency as
     delegated under 7 CFR Part 2, Delegations of Authority by the Secretary of Agriculture
     and General Officers of the Department. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

c.   Cognizant Agency for Indirect Costs. The Federal agency responsible for reviewing,
     negotiating, and approving cost allocation plans or indirect cost proposals developed
     under this part on behalf of all Federal agencies. The cognizant agency for indirect cost
     is not necessarily the same as the cognizant agency for audit. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.1,
     Definitions)

d.   Cooperative Agreement. A legal instrument that, in accordance with the Federal Grant
     and Cooperative Agreement Act of 1977 (FGCAA), reflects a relationship between a
     Federal agency and a NFE where the principal purpose of the relationship is to transfer a
     thing of value to the NFE to carry out a public purpose of support or stimulation
     authorized by a law of the United States instead of acquiring (by purchase, lease, or
     barter) property or services for the direct benefit or use of the United States Government
     and where substantial involvement is expected between the Federal agency and the NFE
     when carrying out the activity contemplated in the agreement. 2 CFR § 200.1,
     Definitions; 31 U.S.C. § 6305, Using cooperative agreements.

e.   Cost Sharing or Matching. The portion of project costs not paid by Federal funds or
     contributions (unless otherwise authorized by Federal statute). See also 2 CFR §
     200.306, Cost sharing or matching. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.1, Definitions)

f.   Department. The United States Department of Agriculture; also referred to as USDA.
     (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

g.   Federal Agency. The Federal agency is the Federal department, agency, commission,
     council, or instrumentality of the Government, or the primary organizational sub-unit
     (the administering office) that has direct operational responsibility for managing a
     program. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

h.   Federal Award. Has the meaning, depending on the context, in either paragraph (1) or
     (2), of this definition (Source: 2 CFR § 200.1, Definitions):



                                            B-1
     (1) The Federal financial assistance that a recipient receives directly from a Federal
         awarding agency or indirectly from a Pass-through Entity (PTE), as described in 2
         CFR § 200.101, Applicability; or the cost-reimbursement contract under the Federal
         Acquisition Regulations (FAR) that a NFE receives directly from a Federal
         awarding agency or indirectly from a PTE, as described in 2 CFR § 200.101,
         Applicability.

     (2) The instrument setting forth in the terms and conditions. The instrument is the
         grant agreement, cooperative agreement, other agreement for assistance covered in
         paragraph (2) of the definition of Federal financial assistance covered in 2 CFR §
         200.1, Definitions, or the cost-reimbursement contract awarded under the FAR.

     (3) Federal award does not include other contracts that a Federal agency uses to buy
         goods or services from a contractor or a contract to operate Federal Government
         owned, contractor operated facilities (GOCO).

     (4) See also definitions of Federal financial assistance, grant agreement, and
         cooperative agreement.

i.   Federal Awarding Agency. The Federal agency that provides a Federal award directly
     to a non-Federal entity. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.1, Definitions)

j.   Federal Financial Assistance. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.1, Definitions)

     (1) Assistance that NFEs receive or administer in the form of grants; cooperative
         agreements; non-cash contributions or donations of property (including donated
         surplus property); direct appropriations; food commodities; and other financial
         assistance, except assistance listed in paragraph (2) of this definition.

     (2) For 2 CFR § 200.203, Requirement to provide public notice of Federal financial
         assistance programs and 2 CFR Part 200 Subpart F Audit Requirements, Federal
         financial assistance also includes assistance that NFEs receive or administer in the
         form of loans, loan guarantees, interest subsidies, and insurance.

     (3) For 2 CFR § 200.216, Prohibition on certain telecommunications and video
         surveillance services or equipment, Federal financial assistance includes assistance
         that non-Federal entities receive or administer in the form of: grants, cooperative
         agreements, loans and loan guarantees.

     (4) Federal financial assistance does not include amounts received as reimbursement
         for services rendered to individuals as described in 2 CFR § 200.502 Basis for
         determining Federal awards expended, paragraph (h), Medicare and (i), Medicaid.




                                           B-2
k.   Federal Program. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.1, Definitions)

     (1) All Federal awards which are assigned a single Assistance Listings Number.

     (2) When no assistance listings number is assigned, all Federal awards from the same
         agency made for the same purpose must be combined and considered one program.

     (3) Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) and (2) of this definition, a cluster of programs.
         The types of clusters of programs are:

         (a) Research and development (R&D);

         (b) Student financial aid (SFA); and

         (c) Other clusters as described in definition of cluster of programs in 2 CFR §
             200.1.

l.   Final Rate. An indirect cost rate applicable to a specified past period which is based on
     the actual allowable costs of the period. A final audited rate is not subject to adjustment.
     (Source: Appendix IV to 2 CFR Part 200—Indirect (F&A) Costs Identification and
     Assignment, and Rate Determination for Nonprofit Organizations, (paragraph C.1))

m. Fixed Rate. An indirect cost rate which has the same characteristics as a predetermined
   rate, except that the difference between the estimated costs and the actual costs of the
   period covered by the rate is carried forward as an adjustment to the rate computation of
   a subsequent period. (Source: Appendix IV to 2 CFR Part 200—Indirect (F&A) Costs
   Identification and Assignment, and Rate Determination for Nonprofit Organizations,
   (paragraph C.1))

n.   Foreign Organization. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.1, Definitions)

     (1) A public or private organization located in a country other than the United States
         and its territories that is subject to the laws of the country in which it is located,
         irrespective of the citizenship of project staff or place of performance;

     (2) A private nongovernmental organization located in a country other than the United
         States that solicits and receives cash contributions from the general public;

     (3) A charitable organization located in a country other than the United States that is
         nonprofit and tax exempt under the laws of its country of domicile and operation,
         and is not a university, college, accredited degree-granting institution of education,
         private foundation, hospital, organization engaged exclusively in research or
         scientific activities, church, synagogue, mosque or other similar entities organized
         primarily for religious purposes; or




                                             B-3
     (4) An organization located in a country other than the United States not recognized as
         a Foreign Public Entity.

o.   Foreign Public Entity. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.1, Definitions)

     (1) A foreign government or foreign governmental entity;

     (2) A public international organization, which is an organization entitled to enjoy
         privileges, exemptions, and immunities as an international organization under the
         International Organizations Immunities Act (22 U.S.C. 288-288f);

     (3) An entity owned (in whole or in part) or controlled by a foreign government; or

     (4) Any other entity consisting wholly or partially of one or more foreign governments
         or foreign governmental entities.

p.   For-Profit Organization. (Source: 2 CFR 25.425, For-profit organization)

     (1) An “S corporation” incorporated under Subchapter S of the Internal Revenue Code;

     (2) A corporation incorporated under another authority;

     (3) A partnership;

     (4) A limited liability corporation or partnership; and

     (5) A sole partnership.


q.   Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). Accounting standards issued by
     the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB) and the Financial Accounting
     Standards Board (FASB). (Source: 2 CFR § 200.1, Definitions)

r.   Grant Agreement. A legal instrument that, in accordance with the FGCAA, reflects a
     relationship between a Federal agency and a NFE where the principal purpose of the
     relationship is to transfer a thing of value to the NFE to carry out a public purpose of
     support or stimulation authorized by a law of the United States instead of acquiring (by
     purchase, lease, or barter) property or services for the direct benefit or use of the United
     States Government and where substantial involvement is not expected between the
     Federal agency and the NFE when carrying out the activity contemplated in the
     agreement. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.1, Definitions; 31 U.S.C. § 6304, Using grant
     agreements)

s.   Indian Tribe. Any Indian tribe, band, nation, or other organized group or community,
     including any Alaska Native village or regional or village corporation as defined in or
     established pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 U.S.C. Chapter 33),



                                             B-4
     which is recognized as eligible for the special programs and services provided by the
     United States to Indians because of their status as Indians (25 U.S.C. § 5304). See
     annually published Bureau of Indian Affairs list of Indian Tribal Entities Within the
     Contiguous 48 States Recognized by and Eligible To Receive Services From the United
     States Bureau of Indian Affairs. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.1, Definitions)

t.   Indirect (Facilities & Administrative (F&A)) Costs. Costs incurred for a common or
     joint purpose benefitting more than one cost objective, and not readily assignable to the
     cost objectives specifically benefitted, without effort disproportionate to the results
     achieved. To facilitate equitable distribution of indirect expenses to the cost objectives
     served, it may be necessary to establish a number of pools of indirect (F&A) costs.
     Indirect (F&A) cost pools must be distributed to benefitted cost objectives on bases that
     will produce an equitable result in consideration of relative benefits derived. (Source: 2
     CFR § 200.1, Definitions)

u.   Indirect Cost Liaison. Single point of contact for Mission Area, agency, or staff office
     for indirect cost matters.

v.   Institution of Higher Education (IHE). An educational institution in any State that
     (Source: 2 CFR § 200.1, Definitions; 20 U.S.C. § 1001, General definition of institution
     of higher education):

     (1) Admits as regular students only persons having a certificate of graduation from a
         school providing secondary education, or the recognized equivalent of such a
         certificate, or persons who meet the requirements of 20 U.S.C. § 1091(d);

     (2) Is legally authorized within such State to provide a program of education beyond
         secondary education;

     (3) Provides an educational program for which the institution awards a bachelor’s
         degree or provides not less than a 2-year program that is acceptable for full credit
         toward such a degree, or awards a degree that is acceptable for admission to a
         graduate or professional degree program, subject to review and approval by the
         Secretary of Education;

     (4) Is a public or other nonprofit institution; and

     (5) Is accredited by a nationally recognized accrediting agency or association, or if not
         so accredited, is an institution that has been granted preaccreditation status by such
         an agency or association that has been recognized by the Secretary of Education for
         the granting of preaccreditation status, and the Secretary of Education has
         determined that there is satisfactory assurance that the institution will meet the
         accreditation standards of such an agency or association within a reasonable time.




                                            B-5
w. Interagency Agreement (IAA). The signed agreement between the Servicing Agency
   and Requesting Agency that sets out the terms and conditions under which reimbursable
   work will be performed. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

x.   Mission Area. A group of agencies with related functions that report to the same Under
     or Assistant Secretary. Research, Education, and Economics (REE) is an example of a
     Mission Area. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

y.   Modified Total Direct Cost (MTDC). All direct salaries and wages, applicable fringe
     benefits, materials and supplies, services, travel, and up to the first $25,000 of each
     subaward (regardless of the period of performance of the subawards under the award).
     MTDC excludes equipment, capital expenditures, charges for patient care, rental costs,
     tuition remission, scholarships and fellowships, participant support costs and the portion
     of each subaward in excess of $25,000. Other items may only be excluded when
     necessary to avoid a serious inequity in the distribution of indirect costs, and with the
     approval of the cognizant agency for indirect costs. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.1,
     Definitions)

z.   Non-Federal Entity (NFE). A state, local government, Indian tribe, Institution of Higher
     Education (IHE), or nonprofit organization that carries out a Federal award as a recipient
     or subrecipient. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.1, Definitions)

aa. Nonprofit organization. A corporation, trust, association, cooperative, or other
    organizations, not including IHEs; that (Source: 2 CFR § 200.1, Definitions):

     (1) Is operated primarily for scientific, educational, service, charitable, or similar
         purposes in the public interest;

     (2) Is not organized primarily for profit; and

     (3) Uses net proceeds to maintain, improve, or expand the operations of the
         organization.

bb. Office of Management and Budget (OMB). The Executive Office of the President,
    Office of Management and Budget. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.1, Definitions)

cc. Predetermined Rate. An indirect cost rate, applicable to a specified current or future
    period, usually the organization’s fiscal year. The rate based on an estimate of the costs
    to be incurred during the period. A predetermined rate is not subject to adjustment.
    (Source: Appendix IV to 2 CFR Part 200—Indirect (F&A) Costs Identification and
    Assignment, and Rate Determination for Nonprofit Organizations, paragraph C.1)

dd. Provisional Rate. A temporary indirect cost rate applicable to a specified period which
    is used for funding, interim reimbursement, and reporting indirect costs on Federal
    awards pending the establishment of a final rate for the period. (Source: Appendix IV




                                             B-6
      to 2 CFR Part 200—Indirect (F&A) Costs Identification and Assignment, and Rate
      Determination for Nonprofit Organizations, paragraph C.1)

ee. Recipient. An entity usually but not limited to NFEs, that receives a Federal award
    directly from a Federal awarding agency. The term recipient does not include
    subrecipients or individuals that are beneficiaries of the award. (Source: 2 CFR §
    200.1, Definitions)

ff. Schedule of Expenditures for Federal Awards. A schedule of expenditures of Federal
    awards for the period covered by the auditee’s financial statements which must include
    the total Federal awards expended as determined in accordance with 2 CFR § 200.502,
    Basis for determining Federal awards expended. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.510(b)(1),
    Financial statements)

gg. Staff Office. Departmental administrative office whose heads report to officials within
    the Office of the Secretary. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

hh. Ten Percent De Minimis Rate. Any NFE that does not have a current negotiated
    (including provisional) rate, except for those non-Federal entities described in Appendix
    VII to 2 CFR Part 200 – State and Local Government and Indian Tribe Indirect Cost
    Proposals, (paragraph D.1.b), may elect to charge a de minimis rate of 10% of MTDC
    which may be used indefinitely. No documentation is required to justify the 10% de
    minimis indirect cost rate. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.414(f), Indirect (F&A) costs))

ii.   Unrecovered Indirect Cost. The difference between the amount charged to the Federal
      award and the amount which could have been charged to the Federal award under the
      NFE’s approved negotiated indirect cost rate. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.306(c), Cost
      sharing or matching).




                                           B-7
                                        APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


2 CFR 25.425, For-profit organization

2 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 200, Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost
Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards

Appendix I to 2 CFR Part 200, Full Text of Notice of Funding Opportunity

Appendix IV to 2 CFR Part 200, Indirect (F&A) Costs Identification and Assignment, and Rate
Determination for Nonprofit Organizations

Appendix V to 2 CFR Part 200, State/Local Governmentwide Central Service Cost Allocation
Plans

Appendix VII to 2 CFR Part 200, States and Local Government and Indian Tribe Indirect Cost
Proposals

2 CFR 200.1, Definitions

2 CFR 200.101, Applicability

2 CFR 200.203, Requirement to provide public notice of Federal financial assistance programs

2 CFR 200.204, Notices of funding opportunities

2 CFR 200.211, Information contained in a Federal award

2 CFR 200.216, Prohibition on certain telecommunications and video surveillance services or
equipment

2 CFR 200.306, Cost sharing or matching

2 CFR 200.414, Indirect (F&A) costs

2 CFR Part 200 Subpart F, Audit Requirements

2 CFR 200.502, Basis for determining Federal awards expended

2 CFR 200.510, Financial statements

2 CFR Part 400, Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements
for Federal Awards



                                             C-1
7 CFR Part 2, Delegations of Authority by the Secretary of Agriculture and General Officers of
the Department

20 United States Code (U.S.C.) § 1001, General definition of institution of higher education

20 U.S.C. § 1091(d), Students Eligibility

22 U.S.C. 288-288f, International Organizations Immunities Act

25 U.S.C. § 5304, Indian Self Determination, Education and Assistance Act

31 U.S.C. § 6304, Using grant agreements

31 U.S.C. § 6305, Using cooperative agreements

43 U.S.C. Chapter 33, Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act

DHHS, Financial Management, website

DOI, Indirect Cost Services, website

Federal Acquisition Regulations

Federal Grant and Cooperative Agreement Act of 1977 (FGCAA), Public Law 95-224, February
3, 1978

Financial Accounting Foundation, GAAP, Generally Accepted Accounting Principles

Indian Tribal Entities Within the Contiguous 48 States Recognized by and Eligible To Receive
Services From the United States Bureau of Indian Affairs. This is updated annually. The link
takes the reader to the 2021 list. Future year updates can be found in the Federal Register.

Standard Form (SF)-424A, Budget Information – Non-Construction Programs

USDA, DG 0100-002, USDA Departmental Directives Definitions Glossary, September 26,
2018

USDA, Forest Service, Audit and Assurance Staff, website




                                              C-2
                                         APPENDIX D

                               INDIRECT COST LIMITATION


The examples below illustrate the application of the indirect cost limitation of 10% of the TDC
to cooperative agreements with IHEs and other nonprofit organizations as defined in 2 CFR Part
200.

Note: Before applying this limitation, ensure the current Agriculture Appropriation bill contains
this indirect cost limitation.

        Example 1:

        The Pennsylvania Wildlife Society (an Internal Revenue Service classified nonprofit)
        has a Cooperative Agreement with TDC of $100,000. The Society has an indirect cost
        rate of 30%. The direct cost application base specified in the recipient’s NICRA is
        salaries, wages, and fringe benefits. The Society’s Budget Information – Non-
        Construction Programs (Standard Form SF-424A) states that $70,000 will be spent on
        salaries, wages, and fringe benefits. The remaining $30,000 is for travel, contracts, and
        equipment.

        The NICRA calculation and 10% of the TDC must be completed in order to determine
        the maximum allowed indirect costs for the project. If 10% of the TDC was applied, the
        indirect costs would be 10% X 100,000 = $10,000. If their 30% indirect cost rate was
        applied to the base of $70,000 (salaries, wages, and fringe benefits), the indirect costs
        would be 30% X 70,000 = $21,000. In this scenario, the indirect cost limitation of 10%
        of the TDC would apply. They could only claim $10,000 in indirect costs.

        Example 2:

        Spring City State University (SCSU) has a Cooperative Agreement with TDC of
        $100,000. SCSU has an indirect cost rate agreement of 15%. The direct cost
        application base specified in the recipient’s NICRA is salaries and wages. SCSU’s SF-
        424A states that $50,000 will be spent on salaries and wages. The remaining $50,000 is
        for travel, supplies, and training.

   The NICRA calculation and 10% of the TDC must be completed in order to determine the
   maximum allowed indirect costs for the project. If the 10% of the TDC was applied, the
   indirect costs would be 10% x $100,000 = $10,000. If their 15% indirect cost rate was
   applied to the base of $50,000 (salaries and wages), the indirect costs would be 15% x
   $50,000 = $7,500. In this scenario, SPSU’s rate would apply. They could only claim $7,500
   in indirect costs.




                                               D-1
