                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                               NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                       DR 2235-001
                                                               DATE:
SUBJECT: Economy Act Agreements                                July 14, 2021
                                                               EXPIRATION DATE:
OPI: Office of the Chief Financial Officer
                                                               July 14, 2026



Section                                                                                  Page

1. Purpose                                                                                  1
2. Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                       2
3. Scope                                                                                    2
4. Policy                                                                                   2
5. Authority for Economy Act Agreements                                                     2
6. Guidelines                                                                               3
7. Types of Economy Act Agreements                                                          4
8. Determinations and Findings                                                              6
9. Interagency Agreement Forms                                                              7
10. Dispute Resolution                                                                      7
11. Modifications                                                                           8
12. Authorizing Officials                                                                   8
13. Closeout                                                                                8
14. Records Retention                                                                       9
15. Roles and Responsibilities                                                              9
16. Compliance                                                                             12
17. Inquiries                                                                              12

Appendix A - Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                   A-1
Appendix B - Definitions                                                                  B-1
Appendix C - Authorities and References                                                   C-1
Appendix D - Determination and Findings (D&F) Authority to Enter into an                  D-1
             Interagency Agreement Under the Economy Act



   PURPOSE

   a.     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of
          Agriculture (USDA) policy for interagency transactions entered into pursuant to the
          Economy Act as codified in 31 United States Code (U.S.C.) § 1535.
b.   This DR does not cover interagency transactions pursuant to authorities other than the
     Economy Act.


SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

a.   This DR supersedes DR 2235-001, Economy Act Agreements, dated September 27,
     2013.

b.   This DR is effective immediately and remains in effect until it is superseded or expires.

c.   This DR applies to interagency transactions entered into under the authority of the
     Economy Act signed after the effective date of this directive.

d.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their policies and procedures
     with this directive within 6 months of the publication date.


SCOPE

This DR applies to all USDA Mission Area, agencies, and staff offices that engage in the
exchange of good or services.


POLICY

USDA may enter into interagency transactions as either the requestor or provider of goods or
services only when it is legally permissible and in the best interest of the Federal
Government. This policy applies to interagency agreements (IAAs) for the purchase of
goods or services, including interagency acquisitions and interagency details, entered into
under the authority of the Economy Act. The Economy Act applies only when more specific
legal authority does not exist.


AUTHORITY FOR ECONOMY ACT AGREEMENTS

a.   The Economy Act, as amended, provides authority for agencies to order goods or
     services from another Federal agency and to pay the actual cost of those goods or
     services. The head of an agency or major organizational unit within an agency may place
     an order with a major organizational unit within the same agency or another agency for
     goods or services if:

     (1) Amounts are available;

     (2) The head of the ordering agency or unit decides the order is in the best interest of
         the United States Government;



                                             2
     (3) The agency or unit to fill the order can provide or provide through a contract the
         ordered goods or services; and

     (4) The head of the agency decides ordered goods or services cannot be provided by an
         agreement as conveniently or cheaply as by a commercial enterprise.

b.   Under the Economy Act, the requesting agency’s appropriation remains obligated for an
     order placed or agreement made only to the extent that the servicing agency provides, or
     enters into a contract to provide, the requested goods or services before the appropriation
     expires. As a result, amounts obligated by the requesting agency must be de-obligated at
     the end of the period of availability (fiscal year or multiple-year period, as applicable) to
     the extent that the servicing agency has not provided the ordered goods or services or the
     servicing agency has not incurred obligations.


GUIDELINES

a.   Servicing Agencies

     (1) The servicing agency may not perform work it is not otherwise entitled or
         authorized to perform. (The Economy Act does not grant the servicing agency any
         authorities which it would not otherwise have.)

     (2) The servicing agency must specify the actual cost to be paid for providing the
         requested item or service, including all actual administrative costs.

     (3) The servicing agency must establish procedures for administering the agreement.
         The procedures must ensure that the specified cost and applicable time limit on the
         use of the funds to produce the goods or perform the services have not been
         exceeded and all costs are promptly billed.

     (4) The servicing agency will bill the requesting agency on a frequency that is
         established within the agreement, unless a business need is identified that dictates
         otherwise.

     (5) The servicing agency must ensure accrual amounts are approved by the requesting
         agency prior to entry in the financial management system. The requesting agency
         and servicing agency will agree on the schedule for posting the accrual.

     (6) The servicing agency must notify the requesting agency when it becomes evident
         that the goods or services will exceed estimated costs. If necessary, the servicing
         agency should stop work to avoid exceeding the estimated cost.

     (7) The servicing agency must submit the final bill within 30 days after completion of
         the work or at the end of the period of performance, whichever is earlier. However,
         under the Economy Act, the requesting agency will remain responsible for



                                              3
         reimbursing the servicing agency for actual costs incurred in performing the ordered
         services even if the costs are discovered after the final bill.

b.   Requesting Agencies

     (1) The requesting agency must ensure that budget authority exists prior to placing an
         order or entering into an agreement for goods or services.

     (2) When the requesting agency and servicing agency sign an agreement (including
         complete supporting documentation), the requesting agency must record the entire
         obligation and provide an approved purchase order to the servicing agency. If this
         is not possible, the requesting agency must provide the agreement to the servicing
         agency no more than 7 working days after signing. If the information is not
         provided, the servicing agency cannot begin the work.

     (3) The requesting agency cannot decrease or de-obligate the agreement amount to
         meet other funding needs without notifying the servicing agency and bilaterally
         modifying the agreement. The requesting agency must confirm that the reduced
         obligation will meet the expenses incurred to date by the servicing agency and any
         additional expenses related to modifying the agreement.

     (4) The requesting agency must ensure accrual amounts are approved by the servicing
         agency prior to entry into the financial management system. The servicing agency
         and requesting agency will agree on the schedule for posting the accrual.

     (5) The requesting agency will periodically review unliquidated obligations to
         determine whether delivery of goods or services or performance is expected to
         occur.

     (6) The requesting agency must de-obligate annual funds at the end of the fiscal year if
         not obligated to an outside contract or expended by the servicing agency.


TYPES OF ECONOMY ACT AGREEMENTS

a.   Interagency Agreements

     (1) An IAA is an arrangement in which one agency (servicing agency) provides goods
         or services to another agency (requesting agency) and receives a reimbursement for
         costs. Agencies can use IAAs to conduct a wide variety of operations, from renting
         space to purchasing equipment. IAAs can be routine in nature, involving the
         acquisition of goods or services necessary to maintain agency operations or support
         a specific program.




                                            4
     (2) An IAA requires the completion of a determination and findings document (D&F)
         approved by an agency or staff office head or their designee. However,
         occasionally, for efficiency, the IAA may be initiated by the servicing agency.

b.   Interagency Acquisitions

     (1) An interagency acquisition is the procedure used when an agency (requesting
         agency) needing supplies or services obtains them using another Federal agency’s
         (servicing agency) contract (e.g., awarding and administering a contract, a task
         order or deliver order; or both). When this process is used, the requesting agency
         and servicing agency are required to comply with Federal Acquisition Regulation
         (FAR) 48 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Subpart 17.5, Interagency
         Acquisitions.

     (2) Interagency acquisitions are commonly conducted through indefinite delivery,
         indefinite quantity (IDIQ) vehicles, such as task and delivery order contracts. There
         are two types of interagency acquisitions: direct acquisitions and assisted
         acquisitions.

     (3) In a direct acquisition, the requesting agency places an order directly against the
         servicing agency’s contract. The servicing agency manages the contract but does
         not participate in the placement of the order.

     (4) In an assisted acquisition, the servicing agency and requesting agency enter into an
         IAA pursuant to which the servicing agency performs acquisition activities on the
         requesting agency’s behalf, such as awarding a contract, task order, or delivery
         order. In many assisted acquisitions, the servicing agency also manages the IDIQ
         contract against which orders are placed. Sometimes, a servicing agency may find
         that another agency’s contract can better serve the requesting agency’s needs, in
         which case two servicing agencies would be involved in the interagency
         acquisition. If a Mission Area issues an agreement with another Mission Area or to
         another department to provide acquisition assistance, the requesting Mission Area
         must notify the Head of the Contracting Activity and provide a copy of the
         agreement prior to execution.

     (5) In many of the Economy Act agreements involving USDA agencies, contracting is
         incidental to the performance of the reimbursable work performed by the servicing
         agency’s employees. These Economy Act agreements are not interagency
         acquisitions and should not be treated as such.

     (6) An interagency acquisition requires the completion of a D&F that is approved by an
         agency or staff office head (or their designee) and by a contracting officer with
         authority to contract for the supplies or services. Occasionally for efficiency, the
         servicing agency may initiate the IAA.




                                             5
c.   Interagency Details

     (1) Another type of interagency service is the detail of personnel. A detail is the
         temporary assignment of an employee to a different position for a specified period,
         with the employee returning to regular duties at the end of the detail. Generally,
         details of personnel between agencies or between separately funded components of
         the same agency may not be done on a non-reimbursable basis but must be done in
         accordance with the Economy Act, which requires full reimbursement of actual
         costs. Actual costs include employee’s salary, accrued annual and sick leave, and
         travel expenses incurred in connection with detail work, if applicable.

     (2) An interagency detail requires the completion of a D&F (approved by an agency or
         staff office head or designee). Either the servicing agency or the requesting agency
         may initiate the completion of these forms.

d.   An example of a D&F that can be used for any of the above types of Economy Act
     agreements and modified to meet agency-specific needs, can be found in Appendix D,
     Determination and Findings (D&F) Authority to Enter Into an Agreement Under the
     Economy Act.


DETERMINATION AND FINDINGS

a.   The purpose of the D&F is to support transactions between the requesting agency and
     servicing agency. The “determination” is a conclusion or decision supported by the
     “findings.’’ The findings are statements of fact or rationale essential to support the
     determination and must cover each requirement of the statute or regulation.

b.   D&Fs are required for all Economy Act agreements.

c.   The D&F, prepared by the requesting agency, must state that:

     (1) Sufficient funding amounts are available;

     (2) The agreement is in the best interest of the United States Government;

     (3) The agency to fill the order can provide or get by contract the ordered goods or
         services; and

     (4) The supplies or services cannot be obtained as conveniently or economically by
         contracting directly with a private source. If the Economy Act order requires
         contracting action by the servicing agency, the D&F must also include a statement
         that at least one of the following circumstances exits:

         (a) The acquisition will appropriately be made under an existing contract of the
             servicing agency and entered into before placement of the order to meet the



                                            6
              requirements of the servicing agency for the same or similar supplies or
              services;

         (b) The servicing agency has capabilities or expertise to enter into a contract for
             such supplies or services that are not available within the requesting agency; or

         (c) The servicing agency is specifically authorized by law or regulation, i.e., [state
             the citation for the law or regulation], to purchase such supplies or services on
             behalf of other agencies.


INTERAGENCY AGREEMENT FORMS

a.   The requesting agency and servicing agency will use the standard Governmentwide IAA
     form – Department of the Treasury. No other forms are authorized.

b.   The IAA form is comprised of two sections: the General Terms & Conditions (GT&C)
     section (FS Form 7600A) and the Order Form section (FS Form 7600B):

     (1) Each completed IAA consists of a GT&C section and at least one Order Form
         section. An Order Form section cannot be completed without first completing a
         GT&C section.

     (2) The GT&C section is the partnership section of the IAA form. It establishes the
         relationship between the trading partners.

     (3) The GT&C section identifies general information about the agreement such as the
         agencies entering into the agreement, the authority permitting the agreement, the
         start and end date of agreement activities, the scope of the agreement, the terms and
         conditions, and other required provisions.

     (4) No fiscal obligations are created through the execution of the GT&C section.

     (5) The Order Form section identifies the specific requesting agency requirements for
         the delivery of goods or services by the servicing agency.

     (6) The Order Form section obligates funds, and it may be signed only if funds are
         available for obligation.

c.   The signed D&F must be attached to the executed FS Forms 7600A and 7600B.


DISPUTE RESOLUTION

a.   In the event of dispute, the parties should communicate with each other promptly and
     attempt to jointly reach a resolution. The areas of disagreement should be stated, in



                                             7
     writing, by each party and presented to the other party for consideration. If agreement is
     not reached within 60 days of identifying the dispute, the parties must forward the
     written presentation of the disagreement to respective higher officials for appropriate
     resolution.

b.   If the parties cannot resolve accounting disputes, they must be resolved consistent with
     the Business Rules delineated in the Treasury Department, Treasury Financial Manual,
     Volume 1, Part 2, Chapter 4700, Federal Entity Reporting Requirements for the
     Financial Report of the United States Government, Appendix No. 5, Overall Intra-
     Governmental Transactions (IGT) Processes/General Information.


MODIFICATIONS

Modifications can be issued only for changes that fall within the original scope of work (i.e.,
delivery dates, change in quantity, annual funding, etc.). Changes to agreements that are
outside of the original scope of work must be treated as new actions.


AUTHORIZING OFFICIALS

a.   The authority to sign IAAs, and D&Fs should be at the highest level possible within an
     organization.

b.   Economy Act agreements are not enforceable unless signed by duly authorized
     representatives from the requesting and servicing agency.

c.   Agencies and staff offices are required to maintain accurate and updated records of
     delegations and designations for all Economy Act agreements.

d.   The following are the required signatory authorities for D&Fs:

     (1) IAA – Agency or Staff Office Heads or their designees.

     (2) Interagency acquisition – Agency or Staff Office Heads or their designees and
         contracting officer.

     (3) Interagency detail – Agency or Staff Office Heads or their designees.


CLOSEOUT

a.   Closeout of an Economy Act agreement should occur when all administrative actions and
     all required work have been completed by both parties and all financial obligations have
     been satisfied. The requesting agency and servicing agency both have the responsibility
     to monitor Economy Act agreements as they approach their end date and at the end of



                                             8
     each fiscal year. This will aid the requesting agency in managing available funds and
     identifying potential funding that may be available for other projects. This will aid the
     servicing agency in reviewing the status of a project, identifying resources available for
     other projects, and ensuring that all actual costs have been paid by the requesting
     agency.

b.   The requesting agency should work expeditiously with the servicing agency to resolve
     any outstanding issues, ensure that the goods or services were delivered, ensure that
     final payments are made, and properly reconcile and close Economy Act agreements. If
     necessary, outstanding issues should be elevated within the requesting agency and
     servicing agency organization for prompt resolution. Closeout should occur no later
     than 90 days after the final payment is received by the servicing agency. Closeout
     should not occur if the servicing agency has incurred actual costs that have not yet been
     paid by the requesting agency.


RECORDS RETENTION

All files, records and supporting documentation related to Economy Act agreements,
modifications and cancellations must be retained for a period of 6 years and 3 months after
final closeout of the interagency transaction or unless otherwise specified by law and noted in
the terms of the agreement.


ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

a.   The USDA Chief Financial Officer (CFO) will:

     (1) Provide leadership and oversight on all aspects of Economy Act agreements; and

     (2) Establish and implement USDA policies, procedures, and standards for Economy
         Act agreements that ensure compliance with all applicable Federal laws and
         regulations.

b.   The Assistant Secretary for Administration, serving as the USDA Chief Acquisition
     Officer, will:

     Provide input to the Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) and oversight on all
     aspects of interagency acquisitions, including policy, procedures, and standards for
     interagency acquisitions.

c.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Heads or their Designees will:

     (1) Ensure that Economy Act agreements receive appropriate levels of review and
         approval prior to execution; and




                                             9
     (2) Review and sign D&Fs for Economy Act agreements.

d.   Mission Area CFOs will:

     (1) Maintain financial control and fiduciary responsibility over Economy Act
         agreements;

     (2) Implement internal controls necessary to prevent over-obligation of funds;

     (3) Develop, issue, and interpret financial management policies for Economy Act
         agreements, subject to the guidelines issued by the OCFO; and

     (4) Ensure the accuracy and timeliness of accurate and timely financial information on
         the status of interagency projects, obligations, and expenditures incurred.

e.   Agency Contracting Officers will:

     (1) Review interagency acquisitions where the USDA or a USDA agency is requesting
         the use of the acquisition services of another Federal agency or using another
         agency’s contract to obtain supplies or services;

     (2) Evaluate all new requirements for suitability for fulfillment via order placement
         against existing contracts or agreements, including available Departmentwide or
         Governmentwide contracts. Upon receipt of a procurement request, Contracting
         Officers will:

         (a) Consider existing Departmentwide contract vehicles which may be found at the
             Office of Contracting and Procurement (OCP), Ordering Products & Services
             web page.

         (b) Query the Integrated Acquisition System (IAS) to identify Departmentwide
             contracting vehicles. (Please refer to the IAS User Guide);

         (c) Visit Federal strategic sourcing websites such as, but not limited to, the
             General Services Administration (GSA) Federal Strategic Sourcing Initiative
             (FSSI), GSA Category Management and the GSA Acquisition Gateway for
             strategic sourcing opportunities;

         (d) Research Federal policies and procedures as to the use of Category
             Management and agreements to improve spend management. If an applicable
             strategically sourced vehicle is available, the Contracting Officer must utilize
             the vehicle to attain the overall best value in terms of cost and economic
             efficiencies; and

         (e) When use of an existing Departmentwide or Governmentwide contract is not
             anticipated for procurements above the simplified acquisition threshold,



                                           10
              Contracting Officers will include in the contract file a brief analysis of the
              comparative value, including price and non-price factors, between the services
              and supplies offered under the source or sources used for the purchase and the
              strategic sourcing agreement. This action, during the acquisition planning
              phase, ensures that Contracting Officers have considered the use of Category
              Management as an acquisition strategy;

     (3) Ensure adherence to the guidance in the OCP, USDA Contracting Desk Book, and
         particularly Parts 407 and 417; and

     (4) Review, confirm, and sign the D&F when the USDA or a USDA agency is
         requesting to use the acquisition services of another Federal agency, or using
         another agency’s contract to obtain supplies or services.

f.   Program Officers will:

     (1) Ensure that all Economy Act agreements within their area of jurisdiction are
         properly authorized and executed prior to performing work. If a Mission Area
         issues an agreement with another Mission Area or to another Department to provide
         acquisition assistance, the requesting Mission Area must notify the head of the
         contracting activity and provide a copy of the agreement prior to execution;

     (2) Ensure adherence to the guidance in the USDA Contracting Desk Book and
         particularly Parts 407 and 417;

     (3) Serve as primary point of contact for issues regarding Economy Act agreements;

     (4) Prepare the D&F for Economy Act agreements;

     (5) Ensure that appropriations are used in accordance with applicable laws, for the
         designated purpose, and within the period of availability;

     (6) Implement internal controls to prevent over-obligation of reimbursable funds;

     (7) Ensure the official Economy Act agreement contains all relevant documents;

     (8) Monitor activity and age and provide justification for agreements with no activity
         over 180 days; and

     (9) Ensure that the Economy Act agreements are properly closed out and that files are
         retained in accordance with record retention policies.




                                            11
COMPLIANCE

Compliance with this directive will be included as a part of the annual testing requirements
under Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular No. A-123, Appendix A,
Management of Reporting and Data Integrity Risk.


INQUIRIES

Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should direct questions and inquiries regarding this
DR to the OCFO at USDABudget@usda.gov.


                                          -END-




                                            12
                              APPENDIX A

                 ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


CFO      Chief Financial Officer
CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
D&F      Determination and Findings
DR       Departmental Regulation
FAR      Federal Acquisition Regulation
FS       Bureau of the Fiscal Service (Treasury Department Component)
FSSI     Federal Strategic Sourcing Initiative
GAO      Government Accountability Office
GSA      General Services Administration
GT&C     General Terms and Conditions
IAA      Interagency Agreement
IAS      Integrated Acquisition System
IDIQ     Indefinite Quantity
IGT      Intragovernmental Transaction
OCFO     Office of the Chief Financial Officer
OCP      Office of Contracting and Procurement
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                                   A-1
                                          APPENDIX B

                                         DEFINITIONS


Assisted Acquisition. The servicing agency performs acquisition activities on a requesting
agency's behalf, such as awarding and administering a contract, task order, or delivery order.

Direct Acquisition. The requesting agency places an order directly against a servicing agency's
indefinite-delivery or indefinite-quantity contract. The servicing agency manages the contract but
does not participate in the placement or administration of an order.

Interagency Agreement (IAA). The signed agreement between the servicing agency and
requesting agency that sets out the terms and conditions under which reimbursable work will be
performed.

Requesting Agency. The Federal department or agency requesting goods or services from
another agency.

Servicing Agency. The Federal department or agency performing the work or providing the
services in accordance with the terms and conditions of the agreement.




                                               B-1
                                       APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


31 U.S.C. § 1301(a), Application

31 U.S.C. § 1535, Agency agreements (The Economy Act of 1933)

Federal Acquisition Regulation, 48 CFR Subpart 17.5, Interagency Acquisitions

Government Accountability Office (GAO), Policy and Procedures Manual for Guidance of
Federal Agencies, Section 2.4, Transactions Among Appropriations and Fund Accounts, May
18, 1993

GAO, Principles of Federal Appropriations Law (the “Red Book”) web page

OMB, Circular No. A-11, Preparation, Submission, and Execution of the Budget, March 2021,
Section 130.9, How is reimbursable work with Federal agencies under the Economy Act shown
on SF 133 reports?

OMB, Circular No. A-123, Appendix A, Management of Reporting and Data Integrity Risk, June
6, 2018

Treasury, FS Form 7600A, Interagency Agreement (IAA) – General Terms and Conditions
(GT&C) – Agreement Between Federal Program Agencies for Intergovernmental Reimbursable
Buy/Sell Activity, March 2021

Treasury, FS Form 7600B, Interagency Agreement (IAA) – Order Form – Agreement Between
Federal Program Agencies for Intergovernmental Reimbursable Buy/Sell Activity, April 2021

Treasury, Treasury Financial Manual, Volume 1, Part 2, Chapter 4700, Federal Entity Reporting
Requirements for the Financial Report of the United States Government, Appendix No. 5,
Overall Intra-Governmental Transactions (IGT) Processes/General Information

USDA, DR 1110-002, Management’s Responsibility for Internal Control, March 5, 2021

USDA, DR 2230-001, Reviews of Unliquidated Obligations, October 28, 2020

USDA, IAS User Guide web page

USDA, OCP, Ordering Products & Services web page

USDA, OCP, USDA Contracting Desk Book, v1.41, February 20, 2020




                                            C-1
                                         APPENDIX D

                  DETERMINATION AND FINDINGS (D&F) AUTHORITY
                         TO ENTER INTO AN AGREEMENT
                           UNDER THE ECONOMY ACT


Based on the following determination and findings, in accordance with the authority of the Economy
Act (31 U.S.C. 1535), [Name of USDA office], intends to enter into an agreement with the [name of
other agency].

Purpose of the agreement:
□ Interagency Agreement;
□ Acquisition Services;
□ Reimbursable Detail.
[Name of USDA office] certifies:

[Place a check in each space for each finding to indicate it has been substantiated.]

□ That sufficient funding amounts are available;
□ That this agreement is in the best interest of the United States Government;
□ The agency to fill the order can provide or get by contract the ordered goods or services; and
□ That the services requested cannot be provided by contract as conveniently or cheaply by a
   commercial enterprise.


Signature of USDA official who has authority to sign this D&F
Name
Title and office
Date:
It has been determined that this Economy Act order:
[Place a check in each space that applies.]

□ Does not require contracting action by the servicing agency; or
□ Does require contracting action by the servicing agency and that one of the following circumstances
   exists:
   □ The acquisition will appropriately be made under an existing contract of the servicing agency,
       which was entered into before placement of this order to meet the requirements of the servicing
       agency for the same or similar supplies or services;



                                               D-1
  □ The servicing agency has capabilities or expertise to enter into a contract for such supplies or
      services which is not available within the requesting agency; or
  □ The servicing agency is specifically authorized by law or regulation, i.e., [set forth the citation
      for the law or regulation], to purchase such supplies or services on behalf of other agencies.


Signature of USDA official who has authority to sign this D&F
Name
Title and office Date:




                                              D-2
