                             U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                   WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                  NUMBER:
     DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION DR 2236-001
                                                                  DATE:
     SUBJECT: Shared Cost Programs                                April 16, 2021
                                                                  EXPIRATION DATE:
     OPI: Office of the Chief Financial Officer
                                                                  April 16, 2026



Section                                                                                     Page

1.    Purpose                                                                                  1
2.    Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                       1
3.    Scope                                                                                    1
4.    Policy                                                                                   2
5.    Roles and Responsibilities                                                               2
6.    Shared Cost Program Advisory Committee Membership                                        5
7.    Inquiries                                                                                5

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                      A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                     B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                      C-1



1. PURPOSE

      This Departmental Regulation (DR) identifies and establishes, where necessary, individuals,
      and organizations responsible for the financial health of and efficient operation of activities
      supported by United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Shared Cost Programs (SCP).
      It describes the roles and responsibilities as they relate to the financial and operational
      management of SCPs and as they conform to authorities set forth under 7 United States Code
      (U.S.C.) § 2263, Transfer of Funds.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

      This regulation supersedes DR 2236-001, Shared Cost Programs, dated March 14, 2014.


3. SCOPE

      This regulation applies to the following individuals and organizations:
  a.   The Secretary, the Deputy Secretary, and the Office of the Secretary (OSEC);

  b.   The Chief Financial Officer (CFO);

  c.   The SCP Controller;

  d.   The General Counsel;

  e.   The Director, Office of Budget and Program Analysis (OBPA);

  f.   Mission Areas, Agencies, Staff Offices, and Organizations managing SCP activities; and

  g.   The SCP Advisory Committee (the “Committee”).


4. POLICY

  a.   USDA may not augment its appropriation accounts (including annual appropriations and
       revolving funds) with transfers from other accounts without specific statutory authority.

  b.   As a rule, if a particular appropriated function is assigned to one Mission Area, agency,
       or staff office by statute or by the Secretary, that Mission Areas, agency, or staff office
       generally may not seek contributions (to include, through shared cost agreements) from
       Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices funded by other appropriations to finance that
       function. The contributions would be an augmentation to the originating Mission Area,
       agency, or staff office’s appropriation.


5. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Secretary, the Deputy Secretary, and OSEC:

       (1) The Secretary, Deputy Secretary, or designee will designate a member to serve as
           chairperson, as needed, to be responsible for providing written recommendations at
           the conclusion of the SCP Advisory Committee.

       (2) The Secretary, Deputy Secretary, or designee will, based on the SCP Advisory
           Committee or other reasons thereof, have final authority to approve in writing:

            (a) New or expanded SCP programs;

            (b) SCP cost recovery methodologies that serve as the basis for recovering SCP
                costs from agencies;

            (c) SCP resource allowances;




                                               2
         (d) Termination of SCPs; and

         (e) Changes in funding mechanism for SCPs (e.g., from SCP to direct
             appropriation, or from SCP to Working Capital Fund (WCF)).

     (3) All approvals must be issued in writing under the signature of the Secretary, Deputy
         Secretary, or by his or her designee. If no approval has been issued after the start of
         the fiscal year, programs are authorized to continue operations at the prior year
         spending allowance level in 90-day increments or at the continuing resolution level,
         whichever is lower, until such time as written approval has been issued.

     (4) In the event the Secretary or Deputy Secretary designates another party to exercise
         approval authority on his/her behalf, such designation must be documented in
         writing and signed by the Secretary or Deputy Secretary. This designation will be
         in effect until notice is given in writing by the Secretary or Deputy Secretary that
         said designation is withdrawn.

b.   The General Counsel will:

     (1) Appoint a representative to the Committee;

     (2) Approve new or expanded SCP activities or changes in funding mechanism; and

     (3) Provide, to the CFO, documentation of the proposed action having been reviewed
         by the Office of the General Counsel (OGC) staff.

c.   The Director, OBPA, will:

     (1) Appoint a representative to the Committee;

     (2) Review notification of changes in funding mechanisms; and

     (3) Provide guidance on and approve Congressional Notifications required for the
         establishment of new programs, reprogrammings, and budget line items prior to the
         implementation or termination of programs.

d.   Departmental Staff Office Directors and Mission Area and Agency Heads administering
     activities with SCP support will:

     (1) Provide overall authority for aspects of service delivery and operation over those
         activities and the related organizational units supported by the SCPs that they
         administer, consistent with existing delegations of authority; and

     (2) Prepare proposals for any new or expanded reimbursable programs and submit such
         requests to the CFO through the SCP Controller, who will be responsible for
         coordinating reviews of such proposals.



                                             3
e.   The CFO will:

     (1) Appoint a representative to the Committee;

     (2) Provide requirements for the formulation of SCP budget requests; and

     (3) Review and approve proposals for new or expanded reimbursable programs.

f.   The Associate CFO for Financial Policy and Planning will:

     (1) Serve as the SCP Controller;

     (2) Exercise day-to-day responsibilities for SCP oversight, including, but not limited to:

         (a) Review of SCP budget estimates, cost recovery methodologies, and SCP
             reimbursement estimates; and

         (b) Preparation of periodic financial reports;

     (3) Serve as primary advisor to the CFO and the Secretary on matters of SCP financial
         operations and general management issues;

     (4) Serve as an ex officio member of the SCP Advisory Committee;

     (5) Serve as Executive Secretary to the SCP Advisory Committee and any SCP
         subcommittees that may be established by the SCP Advisory Committee;

     (6) Provide budget support to and coordinate development of SCP resource estimates
         with SCP managers;

     (7) Coordinate with the OBPA Director on proposals involving changes in funding
         mechanism; and

     (8) Initiate, as applicable, required Congressional notification resulting from funding
         changes pursuant to the Agriculture appropriation act General Provisions or internal
         USDA notification to SCP managers and customer agencies when external
         notification is not required.

     (9) Coordinate reviews of proposals for any new or expanded reimbursable programs.

g.   Organizations managing SCP activities will:

     (1) Prepare, subject to review and approval by the OSEC, annual budgets for SCPs in
         accordance with requirements of the Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO)
         for the formulation of SCP budget requests; and



                                             4
       (2) Make submissions to the SCP Controller.


6. SHARED COST PROGRAM ADVISORY COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP

  The Shared Cost Program Advisory Committee serves as the primary recommending body to
  the Secretary on matters pertaining to SCP resource estimates, cost recovery methodologies,
  and reimbursements. The Committee will be comprised of:

  a.   One representative appointed by the Secretary;

  b.   One representative appointed by the General Counsel;

  c.   One representative appointed by the OBPA Director;

  d.   One representative appointed by the CFO; and

  e.   Ex officio: SCP Controller. The OCFO Associate CFO for Financial Policy and
       Planning will serve in this capacity. This member will not have voting rights with
       respect to business before the Committee.


7. INQUIRIES

  Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should direct questions and inquiries regarding this
  DR to the OCFO at USDABudget@usda.gov.


                                            -END-




                                               5
                              APPENDIX A

                  ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


CFO      Chief Financial Officer
DR       Departmental Regulation
OBPA     Office of Budget and Program Analysis
OCFO     Office of the Chief Financial Officer
OSEC     Office of the Secretary
SCP      Shared Cost Program
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture
WCF      Working Capital Fund




                                   A-1
                                         APPENDIX B

                                        DEFINITIONS


Ex officio Member. Members of the Committee holding this designation are those who hold
membership by virtue of their office. Ex officio members are permanent members of the
Committee as long as they hold their office.

Shared Cost Program (SCP). SCPs are programs authorized under 7 U.S.C. § 2263 and are
performed on behalf of the Department and its Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices, costs
for which are recovered from USDA agencies via reimbursement mechanisms. They do not
include Central Cost Distribution Programs or Working Capital Fund (WCF) activities.




                                              B-1
                                        APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


7 U.S.C. § 2263, Transfer of Funds. Authorizes the Department of Agriculture to establish
programs, financed by reimbursement from agencies of the Department, of general benefit to the
Department, its Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices, its stakeholders, and other
organizations with which the Department works to promote its various missions.




                                             C-1
