                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                               NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                       DR 2300-001
                                                               DATE:
 SUBJECT: Government Travel Charge Card Regulation             June 24, 2021
                                                               EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of the Chief Financial Officer
                                                               June 24, 2026



Section                                                                                  Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                     2
3.   Scope                                                                                  2
4.   Background                                                                             2
5.   Policy                                                                                 3
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                            17
7.   Inquiries                                                                             28


Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                   A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                  B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                   C-1
Appendix D – Sample A/OPC Appointment Letter and Duties                                   D-1
Appendix E – Acknowledgement and Acceptance Statement                                     E-1
Appendix F – US Bank Access Online Reports                                                F-1
Appendix G – Inter-Departmental Hierarchy Transfer Request Worksheet                      G-1
Appendix H – Examples of Memoranda to Employees from A/OPCs                               H-1
Appendix I – NFC Salary Offset                                                             I-1
Appendix J – USDA Senior Federal Travelers                                                J-1
Appendix K – Government Employees Standards of Conduct                                    K-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) prescribes the policies and procedures governing the
     United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) travel charge card program. The
     Government travel charge card program was developed to procure transportation services,
     subsistence, and other allowable travel and transportation expenses incurred during official
     travel. This regulation supplements 41 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Subtitle F, Parts
     300 through 304 (commonly known as the Federal Travel Regulation (FTR)); both are used
     throughout this DR. The FTR is issued by the General Services Administration (GSA) and
  implements statutory requirements and Executive branch policies for travel by Federal
  civilian employees and others authorized to travel at government expense. Provisions
  included in this regulation follow applicable Federal regulations, including the FTR.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This regulation supersedes DR 2300-001, Government Travel Card Regulation, dated
       October 20, 2003.

  b.   This DR contains policies Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must follow for
       official travel performed using the travel charge card after the date of this regulation.

  c.   The requirements listed in this DR remain in effect and must be followed unless or until
       superseded by subsequent changes in applicable laws or revised by the Department.

  d.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must update their processes and procedures in
       accordance with this DR within 180 calendar days of the effective date.


3. SCOPE

  a.   The law requires the mandatory use of the travel charge card by Federal employees
       unless they are exempted, as identified in Section 5e, Use of the Travel Charge Card,
       below. The use of the travel charge card is limited to expenses incurred in conjunction
       with official travel. The provisions of this regulation apply to all employees of USDA
       who have been issued or are applying for a travel charge card.

  b.   This regulation provides policy governing the use of the travel charge card by USDA
       employees. Proper use of the travel charge card supports mission accomplishment and
       preserves the reputation of the Department and its employees. The travel charge card is
       to be used appropriately and in compliance with the provisions within this regulation.
       The USDA will not tolerate misuse or abuse of the travel charge card.

  c.   Possession and use of the travel charge card do not relieve the employee from abiding
       by the rules and regulations governing official travel, including use of Government city-
       pair contract carriers, American Flag carriers, Government car rental agreements,
       Government approved lodging facilities, or a Travel Management Center (TMC).


4. BACKGROUND

  a.   Travel and Transportation Reform Act (TTRA) of 1998

       The TTRA (Public Law (P.L.) 105-264, 112 Stat. 2350, as amended by the Government
       Charge Card Abuse Act of 2012, P.L.112–194, Oct. 5, 2012, 126 Stat. 1448) authorizes



                                                2
       the GSA Administrator, after consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, to require
       Federal employees use the travel charge card established pursuant to the United States
       Travel and Transportation Payment and Expense Control System, or any Federal
       contractor-issued travel charge card, for all payments of expenses of official
       Government travel.

  b.   GSA Exemption

       The FTR, as allowed by the TTRA, authorizes the GSA Administrator to exempt any
       payment, person, type or class of payments, or type or class of personnel from any
       requirement established under the preceding sentence in any case in which:

       (1) It is in the best interest of the United States to do so;

       (2) Payment through a travel charge card is impractical or imposes unreasonable
           burdens or costs on Federal employees or Federal agencies; or

       (3) The Secretary of Defense or the Secretary of Transportation (with respect to the
           Coast Guard) requests an exemption with respect to the members of the uniformed
           services.

  c.   Federal Agency Exemption

       The FTR, as allowed by the TTRA, authorizes the head of a Federal agency, or the
       designee of such head, to exempt any payment, person, type or class of payments, or
       type or class of Federal agency personnel from the above if the agency head or the
       designee determines the exemption to be necessary in the interest of the Federal agency.
       Not later than 30 days after granting such an exemption, the head of such Federal agency
       or the designee shall notify the GSA Administrator in writing of such exemption stating
       the reasons for the exemption.


  d.   Government Charge Card Abuse Prevention Act of 2012

       The Government Charge Card Abuse Prevention Act of 2012 (which amends Section 2
       of the TTRA; and the Note to 5 United States Code (U.S.C.) 5701) requires each
       executive agency with employees who use travel charge cards to establish and maintain
       internal control activities to ensure proper, efficient, and effective use of travel charge
       cards.


5. POLICY

  a.   Records Retention

       Per the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) General Records
       Schedule (GRS) 1.1 – Financial Management and Reporting Records, Item 090,


                                                 3
     Government purchase card and travel credit card application and approval records;
     and GRS 5.1, Common Office Records, Item 010, Administrative records maintained in
     any agency office, documents related to the travel charge cards (e.g., applications,
     appointment letters, acknowledgement and acceptance statements, training certification)
     should be destroyed when the employee leaves the organization, but longer retention is
     authorized if required for business use. Document retention may be in the form of paper
     files or electronic files.

b.   Obtaining a travel charge card

     (1) The contract bank may obtain credit scores for new applicants, if given
         authorization, before issuing a card. If authorization is not given or the applicant’s
         credit score is below the threshold (660) set by the Office of Management and
         Budget’s (OMB) Appendix B to Circular No. A-123, A Risk Management
         Framework for Government Charge Card Programs, then a card can or will be
         issued with more stringent restrictions.

     (2) Per OMB Circular A-123, Appendix B, if obtaining a credit score is not possible
         (e.g., the applicant refuses to provide consent or does not have a credit history), an
         alternative credit worthiness assessment should be completed to determine whether
         the individual possesses a satisfactory credit history. To complete the alternative
         credit worthiness assessment, the Mission Area, agency, or staff office must ensure it
         first conducts an alternative creditworthiness assessment to determine whether the
         individual possesses a satisfactory credit history.

     (3) Specifically, the Mission Area, agency, or staff office must review the applicant’s
         most recent Standard Form (SF) 85P, Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions,
         Section 24, Financial Record; or SF 86, Questionnaire for National Security
         Positions, Section 26, Financial Record; or use a similar vehicle containing the same
         type of questions as in the forms and sections noted and use the information
         provided to assess creditworthiness. In either case, the vehicle used must not be
         older than one year. Neither the SF 85P nor SF 86 is to be shared with the servicing
         contractor.

c.   Spending Limit

     (1) The spending limits on travel charge cards should be in line with the actual needs of
         each cardholder. The Departmentwide default spending limit for new standard
         accounts is $7,500 and $3,500.00 for restricted cards; the Mission Area, agency, or
         staff office can decide to maintain lower spending limits for their cardholders.
         Restricted accounts can become standard accounts in two ways:

         (a) If the account is restricted due to a low credit score, then cardholder can
             contact the bank to authorize or request another credit check; or




                                              4
         (b) If the account was restricted for other than a low credit score, and there have
             been no outstanding issues with the account for 12-months, the Mission Area,
             agency, or staff office program coordinator (A/OPC) can raise the limit to the
             Departmentwide default spending limit.

     (2) Mission Area, agency, or staff office A/OPCs can temporarily increase card limits
         on accounts to meet mission operations; the temporary spending limit should be
         reduced as soon as the need for the increase is complete. Table 1 below shows the
         authorized approval levels for temporary limit increases.


      TABLE 1 – AUTHORIZED APPROVAL LEVELS FOR TEMPORARY LIMIT
                              INCREASES

         Type of Card                   Default   Secondary     Primary      Departmental
                                                   A/OPC        A/OPC          A/OPC
      Unrestricted           Credit      $7,500    $10,000      $20,000      No Maximum
      (Standard
      Account) (Note 1)
                              Cash       $1,500     $2,000       $4,000
                             (Note 3)
      Restricted              Credit     $3,500     $5,000       $5,000      No Maximum
      (Note 2)
                              Cash         $0          $0          $0

     Note 1: Unrestricted account limit increases are based on mission requirements and are
     limited to no more than 12 months.

     Note 2: Restricted account limit increases are based on mission requirements; they
     require prior justification and written approval from a manager to the A/OPC. The
     increase is limited to 60 days.

     Note 3: Cash amounts equate to 20% of the available credit limit.


     (3) The default spending limit for the Office of the Secretary and Senior Federal
         Travelers (listed in Appendix J, USDA Senior Federal Travelers) can be set at
         $25,000, based on their position and/or travel schedules. To maintain permanent
         limits above the default limit, submit written justification to the Department
         Coordinator in the Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO), signed by the
         Mission Area, agency, or staff office’s Chief Financial Officer (CFO) or Senior
         Accountable Travel Official (SATO).

d.   Training Requirements

     (1) General travel charge card training requirements:


                                            5
         (a) All program participants must be trained prior to appointment;

         (b) All program participants must take annual (calendar year) refresher training;
             and

         (c) All program participants must certify that they have received the training,
             understand the regulations and procedures, and know the consequences of
             inappropriate actions.

     (2) A/OPCs must receive training on:

         (a) Cardholder responsibilities;

         (b) Procedures for identifying and reporting suspected fraud, misuse and
             delinquencies;

         (c) Proper card management (e.g., account setup, authorization controls, account
             close-out, available bank reports);

         (d) Control and oversight tools, and techniques;

         (e) Using the bank’s electronic access system (or applicable system, to include
             data analytics tools) to manage their program; and

         (f) Data analytics tools, techniques and reports.

     (3) Cardholders must receive training and information on:

         (a) Government official travel policies and local travel;

         (b) Mission Area, agency, or staff office specific travel charge card policies and
             procedures and proper card use;

         (c) Relevant portions of the FTR; and

         (d) Use of the card generates refunds and other benefits to the USDA.

e.   Use of the Travel Charge Card

     The card will be used whenever and wherever possible for airline and other common
     carrier transportation services, lodging expense, meals, automobile rental and fuel, and
     other expenses incurred incidental to official travel.

     (1) Employees are prohibited from using the travel charge card to procure airline or
         rental car transportation services from a commercial source (e.g., Expedia, Hotwire,



                                             6
    Priceline, ORBITZ), or a vendor’s website, for official travel unless a specific FTR
    exception applies. Employees can use these sources to conduct research; however,
    they must use the USDA’s official Electronic Travel System (ETS) or their Mission
    Area, agency, or staff office’s TMC to book reservations (FTR Part 301-50,
    Arranging for Travel Services). This does not prevent the employee from using the
    travel charge card to make necessary travel adjustments while at the point of
    embarkation or debarkation directly from an airline vendor.

(2) Employees who acquire common carrier transportation with their travel charge card
    and either lose the ticket or fail to use all or part of the ticket are responsible for
    obtaining a credit for the unused ticket or reporting a loss to the carrier. Failure to
    obtain a credit from the carrier will result in the employee being financially liable for
    the entire amount of the ticket.

(3) Employees should not submit unused tickets, paper or electronic, charged to their
    individually billed account (IBA) with their travel voucher. The unused ticket
    should be returned to the TMC or follow procedures prescribed by Mission Area,
    agency, or staff office travel policy.

(4) Employees are prohibited from using the travel charge card to procure lodging
    services from a commercial source (e.g., Airbnb, HomeAway, VRBO), or a vendor’s
    website, for official travel unless a specific FTR exception applies.

    Employees can use these sources to conduct research; however, they must use the
    USDA’s official ETS or their agency’s TMC to book reservations, giving preference
    to FedRooms, meeting the Hotel and Motel Fire Safety Act of 1990, P.L. 101-391,
    requirements, whenever possible.

(5) Employees may use their travel charge card to pay for rental car expenses when
    authorized to use this method of transportation as part of an official trip. The
    employee must use the USDA’s official ETS or the TMC to make the reservations;
    this ensures vendors participating in the Defense Travel Management Office
    (DTMO) U.S. Government Car Rental Agreement are selected. The advantages of
    renting a car through the DTMO rental car program are:

    (a) The rental contract must be ready upon arrival;

    (b) If the size or class of the vehicle you reserved is not available, the rental
        company must offer an upgraded vehicle at the same rate;
         n
    (c) There are no blackout dates or minimum rental periods and you enjoy
        unlimited mileage (except for one-way rentals);

    (d) Rates can vary but may not exceed established ceiling rates;




                                         7
    (e) There is no additional cost for additional authorized drivers (other Government
        employees) or drivers between the ages of 18-25; and

    (f) Insurance is included under Government Administrative Rate Supplement
        (GARS). When “GARS” is listed on the rental contract, travelers receive Loss
        Damage Waiver (LDW), Collision Damage Waiver (CDW), and Supplemental
        Liability insurance at no additional cost. All other insurance coverage should
        be declined.

(6) Employees will not be reimbursed, and are not authorized to use their travel charge
    card, for purchasing pre-paid refueling options when renting a vehicle for official
    travel (per FTR 301-10.450 (d)). Therefore, employees should refuel prior to
    returning the vehicle to the drop-off location. If it is not possible to refuel
    completely prior to returning the vehicle because of safety issues or the location of
    closest fueling station, the employee can request reimbursement for vendor refueling
    charges. The employee should submit proper supporting documentation for this
    reimbursement.

(7) Employees may use their travel charge card for payment of an advance room deposit
    when required by the lodging facility. Complete a pre-trip voucher when the
    advance payment is made to allow timely reimbursement of the expense.

(8) The USDA prohibits the use of the travel charge card to obtain contract city-pair
    fares except for the employee when on official travel. EXCEPTION: the travel
    charge card may be used for family members travel during an official transfer of
    station.

(9) The USDA prohibits the use of the travel charge card to obtain contract city-pair
    fares for personal trips taken in conjunction with official travel. Official travel
    flights must be purchased first, on the travel charge card, then exchanged for
    personal tickets, where appropriate and authorized.

(10) The USDA restricts most Merchant Category Codes (MCC) that offer non-travel
     related services or products. As a precautionary measure for those merchants who
     are mis-classified within the travel charge card program, employees are prohibited
     from using the travel charge card to procure or pay for the following:

    (a) Book and Magazine Subscriptions;

    (b) Membership Fees;

    (c) Training and Conference Fees;

    (d) Higher Education Expenses;

    (e) Theme Parks;



                                        8
         (f) Management Consulting Services;

         (g) Automobile Purchases; Car Repairs and Services;

         (h) Clothing, Lingerie, Outerwear, Shoes, and Furniture;

         (i) Hair Services, Cosmetics, Tattoos, and Massages;

         (j) Emergency Medical Services;

         (k) Office Supplies;

         (l) Computers, Televisions, or Telecommunication Equipment;

         (m) Rental Global Positioning Systems; and

         (n) Any service or product obtained for personal, family, or household purposes.

     (11) The USDA prohibits the use of the travel charge card to purchase fuel and procure
          minor maintenance services on GSA fleet or Mission Area, agency, or staff office-
          owned vehicles. The USDA fleet card is the appropriate payment method for
          purchases incurred while operating Government-owned vehicles.

     (12) While in a travel status, employees may use the travel charge card for non-
          reimbursable expenses incident to official travel such as in-room movie rentals,
          room service and exercise facility fees. This includes purchasing alcoholic
          beverages, incidental to a meal (the meal and beverage must be on the same receipt).
          Although these expenses may be purchased on the travel charge card, they will not
          be reimbursed.

f.   Exemptions to the Use of the Travel Charge Card

     (1) Employees must apply for a contractor-issued Government travel charge card to
         perform official travel, unless they receive an approved exemption. Employees must
         use the travel charge card for official travel related expenses. The travel charge card
         gives employees financial flexibility and convenience while traveling on official
         Government business. Advantages of the travel charge card include direct purchase
         of common carrier tickets and the opportunity to reserve lodging and rental cars
         when authorized in advance by the Mission Area, agency, or staff office.

     (2) If a Mission Area, agency, or staff office desires to exempt additional payments,
         persons, type or class of payments, or type or class of Mission Area, agency, or staff
         office personnel (not already included herein) from the use of the travel charge card,
         then they must submit a written request for this exemption to OCFO, via the
         Departmental Coordinator, prior to authorizing the exemption. If the exemption is



                                             9
    determined to be necessary and in the best interest of the USDA, then the OCFO will
    provide written notification to the GSA within 30 days of the approved exemption.
    This policy applies to any employee paid through the National Finance Center
    (NFC).

(3) The following class of Mission Area, agency, and staff office personnel are exempt
    from mandatory use of the travel charge card (although exempt, these travelers are
    not prohibited from applying for and using the travel charge card):

    (a) Infrequent travelers – those who conduct official Government travel fewer than
        three times in a 12-month period;

    (b) Temporary employees (whose terms of appointment are less than 180 days);
        and

    (c) Intermittent or temporary consultants and experts (who are paid on a daily,
        basis when employed), serving less than 1 year.

    Mission Areas, agencies and staff offices have the discretion to require
    employees to obtain travel charge cards, regardless of how often they travel.

    NOTE: The USDA is working with the contractor bank and card vendor to
    make virtual card accounts (i.e., single use accounts or ghost cards) available to
    employees. Once this solution is available, the exemptions described above will
    be rescinded or terminated.

(4) Expenses for which payment through the travel charge card is impractical (e.g.,
    vendor does not accept credit cards) or imposes unreasonable burdens or costs (e.g.,
    fees are charged for using the card) are exempt from use of the travel charge card.

    Other expense items (or situations) that may be exempted from travel charge card
    use (at the discretion of the Mission Area, agency, or staff office SATO) include:

    (a) Laundry and dry cleaning;

    (b) Parking;

    (c) Local transportation systems (e.g., train, bus);

    (d) Taxi (to include transportation and innovative mobility network companies –
        Transportation Network Company (TNC), Innovative Mobility Technology
        Company (IMTC));

    (e) Tips;




                                       10
         (f) Meals (when use of the card is impractical, e.g., group meals or when the travel
             charge card is not accepted);

         (g) Official phone calls;

         (h) When an employee has an application pending for the travel charge card;

         (i) When individuals are traveling on invitational travel;

         (j) New agency employees who must travel before receiving their travel charge
             card; and

         (k) Relocation allowances, except for enroute travel and house hunting trips.

g.   USDA Zero Tolerance Policy

     This regulation sets forth the “USDA Zero Tolerance Policy” for any inappropriate
     charges and delinquencies. The objective of this policy is to eliminate misuse and abuse
     in the travel charge card program and mitigate the need to impose disciplinary
     procedures on any USDA employee. Proper use of the travel charge card reduces the
     need to cancel card privileges; eliminates the administrative burden of acting against
     employees; preserves the reputation of USDA; and allows employees to achieve mission
     goals with integrity.

     The USDA Zero Tolerance Policy prohibits the following misuses of the card:

     (1) Making unauthorized charges and charges not associated with official travel;

     (2) Allowing family members, another employee, or friends to use the card;

     (3) Using the card while not in an official travel status;

     (4) Using the card in the vicinity of the official duty station or residence when not on
         official travel;

     (5) Paying for another employee’s official travel expenses;

     (6) Allowing your account to become delinquent;

     (7) Failure to reconcile your monthly travel charge card statement;

     (8) Failure to pay accounts with sufficient funds;

     (9) Making cash withdrawals from automated teller machines (ATM) earlier than 3
         business days before the start of official travel (domestic or international) or after the
         final day of official travel;



                                              11
     (10) Obtaining cash advances from ATMs located in a casino or other gaming
          establishment;

     (11) Failure to use split disbursement to repay travel related expenses to the travel charge
          card issuing bank;

     (12) Withdrawing credit balances from the card via an ATM;

     (13) Procuring fuel or minor maintenance services on GSA, Mission Area, agency, or
          staff office-owned vehicles;

     (14) Pre-paying for fuel when renting a vehicle for official travel

     (15) Paying for conference registration fees or training courses, unless the lodging and
          registration are in one combined transaction;

     (16) Paying for alcoholic beverages not incident to a meal; and

     (17) Paying for meals for everyone at the table or in the party and being reimbursed in
          cash.

h.   Delinquencies

     Delinquencies associated with the Government travel charge card are prohibited. The
     following administrative actions can be imposed for delinquent travel cardholders:

     (1) Suspend employee accounts once they reach 61 days past the statement date;

     (2) Instruct the charge card vendor to cancel cards, withhold account reinstatement,
         initiate collection efforts, notify credit bureaus, and assess late fees; and

     (3) Initiate salary offset to collect any undisputed, delinquent travel charge card amount
         via direct deduction from an employee's payroll disbursement or retirement annuity
         on behalf of the travel charge card vendor, Mission Area, agency, or staff office.

i.   Automated Teller Machines Cash Advances

     (1) ATM cash advance withdrawals can only be taken when in an official travel status;
         withdrawals are allowed no earlier than 3 calendar days before official travel
         (domestic or international) begins and no later than the last day of official travel.
         Cash advances are limited to the meals and incidental expenses rate (M&IE) for the
         location of the temporary duty location and other cash expenses identified in Section
         5f of this policy. Cash needs for M&IE expenses should not exceed $100 per day
         (domestic) or $150 per day (international).




                                             12
     (2) The USDA will reimburse travelers for service fees incurred for ATM advances,
         when using their Government issued travel charge card, not exceeding the daily
         location rate multiplied by the number of calendar days in travel status. Cash
         obtained from the ATM in amounts greater than required for the travel duration are
         considered excessive cash advances and a misuse of the travel charge card.

j.   Transportation Network and Innovative Mobility Network Companies

     (1) Employees traveling on official business may use their Government issued travel
         charge card, and be reimbursed, for expenses related to the use of this type of special
         conveyance. Certain jurisdictions may have limits or prohibit the operation or use of
         innovative mobility technology companies. Federal employees must follow all laws,
         including those related to transportation network and innovative mobility technology
         companies, as well as choose the most cost-effective level of service.

     (2) These companies, (e.g., Uber, Lyft, Sidecar, ZipCar, Bike Share), may be an
         efficient and cost-effective alternative to taxis and rental cars for ground
         transportation. Employees must obtain a receipt for reimbursement when the cost
         exceeds $25 and upload the receipt to the travel voucher.

k.   Laundry and Dry Cleaning

     Employees can use their travel charge card for paying laundry and dry-cleaning
     expenses, when their domestic temporary duty (TDY) trip lasts a minimum of four
     consecutive nights. Employees using other than coin-operated machines for these
     services will need to provide an itemized receipt from the TDY location for
     reimbursement, regardless of cost, and upload the receipt to the travel voucher.

l.   Internet Access and Service Fees

     Employees may use their travel charge card, and be reimbursed, for internet access fees
     when necessary to conduct official business while in a TDY status. The estimated cost
     must be listed as an expense, and reimbursement authorized, on the travel authorization
     in advance of scheduled travel. If authorized, this expense can be placed on the travel
     charge card. Employees need to provide a receipt from the TDY location for
     reimbursement, regardless of cost, and upload the receipt to the travel voucher.

m. Travel Voucher Reimbursement

     (1) An employee must prepare and a submit a final travel voucher, together with any
         required receipts, to their approving official within 5 business days after completion
         of an official business trip or period of travel; if on continuous travel (longer than 45
         days), then a voucher can be submitted weekly, bi-weekly, or every 30 days,
         depending on Mission Area, agency, or staff office guidance.




                                              13
     (2) Employees will be reimbursed for travel and transportation expenses authorized and
         allowable under the FTR, DR 2300-005, Agriculture Travel Regulation [ATR], and
         Mission Area, agency, or staff office specific policies. Adherence to these policies
         will help to ensure reimbursement in enough time to the pay the travel charge card
         monthly billing statement. However, the cardholder is required to pay their bill in
         full by the established due date, regardless of whether their voucher has been paid.

n.   Cumulative Use of Travel Charge Card Reports

     Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will use cumulative 12-month charge activity
     reports for the purposes of determining whether employees meet program eligibility
     criteria, the level of participation and for establishing budget estimates for travel.

o.   Travel Charge Card Operations During National and State Declared Emergencies

     Employees who are activated to perform emergency or first responder duties, or
     participate as a continuity of operations (COOP) team member, are exempt from travel
     charge card deactivation and cancellation requirements. Mission Areas, agencies, and
     staff offices should contact the Level 3 or Level 4 A/OPC to ensure the cardholder
     accounts are identified as such within the contractor bank’s electronic access system.

p.   Deactivation and Reactivation

     The Departmental Coordinator will work with the contractor bank to perform
     semiannual deactivation of cards that remain inactive during a 12-month period. In
     addition, the A/OPC should deactivate cards upon notification from the employee’s
     immediate supervisor of travel charge card ineligibility. Employees with a deactivated
     travel charge card will need to contact their A/OPC at least 3 business days prior to travel
     commencement to have their travel charge card reactivated.

q.   Collection of Delinquent Payments from Employee Pay

     (1) In accordance with the cardholder agreement, employees are obligated to pay the
         undisputed balance within 30 days of the statement date, regardless of whether they
         have received payment from their properly completed and submitted voucher.
         Undisputed, delinquent IBA balances are eligible for the USDA travel charge card
         salary offset program. The USDA may offset an employee’s pay to recover
         undisputed delinquent amounts due to the travel charge card contractor. Salary
         offset may also apply to an exiting employee’s final pay, provided the due process
         requirements were followed.

     (2) The USDA will not initiate a salary offset request if the employee has filed a timely
         voucher and it has not yet been paid. Upon receipt of written notice of the intent to
         administer salary offset, the employee must inform the NFC, in writing within 5
         business days, using the contact information in the notification, if the employee has
         not been reimbursed, then follow the instructions provided in Appendix I, NFC



                                              14
         Salary Offset (to provide the name and phone number of the employee’s travel
         voucher-approving official for confirmation).

     (3) No offset of disputed debts will be made except pursuant to the garnishment
         regulations 5 CFR Part 582, Commercial Garnishment of Federal Employees’ Pay.

r.   Suspension or Cancellation of Travel Charge Cards

     (1) USDA officials do not have the authority to override the contractor bank’s policy
         regarding the suspension or cancellation of employee accounts. The current card
         contractor, US Bank, will not reinstate an IBA for the following reasons:

         (a) Poor Fair Isaac Corporation (FICO) score;

         (b) Too many non-sufficient funds (NSF) or returned payments;

         (c) Poor payment history; or

         (d) Account was charged off (requires new application).

     (2) The travel charge card contractor bank will suspend an account once an undisputed
         transaction remains unpaid for 61 days or more from the billing or closing date on
         the statement in which the unpaid charges first appeared. The contractor bank will
         cancel an account once undisputed transactions remain unpaid 120 days or more
         from the closing date on the statement in which the unpaid charges first appeared.
         An account may also be canceled if it has been suspended twice during the
         preceding 12 months, then becomes past due again.

     (3) The card contractor bank will not suspend any account for disputed charges. Upon
         payment of the undisputed principal amount, the contractor bank will automatically
         reinstate a suspended account. The automatic reinstatements are only allowed on
         suspended accounts less than 120 days delinquent. The travel charge card contractor
         bank maintains a suspension, cancellation, and reinstatement file on all accounts.

     (4) Employees who need to perform official travel but have lost their charge card
         privileges due to cancellation by the bank because of a delinquency or using the card
         for non-official purposes, must charge their common carrier transportation to their
         Mission Area, agency, or staff office centrally billed account. The employee can
         request a travel advance (within the ETS) to pay for other travel related costs or can
         use personal funds and be reimbursed after their trip.

     (5) A cancelled travel charge card account reflects unfavorable past performance. For
         this reason, employees with cancelled travel charge card accounts are considered
         high risk in the repayment of travel advances.




                                            15
(6) In the case of hardship, employees who have lost their travel charge card privileges
    may request written approval for a travel advance on a trip-by-trip basis from their
    agency SATO or CFO.

(7) Consideration of such requests will be made on a case-by-case basis, and approval
    should not be assumed. A written record of all such approvals, as well as the basis
    for each approval, will be maintained by the approving office and a copy forwarded
    to the NFC Administrative Payments Section for system processing. The Office of
    the Inspector General (OIG) must regularly review this record during program
    specific audits.

(8) Employees must comply with this policy by promptly resolving any outstanding
    balance on the travel charge card. The use of personal funds to finance travel
    expenses (except transportation tickets) for official travel is authorized when an
    employee has been cancelled from the use of an official travel charge card. When
    personal funds are used, employees will be reimbursed for qualifying travel
    expenses by submitting a proper travel voucher. Questions regarding travel charge
    cards may be directed to the Departmental Coordinator.


         TABLE 2 – CONTRATOR BANK SUSPENSION AND CANCELLATION
                               STATUSES

     Code     Account Status                          Description
      Z1      Pre-Suspended       - Government Travel account is 45 days past due
                                  - Authorizations are still approved
                                  - Credit Rating will change to Open if payment is
                                    received
      Z2        Suspended         - Government Travel account is 60 days past due
                                  - Decline all authorizations
                                  - Declines reissue
                                  - Pick up Status on Card (automatic)
                                  - Status automatically removed if past due amount
                                    is paid in full
                                  - Credit Rating will change to Open if payment is
                                    received
      Z3       Pre-canceled       - Government Travel account is 120 days past due
                                  - Or Early Closure
                                  - Decline all authorizations
                                  - Declines reissue
                                  - Pick up Status on Card (automatic)
                                  - Status not automatically removed when paid
                                  - This status is never removed by customer service
                                  - Reinstatement request is needed to re-open
                                    account. Reinstatement rules vary by Mission
                                    Area, agency, or staff office.



                                       16
             Code     Account Status                        Description
                                         -
              Z5         Canceled        - Government Travel account is 126 days past due
                                         - OR Closed by credit due to 2nd returned or NSF
                                           Returned payment
                                         - Decline all authorizations
                                         - Declines reissue
                                         - Requires Reinstatement to be reopened



6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  Unless otherwise stated below, the provisions of this regulation follow the delegations of
  authority listed in Section 4, Responsibilities, of the DR 2300-005. The following offices and
  individuals have direct responsibilities for monitoring the use of the travel charge card:

  a.   The Head of the OCFO Financial Policy and Planning, Fiscal Policy Division (FPD)
       will:

       (1) Serve as the Departmental Coordinator;

       (2) Ensure the implementation of statutes and regulations related to use of the travel
           charge card;

       (3) Issue and interpret Departmental policy and procedures on the use of the travel
           charge card;

       (4) Serve as the liaison to the contractor and GSA, with the assistance of the contracting
           officer, on issues dealing with the program;

       (5) Promote standardization, centralization, and automation of the program throughout
           USDA. Establish Departmentwide operating limits for card usage;

       (6) Review, on a periodic basis, any MCCs allowed on travel charge cards; and restrict
           or block any MCCs not appropriate for use during official travel;

       (7)   Monitor Mission Area, agency, and staff office compliance regarding the use of
             travel charge card through the use of data mining and other techniques, in
             compliance with the OMB Circular A-123, Appendix B;

       (8) Review travel charge card usage monthly and alert A/OPCs of trends and instances
           of potential inappropriate use and abuse;

       (9) Promote and maximize travel charge card rebates;




                                              17
     (10) Develop or make available, annual training on the travel charge card policy and use;
          and

     (11) Submit an annual travel charge card management plan and quarterly performance
          reports to OMB.

b.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Human Resources Office (HRO) Heads will:

     (1) Assist managers and supervisors in selecting and implementing appropriate
         administrative actions, including disciplinary and adverse action up to and including
         removal from Federal Service, resulting from misuse or abuse of travel charge card
         and account delinquencies. See DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and
         Conduct;

     (2) Collect necessary information and data as required by the Office of Human Resource
         Management (OHRM) regarding travel charge card misuse and account
         delinquencies and report it quarterly; and

     (3) Ensure supervisors are held accountable for disciplinary actions to employees that
         misuse or abuse their travel charge card.

c.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Heads will:

     (1) Appoint one or more A/OPCs for their organization to meet the requirements of this
         regulation;

     (2) Establish internal procedures to promote the use of the card and to monitor fraud,
         waste, and abuse of the travel charge card;

     (3) Ensure their employees receive information on how the travel charge card program
         operates, proper use of the travel charge card, safeguards to the travel charge card,
         and conveyance of the USDA Zero Tolerance Policy to all cardholders;

     (4) Conduct their program in accordance with the FTR and the current GSA SmartPay
         charge cards contract, by taking advantage of services, technology, and rebates
         offered;

     (5) Ensure proper execution of the travel charge card program by all cardholders within
         their respective Mission Area, agency, or staff office in accordance with the
         provisions of this regulation;

     (6) Ensure Mission Area, agency, and staff office employees take annual travel charge
         card training, which includes how the travel charge card program works, proper use
         of the travel charge card, safeguards for the card, and enforcement of the USDA
         Zero Tolerance Policy to cardholders;




                                            18
(7) Designate managers and supervisors to authorize and approve employee travel, and
    by extension, travel charge card use. Ensure appropriate administrative or
    disciplinary actions are taken when employees misuse or abuse their travel charge
    card;

(8) Assign employee(s) as primary and alternate(s) to act as Level 3 and/or Level 4
    A/OPCs to administer the travel charge card program for IBAs and centrally billed
    accounts (CBAs) within their Mission Area, agency, or staff office and appropriate
    operating unit(s). An example appointment letter and a list of the roles and
    responsibilities for each A/OPC level, are available in Appendix D, Sample A/OPC
    Appointment Letter and Duties. Appointment letters for Level 3 and Level 4
    A/OPCs should be sent to the Departmental Coordinator via email
    (TPM@usda.gov);

(9) Determine which employees are eligible for a travel charge card; and, if necessary,
    then sign the certification block on the Employee Acknowledgment and Acceptance
    Statement. Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Heads may delegate the
    signature authority to travel approving officials;

(10) Ensure employees activate their travel charge cards within 60 days of receipt; and
     take appropriate disciplinary action (i.e., verbal or administrative counseling) for
     those employees who do not activate their cards on time;

(11) Establish procedures to classify and evaluate travelers for appropriate travel charge
     card limits. The limits should be issued based on the frequency and duration of
     official travel, and estimated expenses to be incurred. Mission Areas, agencies, and
     staff offices are generally cautioned about increasing an employee’s travel charge
     card limit to accommodate a traveler who has failed to pay his or her travel charge
     card bill in full or on time;

(12) Establish procedures to periodically review program to identify frequent and
     infrequent travelers and determine whether a cardholder has a need for the travel
     charge card;

(13) Ensure the A/OPC functions are adequately staffed, that the A/OPCs are aware of
     their program responsibilities, and that the A/OPCs complete initial and recurring
     (annual) training;

(14) Establish procedures for use and monitoring your Mission Area, agency, or staff
     office CBA, including the requirement to reconcile the account each month, to make
     sure the account is paid in a timely manner, and to mitigate delinquent account
     balances;

(15) Establish an internal Mission Area, agency, or staff office reporting process to
     ensure the results of A/OPCs monitoring activity are transmitted to a central point in




                                        19
         the Mission Area, agency, or staff office. Also, document examination and referral
         activity related to travel charge card misuse, to include disciplinary actions taken;

     (16) Establish administrative procedures for employees detailed to other Mission Area,
          agencies, or staff offices or Departments. If the employee continues to travel using a
          USDA issued travel charge card, then the Mission Area, agency, or staff office must
          have procedures to review travel charge card use and take administrative action for
          misuse and delinquency. If adequate procedures cannot be established, then the
          travel charge card must be deactivated or cancelled until the employee’s detail has
          ended;

     (17) Establish an administrative review process to provide due process to employees that
          have delinquent travel charge card balances or are potentially involved in
          misuse/abuse of their card. The process should include what administrative actions,
          if any, will be imposed on delinquent cardholders; and

     (18) Before amounts are offset from an employee’s pay for travel debts owed to the
          Government, due process requirements must be satisfied.

         Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should use Form Agriculture Department
         (AD)-343, Payroll Action Request, to initiate billings for employees who are paid
         through the NFC for items other than salary overpayments, such as travel debts. The
         completed form must be submitted to the address preprinted on the form. The
         applicable office should retain a copy for their files.

         After NFC receives and processes Form AD-343, they will begin due process
         notification to the employee, following the requirements contained in Federal Salary
         Offset, 7 CFR Part 3, Subpart G; or Pay Administration – Collection by Offset From
         Indebted Government Employees, 5 CFR Part 550, Subpart K; as applicable. NFC
         will produce and mail Form NFC-631, Demand Notice for Payment, to the
         employee. The debt package shows the amount owed and the Mission Area, agency,
         or staff office intent to collect the delinquent amount from the employee’s disposable
         pay prior to initiating the action.

         Provide the employee an opportunity to:

         (a) Inspect records regarding the claim;

         (b) Make a written agreement with the contractor bank to repay the delinquent
             amount; and

         (c) Review the decision to collect the amount through the offset program with
             appropriate agency personnel.

d.   Managers and Supervisors will:




                                             20
     (1) Identify lower level A/OPCs by sending an official appointment letter to the Level 3
         (or Level 4) Mission Area, agency, or staff office A/OPC. An example appointment
         letter and a list of the roles and responsibilities for each A/OPC level, are available
         in Appendix D;

         NOTE: If A/OPC responsibilities are maintained at the mission area (Level 3),
         additional delegations to lower level A/OPCs is not mandatory or necessary.

     (2) Authorize the issuance of travel charge cards to employees, as needed;

     (3) Ensure employees are properly utilizing their travel charge cards;

     (4) Implement appropriate administrative actions to address instances of delinquencies
         greater than 60 days, and card misuse, or abuse;

     (5) Notify employee of any questionable transactions or delinquencies; give the
         employee the opportunity to explain the charges or delinquency; and maintain a
         written record or case file of the notification and the explanation received from the
         employee;

     (6) Consult with the servicing HRO to select and implement appropriate administrative
         actions, including disciplinary and adverse action up to and including removal from
         Federal Service, resulting from employee misuse of travel charge card and account
         delinquencies; and maintain documentation of referrals to the Mission Area, agency,
         or staff office servicing HRO and document resolution of the incident;

     (7) Ensure the A/OPC deactivates or cancels the card if there is a pattern of misuse or
         abuse or insufficient explanation for repeated delinquencies;

     (8) Notify the A/OPC when an employee is transferring between Mission Areas,
         agencies, or staff offices within the USDA; and

     (9) Sign the AD-139, Final Salary Payment Report, and notify the A/OPC when an
         employee leaves USDA.

e.   Agency/Organization Program Coordinators (A/OPC) will:

     (1) Acknowledge their appointment as an A/OPC and comply with requirements
         identified on their official appointment letter;

     (2) Complete initial and recurring (annual) training (USDA and GSA designated
         courses);

     (3) Be familiar with the responsibilities listed within this regulation, those on their
         appointment letter (see Appendix D), and applicable courses available via the US
         Bank Access Online Training Portal;



                                             21
(4) Regularly utilize the contractor bank’s online tools to manage and monitor the travel
    charge card program for potential card misuse and delinquency trends;

(5) Provide the contractor bank a listing of the primary and alternate A/OPC names,
    mailing addresses and telephone numbers, and forward a copy of this information to
    the Departmental Coordinator in the OCFO Fiscal Policy Division at
    TPM@cfo.usda.gov;

(6) Make available to cardholders a copy of the Departmental and Mission Area,
    agency, or staff office specific travel charge card regulation and guidance;

(7) Complete sections designated for Mission Area, agency, or staff office information
    and authorization on the employee travel charge card application;

(8) Forward the original copy of the application to card vendor, via the contractor bank’s
    electronic access system, fax, or email when required or necessary;

(9) Retain a file of the signed Employee Acceptance and Acknowledgment Statement
    (in Appendix E, Acknowledgement and Acceptance Statement), along with a copy of
    the employee’s application (unless submitted electronically), for all employees who
    are cardholders until the employee transfers or retires;

(10) Monitor the contractor bank’s monthly charges and delinquency reports provided via
     their electronic access system (see Appendix F, US Bank Access Online Reports).
     Use electronic and web-based reports whenever possible to reduce paperwork per
     the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C. Chapter 35);

    (a) Review contractor’s reports to identify employees who:

         1    Have left USDA;

         2    Have violated the USDA Zero Tolerance Policy;

         3    Have had additional administrative restrictions placed on their accounts;
              or

         4    Are using the travel charge card while not on official travel;

    (b) Review cardholder spending limits quarterly; and

    (c) Ensure cardholders are assigned to the correct hierarchy;

(11) Review OCFO data mining reports of potential misuse for your Mission Area,
     agency, or staff office cardholders; and report review results to OCFO within
     established and directed timeframes;



                                       22
(12) Notify the appropriate manager, supervisor, and the employee, per Mission Area,
     agency, or staff office procedures, of possible misuse or delinquencies of 60 days or
     more. Sample notification letters are available in Appendix H, Examples of the
     Memoranda to Employees from the A/OPC;

(13) Notify the contractor bank of any mission-related extenuating circumstances for
     which an employee’s delinquent account should not be suspended.

(14) Monitor monthly delinquency reports for employees who are in a pre-suspension
     status; and forward reports to supervisors for appropriate administrative action,
     including counseling;

(15) Annually review spending limits of travel charge cards above the Departmental
     default limit ($7,500.00 for unrestricted accounts and $3,500.00 for restricted
     accounts) to determine whether the higher limit is still needed;

(16) Complete a hierarchy change request worksheet to transfer an employee’s account
     between USDA Mission Areas, agencies, or staff offices (see Appendix G, Inter-
     Departmental Hierarchy Transfer Request Worksheet);

(17) Deactivate an account when notified an employee’s card has been suspended
     because of inappropriate use or delinquency; or when an employee leaves, retires or
     transfers to another Government agency. Deactivation is done by reducing the
     spending limit to $1.00 or temporarily or permanently closing the account using the
     contractor bank’s electronic access system;

(18) Reactivate travel charge cards when employees are authorized for travel;

(19) Suspend, cancel, or void accounts under their purview (the GSA Contracting Officer
     also has this authority); maintain documentation of the reason for the suspension,
     cancellation, or voiding of the account; and notify the OIG and the contractor bank
     of potential fraud;

(20) Request re-instatement of a suspended or cancelled IBA by submitting an email (to
     the Departmental Program Coordinator at TPM@usda.gov (only Level 3 A/OPCs
     may submit the request; lower level A/OPCs should submit the request to the next
     higher level A/OPC). The email should include an updated signed copy of the
     USDA Government Travel Charge Card Acceptance and Acknowledgement
     Statement (Appendix E), a recent copy of the AgLearn Travel Charge Card training
     certification (dated within the last 30 days), and answers to the following questions:

    (a) Why does the cardholder’s account need to be re-opened?

    (b) Did the employee receive supervisory approval to have the account re-opened?




                                        23
    (c) Was the cardholder notified of past due amount prior to account becoming
        suspended or cancelled?

    (d) What is the current balance due on the card?

    (e) What is the past due amount on the account?

    (f) When will the past due amount be paid in full?

    (g) What actions will the employee take to prevent account from becoming
        suspended or cancelled again?

    (h) Does the employee have voucher(s) pending for payment?

    (i) If so, then how much is the voucher payment(s)?

    (j) What is the expected pay date of the pending voucher(s)?

    (k) What caused the delay in paying the balance due to the card?

(21) Inform new applicants that credit scores may be obtained by the contractor bank, if
     given authorization. If authorization is not given or the applicant’s credit score is
     below the threshold (660) set by the OMB Appendix B to Circular No. A-123, then a
     card can be issued with more stringent restrictions.

    (a) The USDA will work with the contractor bank to implement one or more of the
        additional restrictions listed in Section 6.3.2, First time travel charge card
        applicants with a credit score less than 660, of Appendix B to Circular A-123,
        which include:

         1    Reduce the overall dollar limit for the card;

         2    Reduce the monthly card limit;

         3    Limit (or further limit, if applicable) the types of transactions allowed;

         4    Issue a pre-paid, stored value, or declining balance card that automatically
              restricts dollar amount and transaction types;

         5    Limit (or further limit, if applicable) the monthly or cycle limit on the
              account;

         6    Limit (or further limit, if applicable) the length of time a card remains
              active, such as for the length of time in travel status only; and

         7    Restrict (or further restrict, if applicable) use at ATMs.



                                        24
    (b) The USDA staff will not have access to the applicants’ credit score. Restricted
        cardholders may request their score directly from the contractor bank using the
        customer service number provided on the back of the travel charge card.

    (c) Procedures to move from restricted to unrestricted status have been developed
        with the contractor bank. Cardholders can consult with their A/OPC to obtain
        the process to re-evaluate their credit score after 1-year.

(22) Manage and monitor CBA usage; to include approving use of the account,
     reconciling the account monthly, and ensuring the account is paid in a timely
     manner. This account is charged directly to the Mission Area, agency, or staff office
     and therefore must be closely and carefully monitored:

    (a) The maximum allowable 61+ day delinquency rate for CBAs is fifteen percent
        (15%). The delinquency rate is reported monthly, when the US Bank billing
        cycle closes. Per OMB Circular A-123, Appendix B, the delinquency rate for
        charge cards equals the total payments past due at the end of a reporting period
        divided by outstanding balances on all accounts at that time;

    (b) The third consecutive time a Mission Area, agency, or staff office exceeds the
        established maximum delinquency rate, the CBA will be “suspended.” The
        Departmental Coordinator will temporarily close the CBA if the maximum
        delinquency rate is exceeded for a second 3-consecutive-month period within
        12 months.

(23) Request a suspended or closed CBA be re-opened:

    (a) If the account is suspended or closed by the contractor bank or suspended by
        the Department Coordinator, then email the request to the Departmental
        Coordinator. Include the information below in the request:

         1    Current amount over 60 days delinquent;

         2    Amount to be paid within 48 hours of account opening; and

         3    When payment(s) will be processed.

    (b) If the account is closed by the Departmental Coordinator, then the Mission
        Area, agency, or staff office CFO or SATO must send a request memorandum
        to the USDA Associate CFO for Financial Policy and Planning, detailing the
        information below:

         1    Why the account had to be closed;

         2    Why the account should be re-opened;



                                       25
              3    Corrective actions taken or to be taken to prevent future delinquencies;
                   and

              4    Current delinquent amount.

f.   Employees who apply for and are issued a travel charge card will:

     (1) Assume the responsibility to use the card for official travel purposes and pay their
         charges in a timely manner;

     (2) Employ prudent travel practices and to observe rules and regulations governing
         travel as set forth in the FTR, the ATR, the “USDA Zero Tolerance Policy,” and
         Mission Area, agency, and staff office specific policies and procedures;

     (3) Complete the USDA Travel Charge Card Training;

     (4) Complete the travel charge card account application;

     (5) Complete and sign the Employee Acknowledgment Statement recognizing receipt
         and understanding of the policies and procedures related to the use of the travel
         charge card;

     (6) Obtain the approving official or immediate supervisor signature, as designated by
         their Mission Area, agency, or staff office, on the Employee Acknowledgment
         Statement;

     (7) Forward the application and acknowledgment statement to their A/OPC for
         processing. If the A/OPC is unknown, then contact the Departmental Coordinator;

     (8) Read and adhere to the information contained in the contractor bank’s Cardholder
         Guide for Travel;

     (9) Activate the travel charge card within 60 days of receipt;

     (10) Update their ETS profile with the travel card account information;

     (11) Use the card to pay for their own official travel-related expenses only; and will not
          use the card for another employee expenses (e.g., holding a room reservation), or
          allow a family member to use the card;

     (12) Conform to the Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive
          Branch, 5 CFR Part 2635. As a Federal employee, standards of conduct for public
          trust positions apply. The standards require employees to pay each financial
          obligation in a proper and timely manner;




                                             26
(13) File necessary travel vouchers using the ETS, within 5 business days after their
     official business trip ends, to make a payment directly to the travel charge card via
     split-disbursement;

(14) Promptly pay the full account balance due, unless in dispute, by the date indicated on
     the monthly statement. Employees are not relieved of the obligation to pay the
     travel charge card bill, despite any delay in their Mission Area, agency, or staff
     office reimbursing their claim on travel voucher;

(15) Pay for all items billed to the card, unless a charge is disputed, or the card was
     reported lost or stolen;

(16) Secure the travel charge card in the same manner as a personal charge card. The
     card must not be stored or kept by anyone other than the employee;

(17) Keep their travel charge card account personal contact information current with the
     contractor bank (e.g., personal contact information and official email address);

(18) Use the contractor’s bank electronic system to access account to make payments,
     changes to mailing address, telephone numbers, or email address. Travel charge
     cardholder’s billing statements and other charge card correspondence should not be
     sent to the official duty station address;

(19) Contact the contractor bank to dispute charges they did not make or any
     unrecognizable charges. Disputes must be filed in writing within 60 days of the date
     the charge first appears on the billing statement. The contractor bank can be reached
     by calling the customer service number provided on the monthly billing statement or
     on the back of the travel charge card. The contractor bank will need the following
     information:

    (a) Employee name and account number;

    (b) Reference number of the disputed charge;

    (c) Establishment where charge was incurred;

    (d) Amount of the charge;

    (e) Statement date; and

    (f) Reason for dispute.

(20) Notify the A/OPC when transferring between USDA Mission Area, agency, or staff
     office; and

(21) Complete annual travel charge card policy training.



                                         27
  g.   The National Finance Center (NFC) Head, the Departmental Coordinator, and A/OPCs
       will:

       (1) Following due process, the NFC will initiate procedures to collect undisputed
           delinquent amounts from an employee’s disposable pay. Salary offset from the
           employee’s disposable pay may not exceed 15% of disposable pay unless the
           cardholder authorizes a higher amount. In addition to the amount owed to the
           contractor bank, a processing fee will be charged to the employee to recover the
           NFC’s processing costs; and

       (2) The USDA will not initiate a salary offset if the employee filed a timely voucher and
           it has not been paid. Upon receipt of written notice of the intent to administer salary
           offset, the employee must inform NFC in writing within 5 business days if he/she
           has not been reimbursed, then follow the instructions provided in their salary offset
           letter. For travel debts owed to the travel charge card vendor, see the salary offset
           procedures the USDA and the contractor bank established in Appendix I, NFC
           Salary Offset.


7. INQUIRIES

  Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should direct questions and inquiries regarding this
  DR to the OCFO at the Travel Policy Management (TPM) mailbox: TPM@usda.gov.


                                            -END-




                                               28
                             APPENDIX A

                ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AD      Agriculture Department (Prefix for Departmental Forms)
A/OPC   Agency/Organization Program Coordinator
ATM     Automated Teller Machine
ATR     Agriculture Travel Regulation
CBA     Centrally Billed Account
CDW     Collision Damage Waiver
CFO     Chief Financial Officer
CFPB    Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
CFR     Code of Federal Regulations
COOP    Continuity of Operations
CPP     City Pair Program
DR      Departmental Regulation
DTMO    Defense Travel Management Office
ETS     Electronic Travel System
FICO    Fair Isaac Corporation
FPD     Fiscal Policy Division
FTR     Federal Travel Regulation
GARS    Government Administrative Rate Supplement
GRS     General Records Schedule
GSA     General Services Administration
HRO     Human Resources Office
IBA     Individually Billed Account
ID      Identification
IOD     Insights on Demand
IMTC    Innovative Mobility Technology Company
LDW     Loss Damage Waiver
M&IE    Meals and Incidental Expenses
MCC     Merchant Category Code
NARA    National Archives and Records Administration
NFC     National Finance Center
NSF     Non-Sufficient Funds
OCFO    Office of the Chief Financial Officer
OHRM    Office of Human Resource Management
OIG     Office of the Inspector General
OMB     Office of Management and Budget
OPM     Office of Personnel Management
PCS     Permanent Change of Station
P.L.    Public Law
SATO    Senior Accountable Travel Official
SF      Standard Form
SSN     Social Security Number



                                  A-1
TBR      Total Business Reporting (US Bank Reporting Hierarchy or levels)
TDY      Temporary Duty
TMC      Travel Management Center
TNC      Transportation Network Company
TPM      Travel Policy Management
TTRA     Travel and Transportation Reform Act
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture
VRBO     Vacation Rental By Owner
YCA      Standard City Pair Airfare




                                   A-2
                                          APPENDIX B

                                         DEFINITIONS


Abuse. Use of a government payment solution to buy authorized items, but at terms (e.g., price,
quantity) that are excessive, for a questionable government need, or both. Examples of such
transactions would include purchase of items such as a day planner costing $300 rather than one
costing $45, allowable refreshments at an excessive cost, and year-end or other bulk purchases of
supplies or services for a questionable government need. (Source: GSA, Glossary of the
common GSA SmartPay program terminology “SmartPay Glossary”)

Account Deactivation. A method to temporarily block the cardholder's ability to make
transactions on the account without canceling the account altogether. While the account is
deactivated, any transaction that the cardholder attempts to make will be declined at the point of
sale. The agency can deactivate and reactivate an account through the charge card vendor's
Electronic Access System (EAS) or by calling the charge card vendor. (Source: OMB,
Appendix B to Circular No. A-123, A Risk Management Framework for Government Charge
Card Programs, August 27, 2019)

Agency. Organizational units of the Department, other than staff offices, whose Heads report to
officials within the Office of the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Under Secretaries, Assistant
Secretaries, and Assistant to the Secretary. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental
Directives System, January 4, 2018)

Agency/Organization Program Coordinator (A/OPC). This individual serves as the focal point
for answering management, task order administration, establishing and maintaining accounts,
and issuance and destruction of cards. The A/OPC oversees the card program(s) for his or her
Agency/Organization and establishes guidelines. The A/OPC helps set up accounts; serves as
liaison between the cardholder and the purchase card contractor; provides on-going advice;
audits purchase card accounts as required; and keeps necessary account information current.
(Source: OMB, Appendix B to Circular No. A-123)

Automated Teller Machine (ATM) Services. Government contractor-provided ATM services
that allow cash withdrawals from participating ATMs to be charged to a Government contractor-
issued charge card. (Source: FTR, Subchapter A, Introduction, 41 CFR Part 300-3, Glossary of
Terms, Last Reviewed: January 29, 2021)

Billing Error. A reflection on or with a periodic statement of an extension of credit that is not
made to the consumer or to a person who has actual, implied, or apparent authority to use the
consumer's credit card or open-end credit plan. (Source: Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
(CFPB), 12 CFR Part 1026, Truth in Lending (Regulation Z), Subpart B – Open End Credit)

Cancelled Account. An account that is canceled due to an undisputed balance remaining unpaid
120 calendar days after the date of the statement of account on which the charge first appeared.




                                                 B-1
An account may also be canceled for numerous suspensions. (Source: GSA, SmartPay
Glossary)

Cash Advances. The withdrawal of cash from an Automated Teller Machine (ATM) or financial
institution, up to a certain limit. (Source: GSA, SmartPay Glossary)

Centrally Billed Account (CBA). A card or account established by the charge card vendor at the
request of the mission area, agency, or staff office. These may be card or cardless accounts.
Payments are made directly to the charge card vendor by the agency. (Source: OMB, Appendix
B to Circular No. A-123)

City-Pair Fares (YCA). The term used for the airfares under the City Pair Program; identifies a
highly discounted unrestricted fare on a U.S. flag carrier, under contract for a Government
traveler on official travel. (Source: GSA, Airfare Rates - City Pairs Programs, Resource
Library, Dual Fares, Last Reviewed: July 15, 2020)

Data Mining. An automated process used to scan databases to detect patterns, trends, or
anomalies for use in risk management, spend patterns, and other areas of analysis. More
specifically, travel charge card transactions oversight process used to help identify instances of
potential inappropriate card use. (Source: GSA, SmartPay Glossary)

Delinquency. An undisputed charge card account balance that is unpaid for more than 61 days
past the statement date; a debt for which payment is overdue, according to an established
payment schedule. (Source: GSA, SmartPay Glossary)

Disposable Pay. That part of current basic pay, special pay, incentive pay, retired pay, retainer
pay, and in the case of an employee not entitled to basic pay, other authorized pay remaining
after the deduction of any amount required by law to be withheld (other than deductions to
execute garnishment orders in accordance with 5 CFR §581 and §582). Among legally required
deductions that must be applied first to determine disposable pay are levies pursuant to the
Internal Revenue Code (Title 26 U.S.C.) and deductions described in 5 CFR §581.105(b)
through (f). (5 CFR §550.1103). (Source: OMB, Appendix B to Circular No. A-123)

Dispute. A situation in which a customer agency or organization or account holder questions
the validity of a transaction that was registered to an agency or organization account. (Source:
GSA, SmartPay Glossary)

External Fraud. Any felonious act of corruption or attempt to cheat the Government or corrupt
the Government's agents by someone other than Government officials. Otherwise known as
third party fraud. (Source: OMB, Appendix B to Circular No. A-123)

Fraud. See Internal Fraud and External Fraud.

Fraudulent Activity. The use of government payment solutions to transact business that is not




                                                B-2
sanctioned, not authorized, not in one’s official government capacity, not for the purpose for
which the card was issued, or not as part of official government business. (Source: GSA,
SmartPay Glossary)

Ghost Card. A charge card number that is specific to an agency or organization or an entity
within an agency or organization. Purchases made are then charged back to the agency or
organization or the entirety within the agency or organization to which the charge card number
was issued. (Source: GSA, SmartPay Glossary)

Individually Billed Account (IBA). A government contractor-issued charge card used by
authorized individuals to pay for official travel- and transportation-related expenses for which
the contractor (bank) bills the employee, and for which the individual is liable to pay.
Individually Billed Accounts may only be issued to Federal employees or employees of Tribes or
Tribal Organizations. (Source: GSA, SmartPay Glossary)

Infrequent Traveler. Unless otherwise determined by agency guidance, an employee who travels
less than three times over a 12-month period. NOTE: Once a virtual account or card solution is
available for USDA travelers, this definition will become obsolete.

Innovative Mobility Technology Company (IMTC). An organization, including a corporation,
limited liability company, partnership, sole proprietorship, or any other entity, that applies
technology to expand and enhance available transportation choices, better manages demand for
transportation services, or provides alternatives to driving alone. (i.e., ZipCars, Bike Share, etc.).
(Source: FTR, 41 CFR Part 300-3, Glossary of Terms)

Interim Travel Voucher. A weekly, bi-weekly or monthly voucher filed by an employee on
extended TDY (for more than 45 consecutive days) to be reimbursed for official travel expenses.

Internal Fraud. Any felonious act of corruption or attempt to cheat the Government or corrupt
the Government's agents by Government Purchase Charge Card Program officials. Use of the
Government purchase, travel, fleet or integrated charge card(s) to transact business that is not
sanctioned, not authorized, not in one's official government capacity, not for the purpose for
which the card was issued, not as part of official government business. (Source: OMB,
Appendix B to Circular No. A-123)

Merchant Category Code (MCC). A four-digit code used to identify the type of business a
merchant conducts (e.g., gas stations, restaurants, airlines). The merchant selects its MCC with
their bank. The code controls what purchases are allowable. (Source: GSA, SmartPay Glossary).

Mission Area. A group of agencies with related functions that report to the same Under or
Assistant Secretary. Research, Education, and Economics (REE) is an example of a Mission
Area. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-001)

Misuse (Inappropriate Use). Unintentional use of the purchase, travel, fleet and/or integrated
charge card in violation of the Federal Acquisition Regulation, Defense Federal Acquisition
Regulation, FTR, Agency Supplements, or Agency Policies/Procedures. These actions are the



                                                 B-3
result of ignorance and/or carelessness, lacking intent, to include honest mistakes. (e.g., for
personal travel expenses, excessive cash advances, obtaining cash advances from ATMs located in a
casino or other gaming establishments, using the card at a commercial vendor to procure services for
official travel, like Expedia, Hotwire, Priceline, getaroom.com, and Hotels.com). (Source:
OMB, Appendix B to Circular No. A-123)

Non-refundable fare. A fare offered by a private-sector supplier of air, rail or bus transportation.
This type of fare will not be refunded if a trip is cancelled.

Official Travel. Travel under an official travel authorization from an employee’s official station or
other authorized point of departure to a temporary duty location and return from a temporary duty
location, between two temporary duty locations, or relocation at the direction of a Federal agency.
(Source: FTR, 41 CFR Part 300-3, Glossary of Terms)

Official Travel Expense. An authorized expense incurred as a result of official travel. Authority
to incur travel expenses is generally authorized in the travel order.

Pre-trip Voucher. A voucher filed, in advance of trip start date, to be reimbursed for an official
travel expense (e.g., airfare or lodging).

Restricted Card. A Travel card issued to an applicant with a low creditworthiness score or an
applicant who refuses a credit check and contains more stringent controls (i.e. ATM withdrawals
are not allowed). (Source: GSA, SmartPay Glossary)

Salary Offset. The collection of an undisputed, delinquent amount via a direct deduction from
an employee’s payroll disbursement or retirement annuity on behalf of the Contractor. Offsets
are normally initiated subsequent to the employee’s failure to pay their account on a timely basis.
(Source: GSA, SmartPay Glossary)

Single-Use Account. An electronic, charge card-based payment solution that leverages a single
16-digit virtual account number for each payment. The limit on each account is set to the specific
payment amount. (Source: GSA, SmartPay Glossary)

Staff Office. Departmental administrative offices whose heads report to officials within the
Office of the Secretary. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-001)

Suspension. The process by which an account is deactivated due to delinquency or multiple pre-
suspension actions. Temporary termination of travel charge card privileges after the travel charge
account is 60 calendar days past the closing date of the billing statement. (Source: GSA,
SmartPay Glossary)

Training. Annual (calendar year) requirement for program participants to ensure they understand
the regulations and procedures regarding the travel charge card and know the consequences of
inappropriate actions (e.g., fraud, misuse, abuse).

Transportation Network Company (TNC). A corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or
other entity, that uses a digital network to connect riders to drivers affiliated with the entity in


                                                  B-4
order for the driver to transport the rider using a vehicle owned, leased, or otherwise authorized
for use by the driver to a point chosen by the rider; and does not include a shared-expense
carpool or vanpool arrangement that is not intended to generate profit for the driver. Certain
jurisdictions may have limits or prohibit the operation or use of TNCs. Federal employees are
expected to follow all laws, including those related to TNCs, as well as choose the most cost-
effective level of service. (e.g., Uber, Lyft). (Source: FTR, 41 CFR Part 300-3, Glossary of
Terms)

Travel Advance. Prepayment of a percentage of estimated travel expenses provided to an
employee via electronic funds transfer. (Source: FTR, 41 CFR Part 300-3, Glossary of Terms)

Travel Charge Card. An individually or centrally billed, government contractor-issued charge
card used by authorized individuals to pay for travel- and transportation-related expenses in
compliance with the applicable regulations and in support of official government business.
(Source: OMB, Appendix B to Circular No. A-123)

Travel Management Service (TMS). A service for booking common carrier (e.g., air, rail, and
bus confirmations and seat assignments), lodging accommodations, and car rental services;
fulfilling (i.e., ticketing) reservations; providing basic management information on those
activities; and meeting other requirements as specified in §301-73.106 of this title. A TMS may
include a travel management center (TMC), Commercial Ticket Office (CTO), an electronically
available system, other commercial methods of arranging travel, or an in-house system. (Source:
FTR, 41 CFR Part 300-3, Glossary of Terms)

Oversight Insights on Demand (IOD). An artificial intelligence powered audit and risk
management platform that analyzes 100% of charge card spend data, regardless of purchase
method or source system, to automatically identify waste and misuse across the organization.
(Source: Oversight website)

Virtual Cards. One time use account numbers that may be used during a limited time, for a
limited amount and possibly for a specific vendor (e.g. single-use accounts, “ghost” cards).
(Source: GSA, SmartPay Glossary)

Travel Voucher. A written request, supported by documentation and receipts where applicable, for
reimbursement of expenses incurred in the performance of official travel, including permanent
change of station (PCS) travel. (Source: FTR, 41 CFR Part 300-3, Glossary of Terms)




                                                B-5
                                        APPENDIX C

                               AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


5 U.S.C. § 5701, Definitions

Commercial Garnishment of Federal Employees’ Pay, 5 CFR Part 582

Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), 12 CFR Part 1026, Truth in Lending (Regulation
Z), Subpart B – Open End Credit

Defense Travel Management Office (DTMO), U.S. Government Rental Car Program website

Federal Salary Offset, 7 CFR Part 3, Subpart G

Federal Travel Regulation (FTR), Subchapter A, Introduction, 41 CFR Part 300-3, Glossary of
Terms

Federal Travel Regulation (FTR), 41 CFR Parts 301-304

   41 CFR Part 301-10.450, What are the policies when authorized to rent a vehicle for official
   travel?

   41 CFR Part 301-50, Arranging for Travel Services

   41 CFR Part 301-51, Paying Travel Expenses

   41 CFR Part 301-52, Claiming Reimbursement

   41 CFR Part 301-54, Collection of Undisputed Delinquent Amounts Owed to the Contractor
   Issuing the Individually Billed Travel Charge Card

   41 CFR Part 301-70, Internal Policy and Procedure Requirements

   41 CFR Part 301-71, Agency Travel Accountability Requirements

   41 CFR Part 301-76, Collection of Undisputed Delinquent Amounts Owed to the Contractor
   Issuing the Individually Billed Travel Charge Card

Government Charge Card Abuse Act of 2012, P.L. 112-194, October 5, 2012

GSA, Airfare Rates - City Pairs Programs, Resource Library, Dual Fares

GSA, Glossary of the common GSA SmartPay program terminology “SmartPay Glossary”
website



                                             C-1
GSA, SmartPay Training for Account Holders website

GSA, SmartPay Travel for Agency/Organization Program Coordinators website

GSA SmartPay 3 Training – Travel Card Agency/Organization Program Coordinators handout,
dated November 06, 2018

Hotel and Motel Fire Safety Act of 1990, P.L. 101-391, September 25, 1990

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), General Records Schedule (GRS) 1.1,
Financial Management and Reporting Records, Item 090, Government purchase card and travel
credit card application and approval records, April 2020

NARA, GRS 5.1, Common Office Records, Item 010, Administrative records maintained in any
agency office, July 2017

OMB, Appendix B to Circular No. A-123, A Risk Management Framework for Government
Charge Card Programs, August 27, 2019

OMB, Memorandum M-13-21, Implementation of the Government Charge Card Abuse
Prevention Act of 2012, September 6, 2013

Office of Personnel Management (OPM), SF-85P, Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions,
December 2017

OPM, SF-86, Questionnaire for National Security Positions, November 2016

Oversight website

Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, P.L. 104-13, May 22, 1995, codified at 44 U.S.C. Chapter 35

Pay Administration – Collection by Offset From Indebted Government Employees, 5 CFR Part
550, Subpart K

Prompt Payment, 5 CFR Part 1315

Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch, 5 CFR Part 2635

Travel and Transportation Reform Act (TTRA) of 1998, P.L. 105-264, 112 Stat. 2350, October
19, 1998

Travel, Transportation, and Subsistence, 5 U.S.C. Part III, Subpart D, Chapter 57

USDA, AD-139, Final Salary Payment Report, May 2001

USDA, AD-343, Payroll Action Request, November 1995


                                                C-2
USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System, January 4, 2018

USDA, DR 2300-005, Agricultural Travel Regulation, December 8, 2015

USDA, DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007

USDA, NFC-631, Demand Notice for Payment, August 8, 2018

USDA, OCFO, USDA Travel Express website




                                            C-3
                                         APPENDIX D

                  SAMPLE A/OPC APPOINTMENT LETTER AND DUTIES


TO: (Address letter to the designated individual)


FROM: Appointing Official Name


SUBJECT: Appointment as Agency/Organization Program Coordinator (A/OPC)


You are hereby appointed as a Level (insert level) A/OPC for (insert Mission Area, agency, or
staff office).

As the Travel Charge Card Program A/OPC for (insert Mission Area, agency, or staff office), you
are responsible for the day-to-day management of travel charge card accounts and oversight for
the program as outlined in the Federal Travel Regulation (FTR), the Department‘s Departmental
Regulation (DR) 2300-001, Government Travel Charge Card Regulation, the Agency [or Mission
Area or staff office] Travel Regulation, and any subsequent guidance and internal procedures.

You must become thoroughly familiar with your role and responsibilities; giving specific
attention to the FTR Part 301-70, Internal Policy and Procedures Requirements, Subpart H,
Policies and Procedures Relating to Mandatory Use of the Government Contractor-Issued Travel
Charge Card for Official Travel, Sections 301-70.700 through 708).

Furthermore, you are required to complete and review the following information annually:

    a.   The USDA Travel Charge Card and GSA A/OPC training courses currently available in
         AgLearn (or via GSA SmartPay);

    b.   The Travel Charge Card trainings listed on the GSA SmartPay® 3 Training – Travel
         Card Agency/Organization Program Coordinators handout (dated November 06, 2018)
         and available from US Bank’s Access Online website; and

    c.   The Oversight Insights on Demand (IOD) training available on the US Bank Access
         Online website and review the Oversight Help Center Resources information from the
         IOD website.

As the (insert Mission Area, agency, or staff office) Level 3 A/OPC, you are the liaison
responsible for establishing, administering, maintaining, and reporting to the Department Level 2
A/OPC, through the appropriate chain of command, for the Travel Charge Card Program
(Program). Other agency [or Mission Area or staff office] Program participants should be aware
of the resources available to manage and understand the Program. In addition to information



                                                 D-1
which may be available on your agency [or Mission Area or staff office] website, there is
information available on the Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) USDA Travel Express
website. https://www.ocfo.usda.gov/TravelExpress.

After completing the designated AgLearn training courses, and reviewing the regulations and
other information listed above, please acknowledge that you have read, understand, and accept
responsibilities as an A/OPC. This appointment will remain in effect until rescinded, you depart
the agency (or Mission Area or staff office], or you separate from Federal Service.


         A/OPC ACKNOWLEDGMENT and ACCEPTANCE STATEMENT

I acknowledge my appointment as a Level (insert level) A/OPC for (insert Mission Area,
agency, or staff office). I have read and understand the policies and regulations that govern
the use of the Government Travel Charge Card; including the FTR 301-70, Subpart H, as
listed above. I also completed the required USDA Travel Charge Card and GSA A/OPC
training courses currently available in AgLearn (or via the GSA SmartPay Training for
Account Holders website); the Oversight Insights on Demand (IOD) training available on the
US Bank Access Online website; and reviewed the Oversight Help Center Resources
information from the IOD website. I further certify that I have read, understand, and accept
responsibilities as an A/OPC, as outlined in the Department’s Government Travel Charge
Card Regulation and other applicable guidance.



__________________________                                          ________________
A/OPC Signature                                                           Date


__________________________
Typed A/OPC Name




                                                 D-2
          TRAVEL CHARGE CARD A/OPC ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

There are multiple levels of Agency/Organization Program Coordinators (A/OPCs) within the
travel charge card program. The roles and responsibilities of the A/OPCs consist of the topics
documented in the following pages. Please note this is not an all-encompassing list, as new topics
and concerns within the travel charge card program occur frequently.


1. Level 2 Travel Charge Card Program A/OPC.

   The Level 2 A/OPC serves the USDA at a high-level, providing guidance, policy, and
   oversight for the travel charge card program (Program) within the USDA. The USDA has a
   very large Program; one of the Level 2 A/OPCs primary responsibility is to manage program
   risk. This is accomplished by routinely analyzing the Program, strengthening programmatic
   controls, and maintaining a close relationship with the card issuing vendor. The Level 2
   A/OPC is not responsible for providing individual help-desk support to the various program
   areas within each Mission Area, agency, or staff office. Each Mission Area, agency, and staff
   office is responsible for the proper management and oversight of their respective Programs.

   Level 2 A/OPCs will:

   a.   Ensure the USDA’s Program follows OMB Circular A-123, Appendix B including:

        (1) Develop and maintaining the annual Charge Card Management Plan;

        (2) Establish training requirements;

        (3) Implement risk management controls, policies and procedures including:

             (a) Maximize refunds while minimizing risk;

             (b) Monitor Split Disbursement;

             (c) Monitor Salary Offset; and

             (d) Maintain and report data and performance metrics quarterly;

   b.   Monitor Program issues, including pending legislation related to travel to provide
        accurate information and policy updates; and

   c.   Analyze account activity to prevent unauthorized use and misuse including:

        (1) Restrict questionable Merchant Category Codes (MCCs);

        (2) Ensure accounts are being used for authorized travel expenditures only;




                                                 D-3
        (3) Ensure unused non-refundable airline tickets are utilized before expiration;

        (4) Monitor refundable and non-refundable airline tickets;

        (5) Ensure ATM withdrawals and travel advances are appropriate and do not result in
            delinquencies; and

        (6) Monitor and reduce account delinquencies:

            (a) Work with the contractor bank to provide A/OPC training;

            (b) Ensure agency A/OPCs and cardholders complete required training;

            (c) Report travel charge card fraud, waste and abuse to the OIG; and

            (d) Report travel program status to GSA and OMB.


2. Level 3 Travel Charge Card Program A/OPC.

   The Level 3 A/OPC is responsible for providing high-level guidance, policy augmentation,
   and oversight to their respective lower level A/OPCs.

   Level 3 Program A/OPC will:

   a.   Communication and Customer Service

        (1) Serve as the primary Program coordinator for their respective lower level A/OPCs;

        (2) Represent their respective lower level A/OPCs in Program related requests and
            issues;

        (3) Communicate routinely to lower level A/OPCs, and internal and external customers
            on Program-related topics and concerns;

        (4) Provide quality and timely customer service to lower level A/OPCs within their
            oversight to ensure Program success; and

        (5) Actively use the bank’s online system to monitor the Program.

   b.   New Accounts, Maintenance, and Training

        (1) Assist respective lower level A/OPCs by answering program-related inquiries;

        (2) Establish new accounts or hierarchies, and close accounts when employees
            terminate, retire, or transfer;



                                                D-4
     (3) Establish and review reports;

     (4) Monitor training;

     (5) Serve as the Program point of contact for all internal and external customers;

     (6) Ensure respective lower level A/OPCs and cardholders complete initial training prior
         to appointment or issuance of the card, and that refresher training is completed every
         year;

     (7) Maintain a complete, accurate listing of Mission Area, agency, or staff office lower
         level A/OPCs;

     (8) Serve as the central point of contact between the Level 2 A/OPCs in OCFO and the
         respective lower level A/OPCs in the field; handle card-related issues at their
         respective level prior to forwarding onto the Level 2 A/OPC for guidance or
         assistance; and

     (9) Approve establishment of new Centrally Billed Accounts (CBA) travel charge cards
         within their Mission Area, agency, or staff office.

c.   Authorized Charge Card Usage

     Ensure cardholders are not using accounts to purchase personal items or withdraw
     funds unrelated to official travel by monitoring the following charge card vendor
     reports on a monthly, or as-needed, basis:

     (1) Transaction Detail;

     (2) Declined Transaction Authorizations;

     (3) Account List; and

     (4) Cash Advance.

d.   Unused Airline Tickets

     Ensure lower level A/OPCs monitor the following ETS reports:

     (1) Unused Tickets;

     (2) Refunded Tickets; and

     (3) Voided Tickets.




                                             D-5
e.   ATM Withdrawals

     (1) Ensure ATM withdrawals are appropriate and only occur within 3 calendar days of
         official travel;

     (2) Ensure ATM limits are set appropriately so employees are within account limits and
         not misusing this privilege, resulting in account delinquencies;

     (3) Educate account holders on proper use and restrictions of ATM withdrawals;

     (4) Suspend the ATM privileges of any account holder who is delinquent 60 days or
         more by monitoring the following charge card vendor reports:

         (a) Transaction Detail;

         (b) Past Due; and

         (c) Cash Advance.

f.   Travel Voucher Claims

     (1) Educate account holders and approving officials on travel voucher timeline
         submissions to reduce delinquencies (within 5 business days of trip end);

     (2) Monitor the following ETS reports:

         (a) Authorizations with Advances and Outstanding Vouchers;

         (b) Documents Awaiting Approval; and

         (c) Unsubmitted Vouchers.

     (3) Ensure management controls and practices are in place to maintain compliance with
         USDA’s split disbursement requirements; and

     (4) Ensure Mission Area, agency, or staff office policy is being followed and corrective
         action taken against cardholder delinquencies. This includes HR policies concerning
         disciplinary actions for travel charge card offenses.

g.   Unauthorized Use and Misuse of Charge Card Accounts

     (1) Monitor account activity to ensure cardholders are not misusing their card;

     (2) Take appropriate action to prevent unauthorized use and misuse including:




                                              D-6
            (a) Ensure accounts are being used only for authorized travel expenditures while
                employees are on official Government travel; and

            (b) Reduce account limits when employees have not been on official travel within
                the last 6 months.

        (3) In addition to the reports listed in Sections 2c – 2e above, also monitor the following
            card contractor bank reports:

            (a) Account Suspension; and

            (b) Charge Off Report.

        (4) Provide accurate and timely responses to online Oversight Insights on Demand
            exceptions forwarded from the Level 2 A/OPC; and

        (5) Report travel charge card fraud, waste, and abuse to the respective Manager or
            Supervisor, HRO, and OIG.

   h.   Delinquent Charge Card Accounts and Salary Offsets

        (1) Ensure efforts are made to reduce delinquencies with individually billed accounts;

        (2) Ensure salary offset procedures are initiated for any accounts more than 90 days
            delinquent. This includes notification to lower level A/OPCs to begin salary offset
            proceedings for all accounts more than 90 days delinquent;

        (3) Monitor the following charge card vendor reports:

            (a) Past Due Report;

            (b) Charge Off Report; and

            (c) Account Suspension.

        (4) Ensure Mission Area, agency, and staff office personnel follow established policy
            for acting against cardholder delinquencies. This includes HRO policies for
            disciplinary actions regarding travel charge card accounts.


3. Level 4 Travel Charge Card Program A/OPC.

   The Level 4 A/OPC is responsible for providing high-level guidance, policy augmentation,
   and oversight to travel charge card accounts within their respective area of responsibility.
   Each Level 4 A/OPC will determine requirements for their lower level A/OPCs.




                                                 D-7
Level 4 Program A/OPCs, if applicable, will:

a.   Communication and Customer Service

     (1) Serve as the primary Program coordinator for their respective lower level A/OPCs;

     (2) Manage the Program for respective area of responsibility, as determined by the
         Level 3 A/OPC;

     (3) Represent the lower level A/OPCs in Program related requests and issues;

     (4) Communicate routinely to lower level A/OPC, and internal and external customers
         on Program related topics and concerns;

     (5) Provide quality and timely customer service to lower level A/OPCs within to ensure
         Program success; and

     (6) Actively use the bank’s online system to monitor the Program.

b.   New Accounts, Maintenance, and Training

     (1) Assist respective lower level A/OPCs by answering program-related inquiries;

     (2) Establish new accounts and hierarchies, and close accounts when employees
         terminate, retire, or transfer;

     (3) Establish and review reports;

     (4) Monitor training;

     (5) Serve as a primary point of contact for internal and external customers;

     (6) Ensure respective lower level A/OPCs and cardholders complete initial training prior
         to appointment or issuance of the card, and that refresher training is completed every
         year;

     (7) Maintain a complete, accurate listing of lower level A/OPCs within their area of
         responsibility;

     (8) Serve as the central point of contact between the Level 3 A/OPCs and the respective
         lower level A/OPCs in the field; and

     (9) Handle all card-related issues at their respective level prior to forwarding onto the
         Level 3 A/OPC for guidance or assistance.




                                               D-8
c.   Authorized Charge Card Usage

     Ensure cardholders are not using travel charge card to purchase personal items or
     withdraw funds unrelated to employee’s official travel by monitoring the following
     reports on a monthly, or as-needed, basis:

     (1) Transaction Detail;

     (2) Declined Transaction Authorizations;

     (3) Account List; and

     (4) Cash Advance.

d.   Unused Airline Tickets

     Ensure lower level A/OPCs are monitoring the reports currently provided by Level
     A/OPCs (or obtained from the ETS):

     (1) Unused Tickets;

     (2) Refunded Tickets; and

     (3) Voided Tickets.

e.   ATM Withdrawals

     (1) Ensure ATM withdrawals are appropriate and only occur within 3 calendar days of
         official travel;

     (2) Ensure ATM limits are set appropriately so employees are within account limits and
         not misusing this privilege, resulting in account delinquencies;

     (3) Educate account holders on proper use and restrictions of ATM withdrawals;

     (4) Suspend the ATM privileges of any account holder who is delinquent 60 days or
         more by monitoring the following charge card vendor reports:

         (a) Transaction Detail;

         (b) Past Due; and

         (c) Cash Advance.




                                            D-9
f.   Travel Voucher Claims

     (1) Educate account holders and approving officials on travel voucher timeline
         submissions to reduce delinquencies (within 5 business days of trip end).

     (2) Monitor the following ETS reports:

         (a) Authorizations with Advances and Outstanding Vouchers;

         (b) Documents Awaiting Approval; and

         (c) Unsubmitted Vouchers.

     (3) Ensure management controls and practices are in place to maintain compliance with
         USDA’s split disbursement requirements; and

     (4) Ensure Mission Area, agency, or staff office policy is being followed and corrective
         action taken against cardholder delinquencies. This includes HR policies concerning
         disciplinary actions for travel charge card offenses.

g.   Unauthorized Use and Misuse of Charge Card Accounts

     (1) Monitor account activity to ensure cardholders are not misusing their card;

     (2) Take appropriate action to prevent unauthorized use and misuse including:

         (a) Ensure accounts are being used only for authorized travel expenditures while
             employees are on official Government travel; and

         (b) Reduce account limits when employees have not been on official travel within
             the last 6 months.

     (3) In addition to the reports listed in Sections 3c – 3e above, also monitor the following
         card contractor bank reports:

         (a) Account Suspension; and

         (b) Charge Off Report.

     (4) Provide accurate and timely responses to online Oversight Insights on Demand
         exceptions forwarded from the Level 3 A/OPC; and

     (5) Report travel charge card fraud, waste and abuse to the respective Manager,
         Supervisor, HRO, and OIG.




                                             D-10
   h.   Delinquent Charge Card Accounts and Salary Offsets

        (1) Ensure efforts are made to reduce delinquencies with individually billed accounts;

        (2) Ensure salary offset procedures are initiated for any accounts more than 90 days
            delinquent. This includes notification to lower level A/OPCs to begin salary offset
            proceedings for all accounts more than 90 days delinquent;

        (3) Monitor the following charge card vendor reports:

            (a) Past Due Report;

            (b) Charge Off Report; and

            (c) Account Suspension.

        (4) Ensure Mission Area, agency, and staff office personnel follow established policy
            for acting against cardholder delinquencies. This includes HRO policies for
            disciplinary actions regarding travel charge card accounts.


4. Other lower level Travel Charge Card Program A/OPCs.

   Follow instructions as provided by higher level A/OPCs.




                                               D-11
                                          APPENDIX E

                     THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE (USDA)
                   GOVERNMENT TRAVELCHARGE CARD PROGRAM
                   ACKNOWLEDGMENT & ACCEPTANCE STATEMENT


The Government Travel Charge Card Program provides travelers with a means of financing their
official travel expenses without obtaining travel advances or using their own funds. Only official
Government expenses, incurred as a result of temporary duty travel, may be charged to the travel
charge card. Expenses include meals, lodging, rental car, transportation, and any other
authorized official travel related expenses. Travelers are expected to use the travel charge card
whenever and wherever practical for these expenses, prior to using an automatic teller machine
(ATM) for a cash advance. ATM cash advances are allowed for minor expenses and where use of
the travel charge card is impractical or not possible.

Use of the travel charge card for any purpose other than official Government travel related
expenses is not authorized and is considered misuse of the card. Allowing your travel charge
card to become delinquent, by not paying the bill in a timely manner, or using “non-sufficient
fund” checks for payment, are considered card misuse or abuse. Card misuse or abuse may
subject the employee to disciplinary actions under the appropriate Mission Area, agency, staff
office, and civilian personnel regulations.

The “USDA Zero Tolerance Policy” strictly prohibits the following use of the card:

   a.   Making unauthorized charges, charges not associated with official travel, or using the
        card while not in an official travel status;

   b.   Allowing family members and friends to use the card; or using the card to pay for
        another employee’s official travel expenses;

   c.   Using the card in the vicinity of the official duty station or residence, unless authorized
        for use in connection with official travel;

   d.   Allowing your account to become delinquent, failure to pay accounts with enough funds,
        or failure to use split disbursement to repay expenses;

   e.   Making cash withdrawals from an ATM more than 3 business days before the start of
        official travel or after the final day of official travel;

   f.   Obtaining cash advances from ATMs located in a casino or other gaming establishment;

   g.   Using the card to pay for alcoholic beverages not incidental to a meal; and

   h.   Using the card to pay for meals for everyone at the table or in the party and being
        reimbursed in cash.


                                                  E-1
Cardholders should read and familiarize themselves with the contents of the contractor banks
Cardholder Guide for Travel, the Federal Travel Regulation (FTR), the USDA Departmental
Regulation (DR) 2300-001, Government Travel Charge Card Regulation, and Mission Area,
agency, or staff office specific policies regarding the use of the travel charge card.

Additionally, cardholders should be familiar with FTR 301-51, Paying Travel Expenses; FTR
301-54, Collection of Undisputed Delinquent Amounts Owed to the Contractor Issuing the
Individually Billed Travel Charge Card; and FTR 301-76, Collection of Undisputed
Delinquent Amounts Owed to the Contractor Issuing the Individually Billed Travel Charge
Card.


Questions concerning the travel charge card should be addressed to the local or primary A/OPC.


1. I hereby acknowledge that I have read and understand the above policy. I agree to the terms
   of the contractor bank agreement and to abide by the USDA Zero Tolerance Policy.



     SIGN___________________________________                               Date_____________
            CARDHOLDER SIGNATURE


2. Recommend approval for the employee listed above to participate in the Travel Charge Card
   Program.



     SIGN___________________________________                               Date_____________
            SUPERVISOR/AGENCY DESIGNEE


3. Electronic application processed and submitted online via the contractor bank electronic
   access system.


     SIGN____________________________________                              Date_____________
            A/OPC SIGNATURE


     NOTE: This statement must accompany the travel charge card request, and training
     certificate sent to the A/OPC.



                                               E-2
                                      APPENDIX F

                             US BANK ACCESS ONLINE REPORTS


      Reporting Section                                  Description
        Report Name
 SUPPLIER MANAGEMENT
          Travel Expense
Airline Itinerary Detail            Statement transaction detail and itinerary information for
                                    airline MCCs (specific to airline MCCs only).
Airline or Rail City Pairs          Travel report that provides the number of trips between
                                    city pairs for airline or rail.
Airline Refund                      Airline credit transactions with merchant and location
                                    information (specific to airline MCCs only).
Airline Spending                    Provides summary information for all airline spending by
                                    MCCs.
Hotel Spending                      Provides summary information for all hotel spending by
                                    MCCs.
Rental Car Spending                 Provides summary information for all rental car spending
                                    by MCCs.
 PROGRAM MANAGEMENT
            Spend
Account Spend Analysis              Summary of account spending (excluding merchant
                                    detail).
Cash Advance                        Detail of account cash advances including transaction
                                    amount, date, and reference number.
Declining Balance or Managed        Summary and detail information on declining balance
Spend                               accounts by name and account number.
         Administration
Account List                        Frequently used account level information such as open
                                    date, last transaction date, single purchase limit, credit
                                    limit, etc.
Account Maintenance Effective       Detailed history of effective dated account maintenance
Dating Activity                     activity.
Account Status Change               An exception report that lists accounts with a change
                                    status of lost or stolen, closed, or re-opened.
Declined Transaction                Declined Transaction Authorizations report provides
Authorizations                      details of declined transaction authorizations information
                                    along with related account and merchant information.
Order File History                  History of order file loading and matching.
Point of Contact Details            Summary of Point of Contact details including account
                                    information.
Account History - Request Status    History of changes made to Accounts.
Queue


                                            F-1
      Reporting Section                               Description
        Report Name
Delinquency Management
Account Suspension              Provides information on open accounts that are past due
                                and suspended or pending suspension.
Charge-Off                      Information on accounts that have been charged off,
                                including charge-off date, balance charged-off, and
                                recovery amount.
Past Due                        Accounts with past due balances and the number of times
                                past due situations have occurred.

 FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
Transaction Management
Payment Detail                  Detailed payment information pertaining to transactions
                                and payments.
Transaction Aging               Detailed client transaction information and payment
                                aging history.
Transaction Detail              Detailed transaction data including merchant detail,
                                allocation (account code) information, and transaction
                                log data.
Transaction Summary             Transaction summary information.
     ADMINISTRATION
User Management
System User List                Information about user Identification (ID) and associated
                                user profile information including a list of user hierarchy
                                access and user functional entitlements.
System User List with Account   An overview of users and accounts within an
Details                         organization.
USER ACTIVITY AUDIT
REPORTING
User Profiles                   Detailed history of activity and changes for user profile
                                actions such as login, account assignments, contact
                                information, hierarchy changes, and approval manager
                                information.




                                        F-2
                                      APPENDIX G

  INTRA-DEPARTMENTAL HIERARCHY TRANSFER REQUEST WORKSHEET


A. REQUESTING MISSION AREA, AGENCY, OR STAFF OFFICE

Point of Contact:
Email Address:
Name of Cardholder:
Pseudo Code:                              Last Four Digits of Card number:
 OLD
 HIERARCHY
      TBR1           TBR2        TBR3        TBR4         TBR5         TBR6        TBR7




B. RECEIVING MISSION AREA, AGENCY, OR STAFF OFFICE

Point of Contact:
Email Address:
Name of Cardholder:
Pseudo Code:                              Last Four Digits of Card number:
 NEW
 HIERARCHY
     TBR1            TBR2         TBR3         TBR4          TBR5          TBR6           TBR7



Instructions:

1. The receiving A/OPC must indicate they agree to the transfer by either requesting the
   transfer or showing agreement in an email. Please ensure both losing and receiving
   AOPCs are copied for situational awareness.

2. The receiving A/OPC must have TBR3 (in rare cases Level 4 will be accepted) access.

3. Requests should be emailed with “Hierarchy Transfer Request” in the subject line to the
   OCFO Travel Policy Management (TPM) mailbox (TPM@usda.gov).

4. A/OPCs of the old hierarchy will continue to be responsible for the card until it is
   transferred out. An alternative procedure is to cancel or close the card when the


                                           G-1
employee leaves the Mission Area, agency, or staff office and have them complete an
application at the new Mission Area, agency, or staff office.




                                       G-2
                                          APPENDIX H

              EXAMPLES OF MEMORANDA TO EMPLOYEES FROM A/OPCs

                                QUESTIONABLE USE NOTICE


TO:

FROM:          Agency [or Mission Area or staff office] Travel Charge Card Coordinator

SUBJECT:       Questionable Travel Charge Card Use


Our review of the Oversight Insights on Demand data mining information, made available by US
Bank, indicates your official travel charge card was flagged for a «specify questionable
transaction» transaction(s) during the past month. Please submit a written explanation for the
transaction (s) by (date).

As part of our commitment to provide service to employees participating in the travel charge
card program, we would like to remind you of the responsibility’s employees have in using the
US Bank travel charge card.

Employees who participate in the travel charge card program shall, to the maximum extent
possible, utilize the charge card to pay for only authorized travel expenses connected with official
Government travel (e.g., lodging, air fare, and automobile rentals). You should not use the travel
charge card to pay for personal expenses or for any other purpose not related to official
Government business.

If you have any other questions, then please contact «add A/OPC name» at «include correct
phone number».




                                                  H-1
                                          APPENDIX H

              EXAMPLES OF MEMORANDA TO EMPLOYEES FROM A/OPCs

                                UNAUTHORIZED USE NOTICE


TO:

FROM:            Agency [or Mission Area or staff office] Travel Charge Card Coordinator

SUBJECT:         Unauthorized Charge Card Use


A review of the Oversight Insights on Demand data mining information, made available by US
Bank, has brought to my attention several instances of apparent unauthorized use of your official
travel charge card. These charges have included the use of the card for unauthorized personal
retail purchases or excessive unauthorized Automated Teller Machine (ATM) withdrawals.
Please provide me with a written explanation of the charges incurred in conjunction with official
travel by (date).

Unauthorized use of the travel charge card may result in the suspension or cancellation of the
travel charge card privileges, the forward of a delinquent account notice to a collection agency,
or in case of court judgments, a garnishment of salaries, as well as agency [or Mission Area or
staff office] disciplinary action. Your Mission Areas, agency, or staff office head and supervisor
have been notified of your account status for immediate review and resolution.

If you have any questions, then please contact «add A/OPC name» at «include correct phone
number».

Cc: Supervisor




                                                 H-2
                                         APPENDIX H

             EXAMPLES OF MEMORANDA TO EMPLOYEES FROM A/OPCs

                                   DELINQUENT NOTICE


TO:

FROM:         Agency [or Mission Area or staff office] Travel Charge Card Coordinator

SUBJECT:      Delinquent Notice for the Government Travel Charge Card


Our review of the monthly activity reports provided by US Bank via Access Online ®, indicates
your account may be 30 days past due. It is our position that delinquencies beyond the 30-day
timeframe violate the Department’s “Zero Tolerance Policy.”

The agreement that you made with US Bank requires all outstanding charges be paid upon
receipt of your monthly statement. Your charging privileges may be subject to interruption if
you do not bring your account to a current status.

Any questions concerning your statement should be reported directly to the US Bank point of
contact. Please submit your payment for the total balance, both current and past due, to US
Bank. Failure to do so may constitute a violation of the Standards of Ethical Conduct for
Employees of the Executive Branch (5 CFR 2635) and may result in disciplinary action up to and
including removal.

If you have any other questions, then please contact «add A/OPC name» at «Include correct
phone number».

Cc: Supervisor




                                                H-3
                                       APPENDIX I

                                 NFC SALARY OFFSET


The USDA and US Bank are still working to establish Department level salary offset procedures.
However, these are the current procedures for when the USDA is asked to assist US Bank with
collecting delinquent amounts via salary offset.

a.   US Bank reviews delinquent accounts and creates a file of delinquent employees and
     places the file in the secure Data Exchange of US Bank Access Online. The US Bank
     Access Online system is accessible via the web to Mission Area, agency, or staff office
     personnel using a login ID and password. The file contains data elements name, Social
     Security Number (SSN), Account number, Hierarchy Level, beginning Pay Period for
     deduction, the Salary Offset amount requested by the bank for processing of Salary
     Offset. US Bank will ensure the files of delinquent employees excludes employees who
     have any of the following issues:

     (1) Unresolved charges that are the subject of a timely dispute;

     (2) Charges that have been released in bankruptcy; or

     (3) A signed written payment agreement with US Bank and are complying timely with
         the terms.

b.   The Mission Area, agency, or staff office representative reviews and validates the
     employee’s debt to US Bank and then verifies each employee’s eligibility for Salary
     Offset, i.e., currently on payroll, retired, separated, garnishments, etc.

c.   The Mission Area, agency, or staff office compiles a list of eligible employees to whom
     they will mail “due process” letters. The Mission Area, agency, or staff office sends
     “due process” letters to the employees. The letters will include the pay period when
     salary offset will begin if no action is taken by the employee, and the last date that the
     employee can:

     (1) Contact US Bank to arrange payment or to dispute the Salary Offset amount; or

     (2) Request that the Mission Area, agency, or staff office perform a review of the facts
         relevant to the delinquency, (e.g., employee’s voucher was not processed).

d.   The Mission Area, agency, or staff office provides the list of employees who were sent
     “due process” letters to the Mission Area, agency, or staff office program manager and
     US Bank. The A/OPC will provide the Mission Area, agency, or staff office divisions
     with the names of their employees who were mailed “due process” letters.

e.   US Bank will update their initial file (created in item ‘a’ above) based upon the list of
     “due process” letters mailed to the employees.


                                               I-1
f.   The Mission Area, agency, or staff office will be the contact point for those employees
     who respond (either by telephone or in writing) to the “due process” letter within the 30-
     day period. Upon employee contact and request for a review of his or her facts, the
     agency or staff office will temporarily suspend the Salary Offset procedure for the
     employee. The agency will promptly distribute copies of the employee correspondence
     to the A/OPC and to the US Bank Relationship Manager.

g.   The APC and division point of contact (i.e., employee’s supervisor, employee’s
     accounting office, etc.) and US Bank will work together to quickly resolve the
     employee’s concerns contained in correspondence.

h.   At the end of the “due process” period, US Bank will review its employee file (created
     in item ‘a’ above) again and update it for any payments received or adjustments posted,
     as well as for other correspondence that could affect the employee’s presence on the file.

i.   US Bank will transmit the final updated file back to the Mission Area, agency, or staff
     office approximately 4 days before payroll is run for the pay period.

j.   US Bank will provide cancellation or adjustment notices (if any) to the Mission Area,
     agency, or staff office every 2 weeks on Wednesday prior to payroll for employees on
     Salary Offset.




                                            I-2
                                          APPENDIX J

                           USDA SENIOR FEDERAL TRAVELERS

The Federal Travel Regulation (FTR) defines a Senior Federal Official as: An individual who is
paid according to the Executive Schedule established by 5 U.S.C. 53, Subchapter II, including
Presidential appointees who are confirmed by the Senate; employed in the U.S. Government’s
Senior Executive Service or an equivalent “senior” service; who is a civilian employee of the
Executive Office of the President; who is appointed by the President to a position under section
105(a)(2)(A), (B), or (C) of title 3 U.S.C. or by the Vice President to a position under section
106(a)(1)(A), (B), or (C) of title 3 U.S.C; or who is a contractor working under a contract with
an executive agency, is paid at a rate equal to or more than the minimum rate for the Senior
Executive Service, and has senior executive responsibilities. The term senior Federal official, as
used in the Federal Travel Regulation does not mean an active duty military officer.

As listed in Title 7 - Agriculture. Subtitle A - Office of the Secretary of Agriculture.
PART 2 - DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY BY THE SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE
AND GENERAL OFFICERS OF THE DEPARTMENT.
Subpart A - General.
§ 2.4 General officers. The work of the Department is under the supervision and control of the
Secretary who is assisted by the following general officers, the:

Deputy Secretary
Under Secretary for Farm Production and Conservation
Under Secretary for Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services
Under Secretary for Food Safety
Under Secretary for Marketing and Regulatory Programs
Under Secretary for Natural Resources and Environment
Under Secretary for Research, Education, and Economics
Under Secretary for Trade and Foreign Agricultural Affairs
Assistant Secretary for Administration
Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
Assistant Secretary for Congressional Relations
Assistant to the Secretary for Rural Development
Chief Economist
Chief Financial Officer
Chief Information Officer
General Counsel
Inspector General
Judicial Officer
Director, National Appeals Division
Director, Office of Budget and Program Analysis
Director, Office of Communications
Director, Office of Partnerships and Public Engagement
Director, Office of Tribal Relations
Director, Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization



                                                J-1
                                           APPENDIX K

                 GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES STANDARDS OF CONDUCT


         The following excerpts pertinent to the use of the Travel Charge Card are from
                        Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 2635,
           “Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch:”

2635.101, “Basic Obligations of Public Service,” state the following:

1. Public service is a public trust, requiring employees to place loyalty to laws and ethical
   principles above private gain.

(For example, do not take advantage of the charge card privileges for your personal use.)

2. Employees shall put forth honest effort in the performance of their duties.

(For example, abide by the agency policy in carrying out your responsibilities as a cardholder.)

3. Employees shall not knowingly make unauthorized commitments or promises of any kind
   purporting to bind the Government.

(For example, do not make purchases with the travel charge card if purchases have not been
   authorized.)

4. Employees shall not use public office for private gain.

(For example, do not use the charge card to make a personal unauthorized purchase.)

5. Employees shall satisfy in good faith their obligations as citizen, including all just
   financial obligations.

(For example, pay your charge card bill on time. A check returned for insufficient funds does
   not demonstrate good faith in paying your bills.)

6. Employees shall endeavor to avoid any actions creating the appearance that they are
   violating the law, or the ethical standards set forth in this part.

    (For example, do not avoid agency policies and procedures for administrative convenience.)




                                                 K-1
