                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                   WASHINGTON, DC 20250

                                                                  NUMBER:
     DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                      DR 2340-001
 SUBJECT: Payment of MEDEVAC and Medical Expenses                 DATE:
 of Employees on Overseas Temporary Duty Assignment               October 1, 2020
 OPI: Foreign Agricultural Service, Office of the Chief           EXPIRATION DATE:
 Operating Officer                                                October 1, 2025



Section                                                                                     Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                1
2.   Scope                                                                                  1
3.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                     2
4.   Policy                                                                                 2
5.   Procedures                                                                             4
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                             5
7.   Inquiries                                                                              6

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                     A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                    B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                     C-1
Appendix D – Frequently Asked Questions                                                     D-1
Appendix E – Points of Contact                                                              E-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the policy and procedures for payment of
     medical expenses (including the expense of any medical evacuation or “MEDEVAC”) of
     USDA employees who are on official temporary duty assignment (TDY) overseas. The
     information provided in this DR is based on guidance provided by the Department of State’s
     (DOS) Foreign Affairs Manual (FAM), 16 FAM 300, Medical Travel and 16 FAM 500,
     Payment of Medical Services.


2. SCOPE

     This DR covers medical expenses related to overseas TDY travel by employees of USDA,
     contractors, fellows, scholars, summer interns hired in the United States, and other categories
  of employees who are on official USDA travel and have a cleared eCountryClearance (eCC).
  It does not cover situations involving domestic TDY travel or payment of per diem expenses.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This DR provides instruction for situations specific to USDA employees that are not
       addressed in 16 FAM, Medical;

  b.   USDA will apply direction provided in 16 FAM 300 and 16 FAM 500 with respect to
       the payment of medical expenses of its employees working abroad in TDY status.

  c.   The policy is effective immediately and will remain in effect until superseded or
       expiration.

  d.   The terms “insurance” or “health insurance” used throughout this directive specifically
       refer to employee insurance coverage with benefits payable to employees who obtain
       medical services while overseas.

  e.   For purposes of this DR, “employing agency” as referenced in FAM refers to USDA.

  f.   Specific to the payment of medical expenses associated with MEDEVAC, the term
       “home agency” used throughout this document refers to the sponsoring Mission Area,
       agency, or staff office of the Government agency that is providing the funding and/or
       reimbursement for the travel.


4. POLICY

  a.   Medical Expenses

       (1) Payment of employee medical expenses by USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and
           staff offices in accordance with FAM requirements and procedures will depend
           upon the following factors: whether the employee has been hospitalized, whether
           the employee is insured, whether the expenses relate to a pregnancy, and the extent
           to which the employee’s primary insurer provides coverage. (16 FAM 521,
           Applicability; 16 FAM 522, Responsibility)

       (2) Employees should obtain health insurance coverage, either under the Federal
           Employees Health Benefits (FEHB) Program or by contract with a private insurer.
           (16 FAM 522)

       (3) Subject to certain statutory exceptions, such as the FEHB Program, USDA Mission
           Areas, agencies, and staff offices may not purchase health insurance to cover
           employees because health insurance is considered a personal expense of the
           employee, for which appropriated funds may not be obligated, and because the
           Federal Government is self-insured.

                                              2
     (4) Medical expenses are not payable if the employee incurred them while on annual
         leave, other leave, or otherwise not in TDY status.

b.   MEDEVAC Expenses

     (1) In situations where, local medical facilities are inadequate to provide required
         services and MEDEVAC is approved by the DOS Medical Director or designee,
         USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may pay for MEDEVAC in
         accordance with FAM requirements and procedures and without regard to otherwise
         applicable limitations in the Federal Travel Regulation (see also 16 FAM 310,
         General; 22 U.S.C. 4081(5)).

     (2) Payment of MEDEVAC expenses by USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
         offices will depend upon the type of care needed (e.g., obstetrical, dental) and the
         employee’s compliance with required FAM procedures, including travel
         authorizations.

     (3) Subject to certain statutory exceptions, such as the FEHB Program, USDA Mission
         Areas, agencies, and staff offices may not purchase or reimburse employees for the
         cost of MEDEVAC insurance because it is considered a personal expense of the
         employee, for which appropriated funds may not be obligated, and because the
         Federal Government is self-insured.

     (4) USDA employees who mix annual leave in conjunction with official Government
         travel will need to purchase their own MEDEVAC insurance if they wish to be
         covered by such insurance during their annual leave and are personally responsible
         for the MEDEVAC coverage expenses during their annual leave.

     (5) To ensure a consistent approach to certifying MEDEVAC coverage, USDA
         employees must include the following information on all travel authorizations and
         DOS eCCs as required by DOS policy (12 STATE 98318):

         (a) This language: “The United States Department of Agriculture is self-insured
             for medical evacuation (MEDEVAC) coverage and will reimburse any
             expenses associated with medical evacuation (MEDEVAC) recommended by
             DOS, Office of Medical Services (MED) for all international travelers who are
             traveling on USDA travel orders. If MEDEVAC is authorized in accordance
             with 16 FAM 315.1, Medical Evacuations (MEDEVACS) to the United States,
             the U.S. Embassy will coordinate the MEDEVAC.” In addition, some
             embassies may require the traveler to provide point of contact (POC)
             information for their Mission Area, agency, or staff office in the eCC request.

         (b) The POC information for the appropriate Mission Area, agency, or staff office
              or official who can make financial arrangements on behalf of the Mission Area,
              agency, or staff office, if necessary. Approval of MEDEVAC shall not be
              dependent upon such funding being in place at the time of MEDEVAC.

                                             3
           (c) MEDEVAC must be authorized by the DOS Medical Director or designee in
               accordance with 16 FAM 315.1.

       (6) DOS - Bureau of Medical Services (MED) recommends that travelers carry a copy
           of their authorization, which includes the information above, and provide a copy to
           their Embassy POC.


5. PROCEDURES

  The Embassy closest to the employee’s location will help the employee find medical
  treatment. If the treatment is out-patient, all expenses are covered by the employee and their
  insurance.

  a.   If overnight hospitalization is required, the Embassy will guarantee payment.

  b.   The home agency must send the requested funds to the Embassy either through:

       (1) A fund cite cable that is generated in the International Cable System (INCA) which
           is available USDA-wide for worldwide usage; or

       (2) A Financial Management Officer (FMO) funding advisement letter processed in the
           International Management Administrative Resource Tool (iMART – Foreign
           Agriculture Service (FAS) only).

       The cable or the letter must identify the Mission Area, agency, or staff office’s fund
       source along with the appropriate accounting to cover the expenses related to the
       MEDEVAC or medical treatment of the employee. A headquarters (HQ) POC should
       be included on the cable. This should not delay providing MEDEVAC or medical
       treatment to the employee.

  c.   The Embassy will pay for all medical expenses incurred by the employee and the
       Mission Area, agency, or staff office is responsible for reimbursing the Embassy. The
       employee in turn is responsible for reimbursing their Mission Area, agency, or staff
       office for all payments received from their FEHB provider. Any medical expenses not
       covered by the employee’s FEHB plan will be paid by the Mission Area, agency, or staff
       office, except for cost-sharing (deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance) covered by
       the employee’s FEHB plan.

  d.   Any individual who does not provide a fund cite or fiscal data for payment of hospital
       bills may be asked to use a personal credit card for guarantee of payment for hospital
       admission.

  e.   If an employee is not covered by primary health insurance, the employee is liable for all
       medical expenses, including both inpatient and outpatient treatment.


                                               4
  f.   Employees are advised to become familiar with specific Embassy policy prior to travel.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The FAS Chief Operating Officer (COO) will:

       (1) Be responsible for all aspects of this directive;

       (2) Serve as the primary Departmental-level contact for questions regarding the policies
           of this DR; and

       (3) Update this DR and any accompanying guidance, as appropriate.

  b.   Assistant Secretaries, Under Secretaries, and Directors of Staff Offices of the Secretary
       will:

       (1) Ensure that their Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices comply with this DR;
           and

       (2) Ensure that applicable USDA Mission Area, agency, and staff office policies and
           guidance are consistent with this DR.

  c.   USDA Agency Heads will:

       (1) Ensure that agency employees who are covered by the scope of this DR are aware
           of the policies in the DR and the procedures for finding medical treatment and
           payment for medical services; and

       (2) Provide agency employees who are covered by the scope of this DR with any
           necessary guidance and training to understand and fulfill their responsibilities under
           this DR and any agency-specific guidance on payment of medical expenses of
           employees on overseas TDY.

  d.   Managers and Supervisors covered under the scope of this DR and/or have management
       or supervisory responsibilities for employees covered under the scope of this DR, will:

       (1) Be aware of and uphold the principles contained in this DR;

       (2) Implement and comply with this DR as it pertains to their area of management or
           supervision; and

       (3) Ensure that their employees are informed about this DR.

  e.   Employees will:



                                                5
      (1) Be aware of the benefits payable under their health insurance plans, particularly for
          medical expenses incurred overseas;

      (2) Be aware of the principles contained in this DR; and

      (3) Comply with this DR and any additional Departmental, Mission Area, agency, or
          staff office-specific policies and guidance pertaining to international travel.


7. INQUIRIES

  All questions regarding this DR should be directed to the FAS, Office of the Chief Operating
  Officer (OCOO); Room 4121 South Building, Washington, D.C., 20250 or call (202) 720-
  2551 or email overseas-medical-emergencies@usda.gov.


                                           -END-




                                              6
                           APPENDIX A

              ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
COO      Chief Operating Officer
DOS      Department of State
DR       Departmental Regulation
eCC      e-Country Clearance
FAH      Foreign Affairs Handbook
FAM      Foreign Affairs Manual
FAS      Foreign Agricultural Service
FECA     Federal Employees' Compensation Act
FEHB     Federal Employees Health Benefits [Program]
FMO      Financial Management Officer
HQ       Headquarters
iMART    International Management Administration Resource Tool
INCA     International Cable System
MED      Office of Medical Services (at the Department of State)
MEDVAC   Medical Evacuation
OCOO     Office of the Chief Operating Officer
OFSO     Office of Foreign Service Operations
POC      Point of Contact
TDY      Temporary Duty Assignment
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                                A-1
                                     APPENDIX B

                                     DEFINITIONS


a.   Embassy. An embassy is the headquarters for U.S. Government representatives serving
     in a foreign country. It is normally led by an ambassador, who is the U.S. President's
     representative to the host country. An embassy is normally located in the capital city.

b.   Funds Cite cable. The fund cite is that of the fund which was used to finance the
     acquisition of the specific equipment item.

c.   For purposes of this DR, “employee” refers to USDA employees, contractors, fellows,
     scholars, summer interns, and other categories of employees who are on official USDA
     travel overseas.




                                           B-1
                                      APPENDIX C

                          AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


a.   Foreign Service Act of 1980, 22 U.S.C. 3901 et seq., specifically:

     (1) 22 U.S.C. 3922(a)(2): Authorizes the Secretary of Agriculture to utilize the foreign
         service personnel system with respect to all USDA personnel;

     (2) 22 U.S.C. 3927(b): Requires Executive Branch Agencies having employees abroad
         to ensure those employees comply fully with all applicable directives of the Chief
         of Mission;

     (3) 22 U.S.C. 4081, Travel and related expenses: Authorizes the Secretary of State to
         pay for employees’ medical evacuation (MEDEVAC) and other travel costs; and

     (4) 22 U.S.C. 4084, Health care program: Authorizes the Secretary of State to pay the
         costs of employees’ medical treatment while located overseas.

b.   The Department of State, Foreign Affairs Manual (FAM), Volume 16, Parts 300,
     Medical Travel and 500, Payment of Medical Services contain directives regarding the
     payment of medical expenses and medical travel expenses for Civil Service and Foreign
     Service employees working overseas. Both parts have been adopted by USDA with
     respect to its Foreign Service Corps. (16 FAM 122, Eligibility)

     (1) 3 FAM 3631.2, Policy

     (2) 16 FAM, Medical

     (3) 16 FAM 122, Eligibility

     (4) 16 FAM 300, Medical Travel

     (5) 16 FAM 310, General

     (6) 16 FAM 312, Eligibility

     (7) 16 FAM 315, Types of Medical Travel

     (8) 16 FAM 315.1, Medical Evacuations (MEDEVACS) to the United States

     (9) 16 FAM 500, Payment of Medical Expenses

     (10) 16 FAM 520, Responsibility for Payment of Medical Expenses



                                           C-1
     (11) 16 FAM 521, Applicability

     (12) 16 FAM 522, Responsibility

     (13) 16 FAM 531, Limitations

     (14) Department of State, Medical Requirements for E-Country Clearance

c.   41 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 300, Federal Travel Regulation, Chapter 301,
     Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances

d.   41 CFR § 300-30.4, When an illness or injury occurs on TDY, what expenses may be
     allowed?

e.   Department of Labor, Federal Employees' Compensation Act (FECA) web page

f.   Department of State, Insurance Providers for Overseas Coverage web page

g.   Department of State, Memorandum, 12 STATE 98318

h.   Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees Health Benefits (FEHB) Program
     web page




                                         C-2
                                      APPENDIX D

                          FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS


1.   Q: What is the Foreign Affairs Manual?

     A: The Foreign Affairs Manual (FAM) and associated Foreign Affairs Handbooks
        (FAH) are a single comprehensive and authoritative source for the organization
        structures, policies, and procedures that govern the operations of the Department of
        State, the Foreign Service and, when applicable, other Federal agencies. The FAM
        (which generally contains policy) and the FAHs (which generally contain procedures)
        together convey information to Department of State staff and contractors so they can
        carry out their responsibilities in accordance with statutory, executive, and,
        Departmental mandates.

2.   Q: Who is responsible for paying MEDEVAC expenses incurred by an employee while
        in TDY status?

     A: USDA agencies will pay MEDEVAC expenses not covered by the employee’s
        insurance. An individual who is covered by the DOS medical program as defined in
        16 FAM 122, Eligibility, is eligible to receive medical travel, per diem, and/or
        allowances as set forth in 16 FAM 312, Eligibility.

3.   Q: Who determines whether MEDEVAC is necessary?

     A: MEDEVAC must be authorized by the DOS, Medical Director or designee in
        accordance with 16 FAM 315.1.

4.   Q: Is primary health insurance required when on official travel?

     A: While it is not required, obtaining primary health insurance coverage is strongly
        encouraged. This is because USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will
        serve as the secondary payer for hospitalization and for outpatient expenses related to
        a hospitalization. (Employees are responsible for all other outpatient medical
        expenses, whether or not they have primary health insurance coverage.) Employees
        who do not have primary health insurance or whose insurer refuses to act as a primary
        payer will be personally responsible for all medical costs incurred abroad while in
        TDY status as set forth in 16 FAM 521, including hospitalization and related
        outpatient expenses. Employees are strongly encouraged to understand their health
        insurance coverage.

5.   Q: When will USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices serve as the secondary
        payer for medical expenses?

     A: With respect to employees who have primary health insurance coverage, USDA
        Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will serve as a secondary payer for

                                            D-1
         expenses not covered by the primary insurer, to the extent and under the conditions as
         set forth in 16 FAM 521 and 522.

 6.   Q: If an employee on TDY is hospitalized while on official travel, is there any provision
         to cover the cost of the hospital?

      A: Yes. If the traveler has health insurance USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
         offices will serve as the secondary payer for hospitalization and related expenses.
         Travelers without health insurance are personally responsible for all of their medical
         expenses. (Ref FAQ 4)

 7.   Q: Are USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices responsible for paying for
         outpatient services?

      A: Employees are responsible, either directly or through their health insurance, for
         outpatient services that are not related to a hospital stay. (16 FAM 521(a)).

 8.   Q: What if USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices serve as the first payer for
         hospitalization expenses incurred by the employee?

      A: In the event a USDA Mission Area, agency, or staff office covers payment for an
         employee’s initial hospitalization, the employee must reimburse the USDA Mission
         Area, agency, or staff office either directly or by insurance payment, minus the
         expense amount the U.S. Government is obligated to pay under 16 FAM.

 9.   Q: Do employees have access to DOS, MED for routine issues (e.g., vaccinations, minor
         injuries, consultations) during TDY?

      A: Yes, provided they meet the eligibility requirements stated in 16 FAM 122.

10.   Q: How do the DOS MED units support employees in need of medical treatment while
         on overseas TDY?

      A: All short-term (less than 30 days) Government TDY employees may access the
         Health Unit for urgent care; they do not require a clearance for access. TDY
         employees who spend 30 consecutive days or more at the assignment location must
         have a valid medical clearance.

11.   Q: Are USDA employees covered by Workers’ Compensation while on overseas TDY?

      A: Yes. USDA employees are covered by Workers’ Compensation. Under the Federal
         Employees' Compensation Act (FECA), Workers’ Compensation benefits compensate
         employees for loss in wage earnings; medical expenses; loss of life; and physical
         impairments or dismemberment from an injury arising out of or in the course of work
         as stated in 3 FAM 3631.2, Policy.

12.   Q: Does DOS provide a list of available insurance and MEDEVAC providers?

                                             D-2
A: Yes, available at the Department of State, Insurance Providers for Overseas
   Coverage web page.




                                      D-3
                                          APPENDIX E

                                    POINTS OF CONTACT



Overseas Posts

USDA employees on TDY overseas may at times need emergency medical assistance. Travelers
should first contact the Medical Unit at the local U.S. Embassy, Consulate, or Diplomatic
Mission (see: https://www.usembassy.gov).

The U.S. Embassy, State Med Unit, who will provide the TDY traveler with information on
health care providers.

Travelers should also contact one of the following representatives from the USDA Foreign
Agricultural Service staff in Washington, DC.

Washington, D.C.

Assistant Deputy Administrator
Office of the Administrator
Foreign Agricultural Service
United States Department of Agriculture

Director
International Services Division
Office of Foreign Service Operations (OFSO)
Foreign Agricultural Service
United States Department of Agriculture

Deputy Director
International Services Division
Office of Foreign Service Operations (OFSO)
Foreign Agricultural Service
United States Department of Agriculture


The most current Points of Contacts list is available at: https://www.fas.usda.gov/medical-
emergency-contacts.




                                              E-1
