                          U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


            DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                       Number:
                                                                          2300-005
SUBJECT:                                            DATE:
Agriculture Travel Regulation                       December 8, 2015
                                                    OPI:
                                                    Office of the Chief Financial Officer

Section

1. Purpose                                                                       1
2. Cancellation                                                                  2
3. Policy                                                                        2
4. Responsibilities                                                             14
5. Definitions                                                                  17
6. Internal Controls                                                            19
7. Records Retention                                                            20
8. Major Policy Changes                                                         21
9. Appendix A                                                                  A-1


1. PURPOSE

   This regulation supplements the Federal Travel Regulation (FTR) issued by the General
   Services Administration (GSA), with policy specific to United States Department of
   Agriculture (USDA). This regulation is the primary source of USDA policy on managing
   Temporary Duty (TDY) travel. All provisions of this regulation shall comply with applicable
   Federal guidance.

   This regulation applies to the travel of USDA employees, individuals employed
   intermittently by the Department, and non-employees who execute official USDA activities.
   The Agency or Staff Office paying for the travel is responsible for policy and procedures for
   travel management.

   Personnel policies, including policies applicable when employees are in travel status, are
   outside the scope of this document. USDA managers and employees should seek the
   guidance of their servicing personnel office for policies pertaining to pay, compensatory time
   off for travel, other compensatory time, personnel benefits, requirements for overseas
   assignments (such as cost of living allowances and hardship pay differentials), administering
   leave, and other personnel actions involving employees in travel status.



                                               1
2. CANCELLATION

  This regulation supersedes DM 2300-001, dated June 15, 2010.

3. POLICY

  a. Travel Authorizations.

     (1) Travel may only be authorized for official Government purposes.

     (2) Travelers and approving officials are responsible for complying with USDA’s E-Gov
         Travel requirements for providing complete and accurate information in travel
         authorizations.

     (3) Travelers who normally use open or “blanket” travel authorizations, and need to
         travel for different purposes, must submit separate authorizations which describe the
         purpose of this travel for approval.

     (4) Travel authorizations for premium class travel must follow the procedures as detailed
         in the FTR.

  b. Trip-by-Trip and Open or “Blanket” Authorizations.

     (1) Travel may be authorized by either a trip-by-trip or open authorization.

     (2) A trip-by-trip authorization requires an approving official to authorize each trip
         before travel commences and expenses are incurred. Trip-by-trip authorizations are
         USDA’s preference due to the level of accountability and reporting detail.

     (3) Open or “blanket” travel authorizations can be used by an approving official to
         authorize multiple trips for an employee over a specific period of time. In this
         scenario, the employee or travel arranger can then book individual trips at later dates
         without further authorization. These authorizations may be used for frequent, routine
         travel with consistent restrictions and travel purpose. They should be made as
         specific as possible and list locations, dates, methods of transportation, and approved
         miscellaneous expenses whenever possible. The FTR requires several types of travel
         expenses to be specifically approved in an open authorization (e.g. use of a rental
         car).

  c. Travel Vouchers.

     (1) Travelers must submit travel vouchers for authorized travel to their designated
         approving official, as required by the FTR, within 5 working days after completing a
         trip or period of travel. Travelers in a continuous travel status must submit interim
         travel vouchers, at a minimum, every 2 weeks.


                                              2
   (2) Travel vouchers must be reviewed and approved/disapproved for payment by the
       designated approving official within 5 days of receipt.

   (3) An approving official may authorize an appropriate official at a traveler's duty station
       to approve travel vouchers if the traveler’s supervisors are located at other geographic
       locations.

   (4) All travel vouchers are subject to post-payment audit by OCFO.

d. Actual Expense.

   OCFO sets the threshold under which Agency and Staff Office heads may authorize
   travelers to incur actual expenses above per diem for authorized expenses, and approve
   reimbursement. Such expenses should be approved only when prudent, such as when
   travelers would have to endure sub-standard lodging and meals at per diem rates.
   Agency and Staff Office Heads may approve actual expense reimbursements at or below
   per diem and delegate this authority.

   Authorization requests for actual expenses should be made, to the fullest extent possible,
   in advance of travel. Actual expense reimbursement may also be approved after travel is
   completed (“post-approval”) when the approving official determines that one of the
   following has occurred:

   (1) An emergency situation in which a request for pre-travel authorization was not
       possible; or

   (2) Unanticipated, unusual, and exceptional circumstances resulted in the incurrence of
       actual and necessary expenses that were much greater than the authorized per-diem
       allowance.

e. Receipts.

   (1) To receive reimbursement, travelers are required to provide electronic receipts for
       lodging, airfare, and all expenses greater than $75. This policy includes obtaining
       receipt(s) from the airline or other documentation as proof they took the flight(s) and
       incurred the fare(s) for which they are seeking reimbursement.

   (2) For audit purposes, USDA may request a hard copy receipt for expenses greater than
       $75 not electronically attached to the travel voucher.

   (3) Travelers are responsible for all transportation documents for official travel issued to
       them. They also are personally responsible for any additional cost for official travel
       resulting from improper safeguarding of these transportation documents. Travelers
       must return any unused tickets, coupons, or other evidence of refund to their Travel
       Management Center.


f. Mixed Official and Personal (Leisure) Travel.
                                             3
   Official travel must be in the best interest of the Government. Approving officials should
   not authorize travel that mixes official business and personal activity when there is an
   appearance that the focus of the trip falls under the latter category.

   When mixing personal (leisure) travel with official travel, documented approval from the
   delegated approving official must be received. Documented approval can be provided
   electronically through comment fields in the E-Gov Travel system, email or paper
   methods. The approval should clarify what expenses are authorized and how they will be
   calculated. It also should be attached to the electronic travel authorization. General
   Officers, through the delegation of authority, may approve their own mixed travel.

g. Transportation Expenses.

   (1) Rental Car.

      The use of a rental car requires explicit authorization from the Approving Official,
      and must be deemed advantageous to the Government. Approving officials must
      authorize the least expensive compact size car available. Justifications must be made
      in travel authorizations for the rental of vehicles larger than economy class. Such
      determinations include cost, number of passengers, security, location of rental
      facilities, office hours, and wait times. Employees must refuel the rental vehicle prior
      to returning the vehicle at the drop off location to preclude added expense charges by
      the rental car company. Employees are encouraged to share rental cars when
      appropriate.

   (2) Agency Use of Government Contract, Restricted, and Non-Refundable Fares.

      Employees should book airfares that are most advantageous to the Government.
      USDA has determined that restricted fares are most advantageous in many instances.
      The Department has delegated authority to authorize restricted fare use to Agency and
      Staff Office heads.

      (a) Government Contract Fares: GSA provides both regular contract fares (city
          pairs), and city pairs with capacity limits. The lower-cost city pairs with capacity
          limits fares should be used whenever available, as required by FTR. FTR
          mandates the use of Government contract fares unless travelers meet one of the
          exceptions listed within the regulation. These exceptions include a non-contract
          carrier offering a lower fare to the general public that, if used, will result in a
          lower total trip cost to the Government.

      (b) Restricted and Non-Refundable Fares: Employees are encouraged to use these
          lower-cost fares when they meet FTR exceptions. Individual travel authorizations
          requesting the use of these fares shall be justified, routed, and approved through
          USDA’s E-Gov Travel system. Travelers and approving officials must consider
          the potential cost savings and risks of using these fares. Additional costs due to
          official travel being curtailed, cancelled, interrupted for official purposes, or for

                                            4
          other reasons beyond the employee’s control, if acceptable to the agency or staff
          office, may be fully reimbursed.

       (c) Agencies that allow their employees to use non-refundable tickets must
           implement internal controls over the process.

h. Premium Class Travel.

   (1) General.

       Coach class travel is the USDA preference. Authorization can be requested for the
       use of premium class travel. It must meet FTR requirements. Any additional costs or
       penalties incurred by an employee resulting from unauthorized use of non-contract
       service are levied to the traveler. Authorization is unnecessary when an employee’s
       frequent travel benefits are used to upgrade to premium class or business class service
       on an airline or AMTRAK trains.

   (2) Requests for Approval.

       All requests for premium class travel should be submitted to the approving official at
       least 7 days before the commencement of travel, unless it is emergency travel.
       Premium class travel must be approved in advance of booking travel. Requests are
       approved on an individual trip basis. Approving officials may approve a “blanket”
       authorization for travelers to accommodate a disability or special need substantiated
       by a medical authority.

   (3) Reporting.

       Agencies, Staff Offices and OIG will report quarterly to OCFO on the use of
       premium class travel.

i. Use of Paper Tickets.

   There are two situations where paper tickets are allowed:

   1) For international travel, or

   2) When electronic tickets are unavailable.

j. Local Travel.

   (1) Travelers may be reimbursed for travel expenses incurred through performing official
       duties in and around their duty station. This reimbursement does not cover normal
       commuting expenses, except under the Commuter Transit Subsidy Benefits Program.
       When the expense appears reasonable and necessary to conduct business, the traveler
       should be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenses. Local travel expenses must be
       claimed within the fiscal year the expenses were incurred.

                                            5
   (2) Local travel expenses may include such things as the cost of subway, bus, train, taxi,
       mileage, tolls, and parking. Local travel expenses could be incurred in a variety of
       work-related situations including, but not limited to, required attendance at meetings,
       conferences, other official functions, training, or periodic work assignments at
       alternative duty locations in or around the duty station. Per diem expenses, including
       lodging costs, cannot be authorized or reimbursed.

   (3) Approval for local travel expenses shall be made on a case-by-case basis. The
       traveler seeking reimbursement must clearly illustrate and justify that local travel
       costs incurred were additional, out-of-pocket expenses, and not part of the normal
       commuting expense.

   (4) Agency and Staff Office Heads or their designees may determine the appropriate
       method for reimbursing their employees for local travel expenses.

   (5) Agencies should issue guidance on calculating additional out-of-pocket expenses that
       are not part of the employee’s normal commuting expense. The employee’s
       supervisor (or designated approving official) will determine whether those expenses
       are reasonable and should be reimbursed.

k. Emergency Travel.

   Approving officials are authorized to make payments for travel expenses incurred as a
   result of an illness or injury of an employee while the employee was in a travel status
   away from his official station in the United States, or while performing official duties
   outside the continental United States or in transit to or from the temporary duty station.

   While an employee is in official travel status, an approving official may authorize
   emergency travel due to the death or serious illness of a member of the employee’s
   immediate family. For the purposes of emergency travel, the approving official may
   extend the definition of family on a case-by-case basis. The relationship between the
   employee and the family member shall be taken into consideration for the extension of
   the definition of family. The approving official must use their best judgment in
   extending the definition of family.

l. Expenses Incurred Due to the Death of an Employee in Travel Status.

   Agency heads are authorized to make payments for expenses incurred as a result of the
   death of an employee while the employee was in travel status away from their official
   duty station in the United States or while performing official duties outside the
   continental United States or in transit to or from the temporary duty station. FTR
   provides specific instructions.

   The appropriation or fund available for the activity in which the deceased employee was
   engaged shall be charged with the allowable expenditures.

m. Conferences.

                                             6
(1) General Guidelines.

   Agencies and Staff Offices are expected to carefully plan and manage conference and
   training activities to mitigate the risk or appearance of inappropriate spending and
   activities. Conference and training management should be performed in accordance
   with the FTR, and GSA guidance, Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
   directives, and this regulation (see Appendix A). To ensure efficient spending,
   agencies are encouraged to devise strategic alternatives to Government conference
   and training travel, including local or technological alternatives (e.g. video
   teleconferencing). All conference and training activities shall be held at the most
   cost-effective location, considering such factors as per diem, transportation, and
   rental of conference or training rooms. When choosing a conference or training
   location, a cost comparison of at least three geographically diverse viable cities must
   be conducted. A cost comparison is not required if a majority of the likely attendees
   are stationed in the local vicinity of the proposed conference or training location. A
   contracting officer should be used to assist in finding the most cost-effective
   conference or training facility.

(2) Annual Plans for Conference and Training Activities

    No later than August 31 of each year, each Agency and Staff Office is required to
    submit to OCFO a fiscal year annual plan for all conference and/or training activities
    that will be hosted/sponsored or attended and where the estimated cost to the Federal
    Government is more than $7,000. OIG’s annual plan must be submitted to the
    Secretary or Deputy Secretary of Agriculture.

    Agencies are to report to OCFO any conference and/or training activity that is not
    included in the annual plan prior to conducting the event.

    For more detailed information on conference and training management, see
    Appendix A.

(3) Approval to Conduct Conference and Training Activities

   (a) Before submitting a proposal for a conference or training activity to the
       appropriate official identified in subsection (d) below, the Agency or Staff Office
       must determine if the following statements are true:

       1. The conference or training activity will help further the agency’s or the
          Department’s mission;

       2. The information cannot be shared as effectively through another means such
          as a teleconference or the Internet;

       3. The number of employees attending is justified;

       4. The location is appropriate and justified, and a prudent person would not think
          it a waste for tax dollars to be spent for this conference or training event at this
                                         7
        location. (The request must indicate whether the conference or training will
        take place at a non-USDA government facility, commercial facility, or a
        combination of facilities);

   5. The meeting location is near where a majority of the attendees are stationed. If
      not, the detailed cost analysis is to include cost comparisons to locations near
      the majority of attendees;

   6. The conference or training activity is necessary, considering the limited
      budget of the agency; and

   7. For conferences or training activities held or sponsored by a USDA Agency or
      Staff Office, any vendors providing supplies or services for the conference or
      training activity were selected through a competitive contracting process.
      (Conference or training requests involving a sole source contract or no
      contract must include additional justification).

(b) Agencies and Staff Offices must submit proposals and obtain approval from
    officials listed in the subsection (d) below to conduct conference and/or training
    activities which have estimated total USDA costs exceeding $7,000.

(c) Proposals must be approved by Agency Heads and/or the Under Secretary or
    Assistant Secretary, in conformance with approval limits, and submitted in
    USDA’s OCFO Conference Transparency and Tracking tool, six (6) weeks before
    any funds are committed. If agencies submit hardcopy proposals, the OCFO
    templates must be completed. The templates are located on the OCFO’s Website
    under the Travel Express link. Agencies and Staff Offices must obtain approval
    before funds are obligated, except for events that must be conducted due to
    emergencies or newly emerging issues. Each proposal must include the FTR
    required information, including justifications for the events, and estimated costs
    for:

   1.    Temporary duty and local transportation;

   2.    Per diem;

   3.    Rental/facilities and audio visual costs;

   4.    Refreshment/meal costs;

   5.    Printed materials;

   6.    Promotional materials and exhibit costs; and

   7.    Employees’ salary and benefits for time attending and traveling to/from the
        conference.


                                      8
      If an agency is proposing to receive financial support for the event from non-
      Federal sources, these proposals shall also include Agency or Staff Office Heads’
      certification that there is no conflict of interest.

  (d) To mitigate the risk of inappropriate spending, the following levels of approval
      are required:

      1. Agency and Staff Office Heads’ approval for all conference and/or training
         activities that are less than $40,000. This authority may be delegated to the
         Agency Senior Accountable Travel Official. Further delegations are not
         permissible;

      2. General Officers’ approval for conference and/or training activities estimated
         to cost less than $75,000; and

      3. Deputy Secretary’s approval for conference and/or training activities
         estimated to cost more than $75,000.

  (e) Conference and training activities exceeding $450,000 are prohibited and require
      a waiver from the Secretary per OMB Memorandum 12-12. If Agencies are
      required to host or sponsor a conference and/or training activity exceeding
      $450,000, and the conference and/or training activity meets the criteria of an
      exceptional circumstance, OCFO will automatically seek the approval of the
      Secretary.

      A cushion is built into the process to ensure that actual costs do not exceed
      estimated costs and thereby mistakenly violate OMB M-12-12 (e.g., a conference
      with net expenses projected to be $450,000 actually has net expenses of
      $500,000).

  (f) Proposals to conduct events not included in an Agency or Staff Office’s Annual
      Plan may be denied on that basis. Consideration may be given to events
      addressing emergencies, newly emerging issues, or others with acceptable
      justification.

(4) Quarterly and Annual Reporting.

   Based on the dates below, the Agency or Staff Office Senior Accountable Travel
   Official must provide and certify to OCFO a quarterly report where net expenses
   exceeded $7,000 for USDA hosted, sponsored, and attended conference and/or
   training activity. OCFO will obtain data from the certified quarterly reports to
   prepare annual reports that meet the requirement 7 U.S.C. 2255b and OMB
   Memorandum-12-12. The quarterly due dates are listed below:

        QUARTER                         PERIOD                     REPORT DUE DATE
          First                October 1st – December 31st            January 31st
         Second                 January 1st – March 31st               April 30th

                                       9
               Third                    April 1st – June 30th                   July 31st
               Fourth                 July 1st – September 30th                October 31st

      The reports shall include:

      (a) Conference and/or training name as listed on brochure, flyer, publication or
          organization’s Web site;

      (b) Whether the event was attended, sponsored, or hosted;

      (c) Location of the conference and/or training activity;

      (d) Dates of the conference and/or training activity;

      (e) For conferences where the Department awarded a procurement contract, a
          description of the contracting procedures related to such conference awarded
          through competition or sole source;

      (f) Basis for city selection;

      (g) Type of facility where event was held, i.e., USDA, Federal, University, or
          Commercial;

      (h) Total number of individuals whose travel or other conference and/or training
          expenses were paid by the agency and;

      (i) Total actual costs associated with the conference and/or training event (travel
          expenses, audio/visual costs, food or beverage cost, salary costs, facility costs,
          registration fees, exhibit costs, etc.);

      (j) A brief explanation of how the conference and/or training activity advanced the
          agency’s mission.


   For more detailed information on conference and training management, see Appendix A.


n. Miscellaneous Expenses.

   Miscellaneous expenses may be authorized for official travel if the approving official
   deems them appropriate. Approving officials should evaluate the need to reimburse
   miscellaneous expenses on a case-by-case basis. They should disallow any expenses not
   in the Government’s best interest. Many of these expenses can often be avoided with
   proper planning or the use of Government-provided alternatives. Travelers and
   approving officials should discuss and establish a clear understanding of which
   miscellaneous expenses are authorized for a specific trip. Travelers should itemize each
   miscellaneous expense with its estimated cost on the travel authorization.

                                            10
   (1) Personal Telecommunications.

       Personal telecommunications may be authorized for travel lasting more than one
       night. This policy covers personal telephone calls, Internet access for personal use,
       and other methods identified as personal telecommunications. While personal
       telecommunications may be used on any day at any location during official travel,
       reimbursement is limited to $5 a day in the 50 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto
       Rico, or the Virgin Islands, and $15 a day outside of the aforementioned. The total
       telecommunications cost may exceed the daily limit on a particular day; however, the
       total reimbursement cannot exceed the $5 and/or $15 per day limit multiplied by the
       number of lodging nights.

       Agencies and Staff Offices may authorize different policies for employees with
       Government-provided mobile telephones.

   (2) Hotel Taxes.

       While the Federal Government, generally, is exempt from local and State sales taxes,
       not all States and localities offer tax exemptions to individual travelers. Some
       locations do not specify a particular form on which to claim the tax exemption. When
       available, travelers should complete the necessary documentation required to waive
       State and local hotel sales taxes. In locations where these taxes cannot be waived, the
       taxes are reimbursed as a miscellaneous expense. Additional information can be
       found on GSA’s SmartPay Web site (https://smartpay.gsa.gov/about-gsa-
       smartpay/tax-information/state-response-letter).

o. Expenses Not Authorized.

   Expenses related to office supplies, conference fees, training fees, shipping costs,
   conference/meeting rooms, and light refreshments are not travel expenses. They may not
   be authorized or paid through the Department’s travel system.

p. Travel Allowances for Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) Assignees.

   (1) Overview.

       IPA (5 U.S.C. § 3371- 3376) provides for temporary exchanges of personnel between
       the Federal Government and State or local Governments, institutions of higher
       education, Indian tribes or tribal organizations, and any other eligible organization.
       Each such exchange is executed under the provisions of a specific agreement that
       states the purpose and duration of the exchange, the places, hours, and conditions of
       work, and the methods of financing the individual’s pay and allowances.

   (2) Coverage.

       State or local Government agency employees assigned to USDA under IPA
       appointments, and USDA employees assigned to State and local Government
       agencies may be paid travel and transportation allowances. USDA appropriations
                                           11
   may be used to pay for all or part of these expenses. The type and extent of expenses
   to be authorized are based on an administrative determination by an authorized
   official, and must be set forth in a written IPA agreement. IPA assignees may receive
   either certain change of official duty station allowances or per diem for each
   assignment.

(3) Service Agreement.

   Expenses for either per diem or change of official duty station allowances may not be
   authorized unless the IPA assignee has agreed, in writing, to complete the entire
   period of assignment or 1 year, whichever is shorter. Such expenses may be
   authorized if the employee is separated or reassigned for reasons beyond the
   assignee's control and found acceptable by USDA. If the IPA assignee violates the
   agreement, the money spent for expenses other than those for official travel while
   away from the assignment location is recoverable from the assignee as a debt due,
   unless waived in whole or in part by the head of the agency in which the assignee is
   located.

(4) Assignments where change of official duty station allowances are not involved.

   The following travel allowances are authorized for the IPA assignee only:

   (a) Between home and assignment location. Travel between the assignee's home and
       assignment location to include coach transportation or mileage as allowed in the
       FTR for use of privately owned vehicle, plus the standard Continental United
       States per diem rate during travel when initially reporting for duty and when
       returning to original duty station upon completion of the assignment.

   (b) While at assignment location:

       1. Assignment of 30 days or less. The applicable maximum per diem rate
          (standard CONUS or locality rate from FTR Chapter 301, Appendix A) will
          be paid to the assignee for the first 30 calendar days after reporting for duty.

       2. Assignment greater than 30 days. For the first 30 calendar days of an
          assignment, per diem, as shown in (1) above, may be paid to the assignee.
          During this 30-day period, the assignee shall seek long-term residence
          accommodations. After the first 30-day period, a lower per diem rate of up to
          55 percent of that paid during the initial period may be authorized for the
          remainder of the assignment. If the reduced rate is not known at the time the
          travel authorization is prepared, include a statement in the authorization that
          an amendment will be issued during the first 30 days of the assignment. This
          statement will specify the reduced rate. A travel authorization must be issued
          before the start of the assignment. It also must specify exactly what travel
          allowances are approved.

(5) Dual per diem rates.

                                        12
       An IPA assignee, who is receiving per diem at the assignment location, is authorized
       receipt of an additional per diem allowance while on official temporary duty at
       another location (except as noted above). The additional per diem is allowed only if
       the assignee is occupying long-term residence accommodations, and limited to the
       increased expenses resulting from the temporary duty travel.

       (a) In computing dual per diem allowances, the lodgings portion of the authorized per
           diem rate at the assignment location will be paid. For the first and last days of
           travel, only a proportionate share of the amount allowed for meals may be paid.

       (b) Full per diem at a temporary duty location will be paid to assignees who will not
           incur dual lodging costs, or who received change of official duty station
           allowances instead of per diem. Assignees are authorized the same allowances as
           USDA employees.

q. International Travel.

   (1) Specific authorities and rates pertaining to international travel are contained in the
       FTR. The requirements in this part are in addition to those generally applicable to all
       travel.

       The Foreign Agricultural Service (FAS) provides assistance and support to all USDA
       employees who travel internationally. FAS shall prepare the USDA Foreign Trip
       Report bi-weekly for submission to the Office of the Secretary. Travelers are
       required to work with the agency to obtain visas, country clearances, and official
       Government passports. Travelers are encouraged to use the FAS Web site for
       guidance when taking an international trip at www.fas.usda.gov/international-travel.
       Help is also available via email: international-travel@usda.gov.

   (2) International travel will be authorized when it is in the USDA’s best interests and the
       expenses to be incurred can be justified in advancing its programs. International
       travel may also be performed for the benefit of another Department, an international
       Government, an international organization, etc., subject to such laws and regulations
       as may be most appropriate under the circumstances involved. Careful administrative
       consideration should be given to all authorizations for international travel and related
       costs. Before issuance of each authorization for such travel, the authorizing official
       must exercise prudent judgment as to its necessity, and determine that the purpose of
       the travel:

       (a) Relates directly to the accomplishment of USDA authorized programs or
           functions and, therefore, that the expenses may be properly paid from funds
           appropriated or otherwise available to the agency;

       (b) Concerns the authorized program or functions of another Federal agency, and that
           the expenses are chargeable to the funds of that agency; or



                                            13
         (c) Benefits jointly, the Department and another Federal agency, another country, an
             international organization, etc., and that such benefit warrants a sharing of
             expenses by the parties involved.


4. RESPONSIBILITIES

  As management officials are delegated authorities under this regulation, there must also be
  corresponding accountability. The delegated officials are required to maintain necessary
  records to respond to any internal audits or external inquiries from the Congress, the OIG, the
  Government Accountability Office, and other agencies regarding these regulations.
  Management officials are required to immediately report any violation of these regulations to
  the Chief Financial Officer (CFO).

  a. Delegation from the Administrator of General Services to the Secretary of Agriculture.

     Per the GSA Administrator, through the FTR, the Secretary of Agriculture is authorized
     to implement policies for travel by employees and others authorized to travel at USDA
     expense. The GSA Administrator:

     (1) Promulgates the FTR to:

         (a) Interpret statutory and other policy requirements in a manner that balances the
             need to assure that official travel is conducted responsibly with the need to
             minimize administrative costs.

         (b) Communicate resulting policies clearly to Federal agencies and employees.

     (2) Authorizes the:

         (a) Secretary and Deputy Secretary to authorize all types of travel for any traveler,
             including themselves, per Agriculture Travel Regulation (ATR) and the FTR.

         (b) Secretary or Deputy Secretary to approve premium class travel for the Inspector
             General (IG), when approval is within the FTR requirements.

  b. Delegation from the Secretary to the CFO.

     (1) The CFO is delegated full responsibility for Departmental travel policy as contained
         in this regulation.

     (2) The CFO also has the authority to approve all forms of travel for special situations
         including, but not limited to, pandemics, natural disasters, and acts of terrorism to
         ensure the safety of Government employees, continuity of Government operations,
         and the safety of the general public.

  c. Delegation from the Secretary to General Officers.

                                              14
   General Officers may authorize, within ATR and FTR requirements, all types of travel,
   including premium class travel for their employees, and other individuals traveling for
   their office on Departmental business. General Officers:

   (1) Are authorized to approve their own travel (except premium class travel – see section
       (2) (a) below), but are encouraged to have their travel authorized by a subordinate or
       alternate. Specific approval for premium class travel must follow the procedures
       outlined in 3.h.(2) of this regulation.

   (2) May not delegate the authority to approve premium class travel, except in cases
       where employees have disabilities or special needs certified in accordance with
       Departmental Manual 4300-002, Reasonable Accommodation Procedures. In such
       cases, General Officers may grant blanket approval of premium class travel during
       the effective period of the certification.

       (a) May not authorize premium class travel for themselves (except the Deputy
           Secretary). The Secretary’s Chief of Staff is authorized to approve premium class
           travel for the CFO. The Secretary or Deputy Secretary will approve premium
           class travel for the IG.

       (b) When the Deputy Secretary or relative General Officer (and those officially acting
           in their positions) is on travel or leave, or is otherwise unavailable, the authority
           to approve premium class travel may be exercised by the CFO. If the CFO is on
           travel or leave, or is otherwise unavailable, any General Officer may authorize
           premium class travel for another one within the requirements of this regulation.

   (3) Are authorized to approve payments for expenses incurred because of the illness,
       injury, or death of an employee while the employee was in a travel status as specified
       in this regulation.

d. Delegation from the Secretary to Agency and Staff Office Heads.

   Agency and Staff Office heads may authorize, within the requirements of this regulation
   and FTR, all types of travel for their employees and other individuals traveling for their
   agencies, except premium class travel. Agency and Staff Office heads:

   (1) May approve all international and domestic travel, unless specifically restricted by
       this document.

   (2) May approve payments for expenses incurred as a result of the illness, injury, or death
       of an employee while the employee was in a travel status.

   (3) Shall ensure employees are trained and knowledgeable about travel regulations,
       manuals, process, and USDA’s E-Gov Travel system. This includes mandating that
       approving officials and all new employees be trained, and requiring refresher training
       for employees when needed.

e. Delegation from Agency and Staff Office Heads to Approving Officials.
                                            15
     Agency and Staff Office heads are instructed to use special care to ensure that delegations
     of authority are held to sufficiently high levels to ensure proper review and control of
     travel. Delegations must be in writing and contained in agency internal regulations.
     Agency and Staff Office heads may delegate their authority, except for the following:

     (1) Approving payment of subsistence and transportation expenses for threatened law
         enforcement/investigative employees. OIG must be notified of all instances where
         threatened individuals are moved into temporary living accommodations either at or
         away from the official duty station.

     (2) Designating the specific award ceremonies for which employees (and one individual
         related by blood or affinity of the employee's choosing) may be reimbursed for travel
         expenses.

  f. CFO delegation of authority to Agencies and Staff Offices to Issue Supplemental Travel
     Regulations and Procedures.

     Agencies and Staff Offices may issue travel regulations and procedures that supplement
     the ATR. To help standardize and streamline travel policy and management, agencies are
     encouraged to minimize such regulations and limit them to procedural interpretations. A
     USDA Agency or Staff Office travel regulation cannot grant additional benefits or adjust
     processes defined in the FTR or this regulation.

     To ensure agency policies and procedures are consistent with FTR and this regulation,
     Agencies and Staff Offices may be required to submit their travel regulations to the CFO
     for review.

  g. Employees’ Responsibilities.

     (1) Employees must use Government funds only for travel for official purposes.
         Accordingly, employees shall ensure that their activities, while on travel, are prudent,
         appropriate, and justifiable to the public.

     (2) Employees on official travel must also comply with guidance governing behavior on
         the part of Federal employees (such as ethics rules, standards of conduct, and FTR,
         USDA, or Agency and Staff office-specific policies and manuals).


5. DEFINITIONS

  a. Agency. For this regulation, the term “agency” means an organizational unit of USDA,
     other than staff offices, whose Head reports to officials within the Office of the Secretary,
     Deputy Secretary, and Under Secretaries.

  b. Agency Head. The head of an organizational unit of the Department who reports to an
     Under Secretary; the head of an administrative staff office who reports to the Secretary;
     and the IG.
                                              16
c. Approving Official (AO)/Approver. USDA official who has been delegated the authority
   to authorize travel and payment of travel vouchers for a traveler by an Agency or Staff
   Office Head.

d. Baggage Fees. Fees pertaining to checked bags. Checked bags refer to those handed over
   to the airline and usually carried in the cargo compartment of the same aircraft.

e. City-Pair Fares. These are GSA-contracted airfares for Federal employees for official
   travel. The fares are fully refundable, do not have change fees, and have a fixed
   maximum price. Under the terms of the Government contract with the airlines, Federal
   employees on official travel must use these fares unless they meet one of the exceptions
   listed in the FTR 301-10.107.

f. Conference. A meeting, retreat, seminar, symposium, or event that involves attendee
   travel. The term “conference” also applies to training activities that are considered to be
   conference under 5 CFR 410.404.

g. Conference Expenses. All direct and indirect conference costs paid by the Government,
   whether paid directly by agencies or reimbursed by agencies to travelers or others
   associated with the conference.

h. Conference Attendance. Employee participation in a USDA or non-USDA
   sponsored/hosted conference.

i. General Officers. Those who assist the Secretary in the supervision and control of the
   Department as defined in 7 CFR §2.4.

j. Government Facility. Property owned or substantially controlled by the Government.

k. Immediate Family. Any of the following named members of the employee’s household
   at the time he/she reports for duty at the new permanent duty station or performs other
   authorized travel involving family members: spouse, same-sex domestic partner, children
   of the employee, of the employee’s spouse, or of the employee’s same-sex domestic
   partner, who are unmarried and under 21 years of age or who, regardless of age, are
   physically or mentally incapable of self-support. (The term “children” shall include
   natural offspring; stepchildren; adopted children; grandchildren, legal minor wards or
   other dependent children who are under legal guardianship of the employee, of the
   employee’s spouse, or of the same-sex domestic partner; and an unborn child(ren) born
   and moved after the employee’s effective date of transfer; dependent parents (including
   step and legally adoptive parents) of the employee, of the employee’s spouse, or of the
   employee’s same-sex domestic partner; and dependent brothers and sisters (including
   step and legally adoptive brothers and sisters) of the employee, of the employee’s spouse,
   or of the employee’s same-sex domestic partner, who are unmarried and under 21 years
   of age or who, regardless of age, are physically or mentally incapable of self support
   (FTR 300-3.1).


                                            17
l. Interim Travel Voucher. An official request for reimbursement of travel expenses prior
   to the completion of the temporary duty travel.

m. Local Travel. Any travel as result of official business within 50 miles of the employee’s
   duty station or residence lasting less than 12 hours.

n. Local Travel Expenses. Includes expenses such as subway, bus, taxi, mileage, tolls, and
   parking incurred as a result of official business.

o. Official Travel. Travel performed on behalf of the U.S. Government which is authorized
   via written or electronic travel authorizations/orders. Normally results in the traveler
   submitting a settlement voucher for reimbursement of authorized expenses.

p. Official Travel Expense. An authorized expense incurred as a result of official travel.
   Authority to incur such expenses is generally provided through a travel
   authorization/order.

q. Open or “blanket” travel authorizations. Permission to travel on official business without
   further authorization; or limited by certain specific conditions, i.e., travel to specific
   geographic area(s) for specific purpose(s), subject to trip cost ceilings, or for specific
   periods of time.

r. Premium Class Travel. Any class of travel accommodations above coach class (e.g. first
   class or business class.)

s. Rest Period. A break of more than 23 hours, but less than 24 hours, between the times an
   employee arrives at a destination and must begin official duties.

t. Restricted and Non-refundable Fares. Fares offered by a private-sector supplier of air,
   rail or bus transportation available to the public.

u. Senior Accountable Travel Official. An official selected by an Agency Head or Staff
   Office Director who is responsible for the conference and training related reports, internal
   controls, cost tracking procedures and activities.

v. Sponsored/Hosted Conference/Training. A conference or training for which an agency
   leads or participates in the arranging, planning, conducting, or funding. Each conference
   or training event has a principal sponsor and may have multiple co-hosts. The sponsor
   typically pays for all or part of the fees associated with facility rental,
   speakers/presenters, etc.

w. Staff Office. Departmental administrative office whose head reports to the Assistant
   Secretary for Administratio or officials within the Office of the Secretary.

x. Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel. A place, away from an employee’s official duty station,
   where the employee is authorized to travel.


                                            18
  y. Training. Travel in conjunction with educational activities to become proficient or
     qualified in one or more areas of responsibility (FTR Appendix C to Chapter 301).
     5 CFR 410.404 defines ’training’ to mean the process of providing for and making
     available to an employee, and placing or enrolling the employee in a planned, prepared,
     and coordinated program, course, curriculum, subject, system, or routine of instruction or
     education, in scientific, professional, technical, mechanical, trade, clerical, fiscal,
     administrative, or other fields which will improve individual and organizational
     performance and assist in achieving the agency’s mission and performance goals.

  z. Training activity. An employee’s attendance at a conference as a developmental
     assignment when: 1) The announced purpose of the conference is educational or
     instructional; 2) more than half the time is scheduled for a planned, organized exchange
     of information between presenters and audience which meets the definition of training;
     3) The content of the conference is designed to improve individual and/or organization
     performance; and 4) Development benefits will be derived through the employee’s
     attendance as stated in 5 CFR 410.404.

  aa. Travel Management Center (TMC). A commercial travel firm under contract that
      provides reservations, tickets, and related travel-management services for official travel.

  bb. Viable City as related to conference and training planning. A city with an available
      conference facility and lodging, if needed, that a prudent person would consider to be a
      cost-effective location, including being reachable by standard methods of transportation.


6. INTERNAL CONTROLS

  Each agency and staff office is expected to maintain effective internal controls over travel
  activities, cost, and reimbursement. Essential elements of such controls include, but are not
  limited to:

  (1) Ensuring travel is appropriate and necessary;

  (2) Limiting the authorization of travel expenses and reimbursement to only those necessary
      to accomplish the organization’s and Department’s mission in the most economical and
      effective manner;

  (3) Using the method of travel most advantageous to the Government, including lower-cost
      airfares. Special consideration should be given to minimizing travel time and cost to the
      Government;

  (4) Ensuring travelers, travel arrangers, approving officials, Federal agency travel
      administrators, and other travel management staff:

     (a) Are trained on travel regulations, policies, and USDA’s E-Gov Travel system.




                                               19
     (b) Understand and meet their responsibilities (i.e., for requesting, approving,
         conducting, and reimbursing travel), and comply with the FTR, this regulation, and
         related regulations and manuals.

  (5) Monitoring travel activities, including approvals, obligations, and expenditures;

  (6) Coordinating travel when more than one employee is going to the same event or for the
      same purpose, avoiding duplication;

  (7) Identifying and correcting issues that hinder travel management and/or increase costs,
      including:

     (a) Timeliness and accuracy of travel authorization and voucher submission and
         approval;

     (b) Reimbursement of inappropriate or excessive expenses;

     (c) Inadequate and/or ineffective use of lower-cost airfares;

     (d) Delays in resolving E-Gov Travel system and related financial management system
         problems; and

     (e) Maintaining travel management office(s) with adequate staffing, expertise, and
         authority to effectively manage travel.


7. RECORDS RETENTION

  Records relating to reimbursing individuals, such as travel authorizations, travel vouchers,
  and all other supporting documents relating to official travel of officers, employees,
  dependents or others authorized by law to travel should be maintained as required.

  As of the publication date of this regulation, the U.S. National Archives and Records
  Administration (NARA) required that travel-related records be retained 6 years and 3
  months. However, refer to your Agency Records Officer for current retention requirements.

  USDA records schedules authorize destruction of temporary records (paper and electronic)
  when their retention period expires, providing the record is not involved in litigation, audit,
  FOIA requests or other actions that may require the record to be kept beyond the normal
  retention period.


8. MAJOR POLICY CHANGES

  This update also includes a number of changes:

  a. Streamlines the regulation by eliminating all sections which duplicate the FTR. Thus, it
     limits the policy to USDA’s specific additional requirements;
                                               20
b. Sets expectations for Agency and Staff Offices’ internal controls over travel activities,
   cost, and reimbursement;
c. Replaces the Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008 (Farm Bill) definition of a
   conference with the FTR’s definition;
d. Adds the definition of baggage fees, conference expenses, training, training activities,
   and Senior Accountable Travel Official;
e. Requires agencies to report and seek pre-approval for training activities as well as
   conferences;
f. Changes the approval threshold for conference and training activities for Agency and
   Staff Office heads, OCFO, and the Deputy Secretary;
g. Conference and training proposals are no longer submitted to the Assistant Secretary of
   Administration for approval;
h. Proposals to conduct conference and training activities are to be submitted for the Deputy
   Secretary’s approval 6 weeks before obligating funds;
i. Annual and quarterly reports require certification by the agency’s Senior Accountable
   Travel Official;
j. Agencies must submit a quarterly report of conference and training activities where net
   expenses exceed $7,000;
k. Requires agencies to submit annual plans for hosted/sponsored as well as attended
   conference and training activities;
l. Changes the requirement for obtaining approval for conference/training activities and
   agency requirements to use the automated OCFO tool, when available;
m. Increases the mileage threshold for what can be considered local travel to within 50 miles
   of the duty station or the employee’s residence;
n. Removes the International Travel Procedures (formerly Appendix A) and references the
   Foreign Agricultural Service Web site. The site provides current information on
   international travel; and
o. Requires approving officials to review and approve/disapprove travel vouchers within
   5 days of receipt.
p. Requires employees to rent a compact size vehicle and not an economy car.
q. Requires employees to refuel rental vehicle prior to dropping off at rental location.




                                           21
                                        APPENDIX A

            CONFERENCE AND TRAINING MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES


The following information provides additional guidelines for managing conference/training
activities.

   (1) Annual Plan.

       Agencies must develop and submit their Annual Plan no later than August 31 of each
       year.

       Each agency or staff office is required to submit and publish to OCFO a fiscal year
       Annual Plan for all hosted/sponsored conference attendance and training activity. At a
       minimum, agencies are required to provide a simple, least cost alternative analysis in the
       annual plan (e.g. using GSA’s Travel Trax automated tool to estimate airfare, lodging,
       and per diem). Plans are to be entered in the Conference Transparency, Approval and
       Tracking tool, by selecting the “Annual Plan” option.

       When determining the cost of a conference or training activity, agencies must:

       (a) Carefully plan and manage conference or training to mitigate the risk or appearance
           of inappropriate spending and activities;

       (b) Hold events at USDA or other Government facilities whenever possible;

       (c) Ensure attendees’ time is fully utilized (e.g. agendas reflect 8-hour work days,
           excluding lunch periods, and minimize travel days/expenses);

       (d) Not include “networking events” or receptions in the agendas, for these can be
           construed as non-business activities. If informal face-to-face discussions about the
           business are needed among attendees (e.g. those who normally do not interact, but
           need to understand and support each other in implementing programs), describe that
           business purpose clearly in the session title;

       (e) Limit or eliminate spending on refreshments;

       (f) Limit or eliminate spending on promotional materials;

       (g) Ensure per diem is reduced when meals are provided through other funding (e.g.
           conference fees);




                                               A-1
   (h) Plan in advance and use:

       1. Lower-cost airfares, including restricted fares, when it benefits USDA and
          follows the FTR and ATR.

       2. Competitive bidding to obtain below-per-diem lodging, and low-cost or free local
          transportation and facilities. Any meeting, conference, or training sponsored or
          co-sponsored by any USDA agency must conform to the Hotel and Motel Fire
          Safety Act of 1990. This law specifically prohibits the use of Federal funds to
          sponsor or cosponsor any conference, meeting, or training seminar in a hotel or
          motel that does not meet the law’s fire protection requirements.

   (i) Agencies and Staff Offices should have the following information available prior to
       submitting their Annual Plan:

       1. Event name
       2. Location
       3. Purpose description
       4. Justification
       5. Conference and/or training dates
       6. Names of attendees
       7. Travel costs for each employee
       8. Salary costs for employees travel time
       9. Salary costs for employees time attending conference or training
       10. Per diem
       11. Transportation costs
       12. Local transportation
       13. Miscellaneous travel expenses
       14. Conference registration fees
       15. Speaker fees
       16. Printing costs
       17. Rental/Facilities costs including cost comparisons
       18. Audio Visual support costs
       19. Consulting services costs
       20. Conference or training planning costs

   Estimates are permitted when developing the Annual Plan, which may include
   previously-held conference or training data, if applicable.

(2) Location Selection.

   First consideration must be given to less-costly locations for conference or training
   activities. Justification must be provided for not choosing the lowest cost alternatives.
   Agencies should make all appropriate efforts to conduct business and sponsor conference


                                          A-2
   or training in space controlled by the Federal Government, wherever practicable and cost-
   effective. The order of preference for USDA-sponsored conference events is:

       (a) Local USDA facilities;

       (b) Other Federal, State, and local Government facilities;

       (c) Colleges and universities; and

       (d) Commercial space.

   Agency and Staff Offices are encouraged to use a competitive contracting process for
   lodging, facilities, audiovisual support, and other expenses.

(3) Registration.

   All USDA-sponsored and attended conference and training that require attendee
   registrations are encouraged to use the Department’s electronic online training system,
   AgLearn, to enter and track registration fees.

(4) Conference Meal, Refreshment, and Promotional Materials Costs.

   The cost of any meals provided at non-USDA sponsored conference/training or covered
   by conference or training fees are to be deducted from travelers’ per diem in accordance
   with FTR 301-74.21.

   Agencies and Staff Offices should not purchase promotional materials unless deemed
   critical to achieving the mission purpose.

(5) Reporting.

   Agencies and OIG are to submit quarterly conference and training data to OCFO within a
   month of quarter’s end for any conference and/or training activity where the cost to the
   Federal Government exceeds $7,000. This process will facilitate the submission of the
   Secretary’s report to the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Agriculture and
   the Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry on conference sponsored or
   held by USDA or attended by its employees. Reports must be submitted to OCFO on or
   before the report due date.




                                            A-3
     The report shall include:

      (a) Conference or training activity name as listed on a publication, brochure, flyer, or
          organization’s Web site;

      (b) Location of the conference or training activity;

      (c) Dates of the conference or training activity;

      (d) Brief explanation how the conference or training activity advanced the mission of
          the agency;

      (e) Total number of individuals whose travel or other conference or training expense
          were paid by the agency; and

      (f) Total actual costs associated with the conference or training activity (i.e. travel
          expenses, audio/visual, food or beverage, salary and benefits, facility costs,
          registration fees, exhibit costs, etc.)


The table below lists the due date and time period associated with each quarterly submission.


            QUARTER                               PERIOD                     REPORT DUE DATE
               First                    October 1st – December 31st             January 31st
             Second                      January 1st – March 31st                April 30th
              Third                        April 1st – June 30th                  July 31st
              Fourth                     July 1st – September 30th              October 31st

An OCFO data call may request additional information should requirements change.




                                              A-4
