                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                               NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION DR 2400-006
 SUBJECT: Single Audit: Audit Follow Up –                      DATE:
 Management Decision – Compliance Supplement                   October 30, 2020
                                                               EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of the Chief Financial Officer
                                                               October 30, 2025



Section                                                                                     Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                  1
2.   Scope                                                                                    2
3.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                       2
4.   Background                                                                               3
5.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                               4
6.   Records Retention Requirements                                                           9
7.   Inquiries                                                                                9

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                     A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                    B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                     C-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.   The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) policy for effective
          implementation of the Single Audit Act Amendments of 1996, Public Law (P.L.) 104-
          156, and Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit
          Requirements for Federal Awards (Uniform Guidance), 2 Code of Federal Regulation
          (CFR) Part 200, which require that non-Federal entity that expends $750,000 or more
          during the non-Federal entity's fiscal year in Federal awards have a single or program-
          specific audit conducted for that year in accordance with the provisions of 2 CFR part
          200.

     b.   This Departmental Regulation (DR) requires Mission Area, agency, business unit, and
          staff office Key Program Officials to use the results of single audits to:

          (1) Issue management decisions 30 days prior to submission to the FAC to ensure
              recipients of USDA awards resolve current year and recurring findings identified in
              their single audit reports; and
       (2) Summarize and communicate single audit results and recipient actions to audit
           findings to Single Audit Key Management Liaison Officials for their use in
           evaluating Mission Area, agency, business unit, and staff office’s program staff
           oversight and monitoring of recipient performance and identifying programwide
           and recipient-specific problem areas needing management attention.


2. SCOPE

  a.   This DR applies to all Mission Areas, agencies, business units and staff offices
       responsible for managing single audits and Federal financial awards.

  b.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may use this DR as their internal
       guidance or may create their own policy, but may not create a policy that is less
       comprehensive or not in compliance with this DR.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This DR incorporates the Office of Management and Budget's (OMB) Uniform
       Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal
       Awards (Uniform Guidance) dated December 26, 2013. In developing the guidance,
       OMB consolidated existing OMB circulars (which are no longer in effect) into a single
       set of requirements codified at 2 CFR Part 200. OMB circulars consolidated in the
       Uniform Guidance include:

       (1) Circular A-21, Cost Principles for Educational Institutions, revised May 10, 2004;

       (2) Circular A-87, Cost Principles for State, Local and Indian Tribal Governments,
           revised May10, 2004;

       (3) Circular A-89, Federal Domestic Assistance Program Information, revised August
           17, 1984;

       (4) Circular A-102, Grants Awards and Cooperative Agreements with State and Local
           Governments, August 29, 1997;

       (5) Circular A-110, Uniform Administrative Requirements for Grants and Agreements
           with Institutions of Higher Education, Hospitals, and Other Non-Profit
           Organizations, November 19, 1993, as further amended September 30, 1999;

       (6) Circular A-122, Cost Principles for Non-Profit Organizations, revised May 10,
           2004;

       (7) Circular A-133, Audits of States, Local Governments, and Non-Profit
           Organizations, June 26, 2007; and

                                               2
       (8) Sections of Circular A-50, Audit Follow-up (revised September 29, 1982) related to
           audits performed under 2 CFR Part 200, Subpart F, Audit requirements.

  b.   All USDA agencies, Mission Areas, business units and staff offices will align their
       single audit policies and procedures with this DR within 6 months of the publication
       date.

  c.   This policy is effective immediately and remains in effect until it is superseded or
       expiration.


4. BACKGROUND

  The Single Audit Act Amendments of 1996 and Uniform Guidance are intended to promote
  sound financial management, including effective internal control over Federal awards
  expended by non-Federal entities (NFE). The audits required by the Single Audit Act
  Amendments of 1996 are a critical element in the Federal Government’s ability to ensure that
  Federal funds are properly used. Each year, about 30,000 single audits are conducted with
  several thousand identifying weaknesses in auditees’ financial management and internal
  control systems. The Federal Government must take timely and effective action to ensure
  that these weaknesses are corrected, not only for effective program operations, but also to
  minimize improper payments.

  The single audit is a rigorous, organization wide examination of NFEs that expend $750,000
  or more in Federal awards per fiscal year. It is performed annually and encompasses both
  financial and compliance components. The financial review examines whether the
  statements and transactions fairly and accurately describe the results of the recipient’s
  operations, in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). The
  compliance review, on the other hand, examines whether the recipient has complied with
  laws, regulations, and the provisions of contracts and Federal financial assistance agreements
  that may have a direct and material effect on each of the recipient’s programs. All NFEs that
  expend $750,000 or more of Federal awards during the entities’ fiscal year are required to
  have a single or program specific audit conducted for that year. In addition, NFEs must
  submit all required documentation to the Federal Audit Clearinghouse (FAC) or its successor
  system for archival purposes and for distribution to Federal Agencies responsible for
  programs for which the auditor identifies a finding.

  Each year, OMB issues the Appendix XI to 2 CFR Part 200, Compliance Supplement which
  is a guidebook for single audits. Compliance Supplements are updated annually and are
  available in their entirety on OMB’s Office of Federal Financial Management website at
  (https://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/management/office-federal-financial-management/). The
  Compliance Supplement is meant to serve as a guide for auditors, any NFE that expends
  Federal funds should be familiar with the compliance requirements and their program-
  specific section of the document. The Compliance Supplement is an important tool to



                                               3
  provide Mission Areas, agencies, business units, and staff offices Key Program Officials with
  an understanding of what issues auditors will be focused on when conducting a Single Audit.


5. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  Mission Areas, agencies, business units, and staff offices responsibilities vary depending on
  whether it is a Federal Awarding Agency or has been designated as a cognizant or oversight
  agency for audit. Cognizance or oversight for multiple agencies that provide awards to the
  same recipient will be determined based on the information provided in the Appendix B,
  Definitions (see h, Cognizant Agency for Audit, and bb, Oversight Agency for Audit) of this
  document.

  a.   The Secretary or Deputy Secretary of Agriculture will designate the Single Audit Key
       Management Liaison Official for USDA from among the senior Mission Area, agency,
       business unit, and staff office policy officials (e.g., Under Secretary, Agency
       Administrator or Chief). Within the Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO), the
       Chief Financial Officer (CFO) has been designated as the Single Audit Key
       Management Liaison Official.

  b.   The CFO will coordinate with the Mission Area, agency, business unit, and staff office
       Key Program Officials to:

       (1) Develop and establish baseline metrics and targets;

       (2) Track the effectiveness of the Mission Area, agency, business unit, and staff
           office’s process to follow up on audit findings; and

       (3) Provide guidance on the effectiveness of single audits in improving NFE
           accountability and their use by Single Audit Key Management Liaison Official in
           making award decisions.

  c.   The Under Secretary, Agency Administrator or Chief, or Staff Office Director will
       designate Mission Areas, agencies, business units, and staff offices Key Program
       Official who will act as the point of contact for Mission Area, agency, business unit, or
       staff office’s Single Audit Liaison office.

  d.   The Single Audit Key Management Liaison Official will:

       (1) Delegate some or all the responsibilities under this section to the Director of the
           Single Audit Liaison Office;

       (2) Provide single audit follow-up, management decision, and Compliance Supplement
           policy and oversight to the agencies;

       (3) Participate in the Governmentwide single audit conferences or other symposiums;

                                               4
     (4) Ensure that Mission Areas, agencies, business units, and staff offices fulfill all the
         single audit responsibilities requirements for Federal Agencies and effectively use
         the single audit process to reduce improper payments and improve Federal program
         effectiveness;

     (5) Develop a baseline, metrics, and targets to track the effectiveness of Mission Areas,
         agencies, business units, and staff offices processes to follow up on audit findings;
         and the effectiveness of single audits in improving NFE accountability and their use
         by agencies in making award decisions;

     (6) Be held accountable to improve the effectiveness of the single audit process;

     (7) Ensure USDA provides annual updates of the Compliance Supplement to OMB if
         required; and

     (8) Issue reporting guidelines and data calls, as deemed necessary.

e.   The Mission Area, agency, business unit, and staff office Key Program Officials will:

     (1) Serve as the Single Audit Liaison Office point of contact for the single audit
         process;

     (2) Use single audits as an oversight and monitoring tool to ensure that recipients are
         properly utilizing Federal funds and address audit findings identified in their Single
         Audit Report;

     (3) Promote interagency coordination, consistency, and sharing in areas such as
         coordinating audit follow-up; identifying higher-risk NFEs; providing input on
         single audit and follow-up policy; enhancing the utility of the FAC or its successor
         system; and studying ways to use single audit results to improve Federal award
         accountability and best practices;

     (4) Oversee training for the Mission Area, agency, business unit, and staff office’s
         program staff related to the single audit process;

     (5) Promote the Mission Area, agency, business unit, and staff office’s use of
         cooperative audit resolution mechanisms;

     (6) Coordinate the Mission Area, agency, business unit, and staff office’s activities to
         ensure appropriate and timely (one year from the issuance date of the audit report),
         follow-up and corrective action on audit findings;

     (7) Organize the cognizant Mission Area, agency, business unit, and staff office for
         audit follow-up on crosscutting audit findings that affect the Federal programs of
         more than one Federal Awarding Agency;

                                             5
(8) Advise recipients of requirements imposed on them by Federal laws, regulations,
    and the provisions of contracts or grant agreements;

(9) At its discretion, assume responsibility for arranging the required audit and
    overseeing its performance, including imposing additional or more stringent
    requirements on a recipient;

(10) Provide technical program advice and counsel to auditees and auditors as requested;

(11) Access the FAC or its successor system at the beginning of each quarter or more
     frequently if required by the Mission Area, agency, business unit, and staff office’s
     specific policy to run and disseminate reports of auditees for their Federal programs
     that were identified as having audit findings and whose audit reports were
     processed by the FAC or its successor system in the preceding week. Audit
     findings are listed by the auditor in the schedule of findings and questioned costs.
     The Mission Area, agency, business unit, and staff office will pay particular
     attention to repeat findings;

(12) Evaluate the findings contained in these reports and require the program staff to
     issue and track the management decisions, as well as the corrective actions taken by
     recipients;

(13) Issue management decisions on audit findings that relate to Federal awards they
     make to NFEs within 6 months of acceptance of the audit report by the FAC or its
     successor system. The cognizant Mission Area, agency, business unit, and staff
     office for audit is responsible for coordinating a management decision for cross-
     cutting audit findings that affect programs of more than one Federal Agency;

(14) Support the Single Audit Key Management Liaison Official’s mission;

(15) Provide input for the Compliance Supplement to OMB by the established due date;

(16) Coordinate the OMB Compliance Supplement submission with Single Audit Key
     Management Liaison Official;

(17) Inform OMB if there are any changes (i.e., additions or deletions) in the Mission
     Area, agency, business unit, and staff office’s prior year programs;

(18) Timely respond to data and reporting calls issued in writing by OCFO; and

(19) May conduct desk and quality control reviews of selected single audit reports that
     are conducted by auditors to determine whether:

    (a) Audits comply with Federal requirements; and



                                        6
         (b) If there are quality deficiencies in the auditors’ work that require correction or
             affect the reliability of audit results.

f.   The National Single Audit Coordinator (NSAC) will:

     (1) Provide technical audit advice and liaison to auditees and auditors;

     (2) Obtain or conduct desk reviews and quality control reviews of selected audits (as
         applicable) made by auditors and provide the results, when appropriate, to other
         interested organizations to determine whether:

         (a) Audits comply with Federal requirements; and

         (b) If there are quality deficiencies in the auditors’ work that require correction or
             affect the reliability of audit results;

     (3) Cooperate and provide support to the Federal Agency designated by OMB to lead a
         Governmentwide project to determine the quality of single audits by providing a
         statistically reliable estimate of the extent that single audits conform to applicable
         requirements, standards, and procedures; and to make recommendations to address
         noted audit quality issues, including recommendations for any changes to applicable
         requirements, standards and procedures indicated by the results of the project. This
         Governmentwide audit quality project must be performed once every 6 years
         beginning in 2018 or at such other interval as determined by OMB, and the results
         must be public;

     (4) Advise the community of independent auditors of any noteworthy or important
         factual trends related to the quality of audits stemming from quality control reviews.
         Significant problems or quality issues consistently identified through quality control
         reviews of audit reports must be referred to appropriate State licensing agencies and
         professional bodies;

     (5) Advise the auditor and, where appropriate, the auditee of any deficiencies found in
         the audit quality which requires corrective action by the auditor. When advised of
         audit quality deficiencies, the auditee must work with the auditor to take corrective
         action. If corrective action is not taken, the cognizant Mission Area, agency,
         business unit, and staff office for audit must notify the auditor, the auditee, and
         applicable Federal Awarding Agency and Pass Through Entity (PTE) of the facts
         and make recommendations for follow-up action. Major inadequacies or repetitive
         substandard performance by auditors must be referred to appropriate State licensing
         agencies and professional bodies for disciplinary action;

     (6) Coordinate the audit work and reporting responsibilities among auditors to achieve
         the most cost-effective audit;




                                             7
     (7) Provide advice to auditees as to how to handle changes in fiscal years. This is a
         collaborative effort between the NSAC and the Mission Area, agency, business
         unit, and staff office Key Program Officials;

     (8) Promptly inform other affected Federal Agencies and appropriate Federal law
         enforcement officials of any direct reporting by the auditee or its auditor of
         irregularities or illegal acts, as required by Generally Accepted Government
         Auditing Standards (GAGAS) or pertinent laws and regulations. This is a shared
         responsibility with the Mission Area, agency, business unit, and staff office;

     (9) When requested by a Federal Awarding Agency, notify the Mission Area, agency,
         business unit, and staff office of the request for cooperative management decision
         for cross-cutting audit findings that affect USDA programs when USDA Mission
         Area, agency, business unit, and staff office is not the cognizant or oversight agency
         for audit; and

     (10) Provide employees of each Mission Area, agency, business unit, and staff office
          with access to the FAC or its successor system upon request by the Mission Area,
          agency, business unit, and staff office Key Program Official. Each Mission Area,
          agency, business unit, and staff office may then access reports on their own.

g.   The Cognizant Mission Area, agency, business unit, or staff office will:

     (1) Obtain the audit reports with findings relating to their Federal programs and
         distribute this information to appropriate program staff for action. Mission Area,
         agency, business unit, and staff office Key Program Officials, at a minimum, should
         access the FAC or its successor system website quarterly or more frequently if
         required by the Mission Area, agency, business unit, and staff office’s specific
         policy, to search for and download appropriate audit reports. This ensures that
         Mission Area, agency, business unit, and staff office Key Program Officials are
         aware of findings as early as possible and have sufficient time to issue management
         decisions, which are due 6 months from the date the FAC or its successor system
         accepts the audit report.

     (2) Develop mechanisms to track and ensure that auditees are submitting the single
         audit reports on time or as required;

     (3) Implement policies and procedures regarding the timely issuance of the
         management decisions for the single audits;

     (4) Ensure that the management decisions contain the required elements and are issued
         timely in accordance with the OMB Guidance; and

     (5) Develop a risk-based approach to manage high-risk and recurring single audit
         findings to identify problems so that adequate resources can be dedicated to address
         the problem.

                                             8
  h.   The Oversight Mission Area, agency, business unit, and staff office will:

       (1) Provide technical program advice to auditees and auditors, as requested; and

       (2) Assume all or some of the responsibilities normally performed by a cognizant
           Mission Area, agency, business unit, and staff office for audit.


6. RECORDS RETENTION REQUIREMENTS

  Mission Areas, agencies, business units, and staff offices will destroy single audit related
  files 3 years after final action is taken to address audit findings, but longer retention is
  authorized if required for business use. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.333, Retention requirements
  for records)


7. INQUIRIES

  Inquiries regarding this directive should be directed to the OCFO at 202-720-5539, or via
  email to OCFO-Internal-Control-Staff@usda.gov.


                                            -END-




                                              9
                                APPENDIX A

                    ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


CFDA     Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance
CFO      Chief Financial Officer
CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
COSO     The Committee of Sponsoring Organization of the Treadway Commission
DG       Departmental Guidebook
DR       Departmental Regulation
EO       Executive Order
FAC      Federal Audit Clearinghouse
FAR      Federal Acquisition Regulation
FASB     Financial Accounting Standards Board
GAAP     Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
GAGAS    Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards
GAO      Government Accountability Office
IPERIA   Improper Payment Elimination Recovery and Improvement Act
NFE      Non-Federal Entity
NSAC     National Single Audit Coordinator
OCFO     Office of the Chief Financial officer
OIG      Office of the Inspector General
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
P.L.     Public Law
PTE      Pass-through Entity
S&D      Suspension and Debarment
SAM      System for Award Management
SF-SAC   Standard Form – Single Audit Clearinghouse
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                                     A-1
                                     APPENDIX B

                                     DEFINITIONS


a.   Agency. Organizational units of the Department, other than staff offices, whose heads
     report to officials within the Office of the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Under
     Secretaries, Assistant Secretaries, and Assistant to the Secretary. (Source: DG 0100-
     002, USDA Departmental Directives Definitions Glossary)

b.    Agency Head. The administrator, chief, or director of an Agency who is the official
     named or designated to have primary responsibility for the management of the Agency
     as delegated under 7 CFR Part 2. (Source: DG 0100-002, USDA Departmental
     Directives Definitions Glossary at Page 16)

c.   Agency Key Program Official. Mission Area, agency, business unit, and staff office key
     management liaison responsible for audit resolutions and single audit policy within the
     USDA.

d.   Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) Number. The beta.SAM.gov system
     assigns each assistance listing a unique number that follows the assistance listing
     throughout the assistance lifecycle. This enables data and funding transparency.
     (Source: Federal Service Desk web page)

e.   Audit Finding. Deficiencies which the auditor is required by § 200.516 Audit findings,
     paragraph (a) to report in the schedule of findings and questioned costs.. (Source: 2
     CFR § 200.5, Audit finding)

f.   Auditee. Any non-Federal entity that expends Federal awards which must be audited
     under Subpart F—Audit Requirements. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.6, Auditee)

g.   Auditor. A public accountant or a Federal, state or local government audit organization,
     which meets the general standards specified in generally accepted government auditing
     standards (GAGAS). The term auditor does not include internal auditors of nonprofit
     organizations. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.7, Auditor)

h.   Cognizant Agency for Audit. The Federal awarding agency that provides the
     predominant amount of direct funding to a non-Federal entity unless OMB designates a
     specific cognizant agency for audit. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.513, Responsibilities,
     paragraph (a)). (Source: 2 CFR § 200.18, Cognizant agency for audit)

i.   Compliance Supplement. Compliance Supplement (previously known as the Circular
     A-133, Compliance Supplement). The Compliance Supplement is an extensive United
     States Federal Government guide which is created by the OMB and is used in auditing
     Federal assistance and Federal grants programs as carried by their recipients. (The
     Compliance Supplement (https://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/management/office-federal-

                                           B-1
     financial-management/) may be found at 2 CFR Part 200, Appendix XI)

j.   Cooperative Audit Resolution. The use of audit follow-up techniques which promote
     prompt corrective action by improving communication, fostering collaboration,
     promoting trust, and developing an understanding between the Federal Agency and the
     NFE. This approach is based upon:

     (1) A strong commitment by Federal Agency and NFE leadership to program integrity;

     (2) Federal Agencies strengthening partnerships and working cooperatively with NFEs
         and their auditors; and NFE entities and their auditors working cooperatively with
         Federal Agencies;

     (3) A focus on current conditions and corrective action going forward;

     (4) Federal Agencies offering appropriate relief for past non-compliance when audits
         show prompt corrective action has occurred; and

     (5) Federal Agency leadership sending a clear message that continued failure to correct
         conditions identified by audits which are likely to cause improper payments, fraud,
         waste, or abuse is unacceptable and will result in sanctions.

     (Source: 2 CFR § 200.25, Cooperative Audit Resolution)

k.   Corrective Action. Action taken by the auditee that:

     (1) Corrects identified deficiencies;

     (2) Produces recommended improvements; or

     (3) Demonstrates that audit findings are either invalid or do not warrant auditee action.

     (Source: 2 CFR § 200.26, Corrective action)

l.   Cross-Cutting Audit Finding. An audit finding where the same underlying condition or
     issue affects Federal awards of more than one Federal Awarding Agency or a PTE.
     (Source: 2 CFR § 200.30, Cross-cutting audit finding)

m. Disallowed Costs. Costs charged to a Federal award that the Federal Awarding Agency
   or a PTE determines to be unallowable, in accordance with the applicable Federal
   statutes, regulations, or the terms and conditions of the Federal award. (Source: 2 CFR
   § 200.31, Disallowed costs)

n.   Federal Audit Clearinghouse (FAC). The clearinghouse designated by OMB as the
     repository of record where NFEs are required to transmit the reporting packages
     required by Single Audit Act Amendments of 1996 and Uniform Guidance. (Source: 2

                                             B-2
     CFR § 200.36, Federal Audit Clearinghouse (FAC))

o.   Federal Award. Has the meaning, depending on the context, in either (1) or (2), as
     described below:

     (1) The Federal financial assistance that NFE receives directly from a Federal
         Awarding Agency or indirectly from a PTE or the cost-reimbursement contract
         under the FAR that NFE receives directly from a Federal Awarding Agency or
         indirectly from a PTE, as described in 2 CFR § 200.101, Applicability.

     (2) The instrument setting forth the terms and conditions. The instrument is the grant
         agreement, cooperative agreement, other agreement for assistance covered in 2 CFR
         § 200.40(b), or the cost-reimbursement contract awarded under the FAR.

     (3) Federal award does not include other contracts that a Federal Agency uses to buy
         goods or services from a contractor or a contract to operate Federal government
         owned, contractor operated facilities (GOCOs).

     (4) See also definitions of Federal financial assistance, grant agreement, and
         cooperative agreement.

     (Source: 2 CFR § 200.38, Federal award)

p.   Federal Awarding Agency. The Federal Agency that provides a Federal award directly
     to NFE. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.37, Federal awarding agency)

q.   Federal Financial Assistance: (Source: 2 CFR § 200.40, Federal financial assistance)

     (1) Assistance that non Federal entities receive or administer in the form of grants;
         cooperative agreements; non-cash contributions or donations of property (including
         donated surplus property); direct appropriations; food commodities; and other
         financial assistance, except assistance that non Federal entities receive or administer
         in the form of loans, loan guarantees, interest subsidies, and insurance.

     (2) Federal financial assistance does not include amounts received as reimbursement
         for services rendered to individuals as described in § 200.502 Basis for determining
         Federal awards expended.

r.   Federal Program: (Source: 2 CFR § 200.42, Federal program)

     (1) All Federal awards which are assigned a single number in the Assistance Listing.

     (2) When no Assistance Listing number is assigned, all Federal awards to NFE from
         the same agency made for the same purpose must be combined and considered one
         program.



                                            B-3
     (3) Notwithstanding paragraph r(1) and r(2) above, a cluster of programs. The types of
         clusters of programs are research and development; student financial aid; and “other
         clusters” As described in the Cluster of Programs.

s.   Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). Has the meaning specified in
     accounting standards issued by the Government Accounting Standards Board and the
     Financial Accounting Standards Board. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.49, Generally Accepted
     Accounting Principles (GAAP))

t.   Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards (GAGAS). Auditing standards
     issued by the Comptroller General of the United States, which are applicable to financial
     audits. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.50, Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards
     (GAGAS))

u.   Improper Payment. Any payment that should not have been made or that was made in
     an incorrect amount (including overpayments and underpayments) under statutory,
     contractual, administrative, or other legally applicable requirements. Improper
     payments include any payment to an ineligible party, any payment for an ineligible good
     or service, any duplicate payment, any payment for a good or service not received
     (except for such payments where authorized by law), any payment that does not account
     for credit for applicable discounts, and any payment where insufficient or lack of
     documentation prevents a reviewer from discerning whether a payment was proper.
     (Source: 2 CFR § 200.53, Improper payment)

v.   Internal Controls. A process, implemented by NFE, designed to provide reasonable
     assurance regarding the achievement of objectives in the following categories:

     (1) Effectiveness and efficiency of operations;

     (2) Reliability of reporting for internal and external use; and

     (3) Compliance with applicable laws and regulations.

     (Source: 2 CFR § 200.61, Internal controls)

w. Management Decision. The evaluation by the Federal Awarding Agency or a PTE of
   the audit findings, corrective action plan, and the issuance of a written decision to the
   auditee as to what corrective action is necessary. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.66,
   Management decision)

x.   Mission Area. A group of agencies within the related functions that report to the same
     Under or Assistant Secretary of USDA. (Source: DG 0100-002, USDA Departmental
     Directives Definitions Glossary)

y.   National Single Audit Coordinator (NSAC). Designated Office of the Inspector General
     (OIG) representative that acts as a liaison within USDA and with other Federal Agency

                                            B-4
     Key Program Officials. Within the OIG, Inspector General is responsible for
     designating the NSAC.

z.   Non-Federal Entity (NFE). A State, local government, Indian tribe, institution of higher
     education, or non-profit organization that carries out a Federal award as a recipient or
     Subrecipient. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.69, Non-Federal entity)

aa. Office of Management and Budget (OMB). OMB means the Executive Office of the
    President, Office of Management and Budget.(Source: 2 CFR § 200.72, Office of
    Management and Budget (OMB))

bb. Oversight Agency for Audit. The Federal Awarding Agency that provides the
    predominant amount of funding directly to NFE is not assigned a cognizant agency for
    audit. When there is no direct funding, the Federal Awarding Agency which is the
    predominant source of pass-through funding must assume the oversight responsibilities.
    The duties of the oversight agency for audit and the process for any reassignments are
    described in § 200.513 Responsibilities, paragraph (b). (Source: 2 CFR § 200.73,
    Oversight agency for audit)

cc. Pass-through Entity (PTE). NFE that provides a sub-award to a Subrecipient to carry
    out part of a Federal program. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.74, Pass-through entity)

dd. Questioned Cost. Cost that is questioned by the auditor because of an audit finding:

     (1) Which resulted from a violation or possible violation of a statute, regulation, or the
         terms and conditions of a Federal award, including for funds used to match Federal
         funds;

     (2) Where the costs, at the time of the audit, are not supported by adequate
         documentation; or

     (3) Where the costs incurred appear unreasonable and do not reflect the actions a
         prudent person would take in the circumstances.

     (Source: 2 CFR § 200.84, Questioned cost)

ee. Recipient. NFE that receives a Federal award directly from a Federal Awarding Agency
    to carry out an activity under a Federal program. The term recipient does not include
    Subrecipients. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.86, Recipient)

 ff. Single Audit. An audit described under section 7502(d) of the Single Audit Act
     Amendments of 1996, of a non-Federal entity that includes the entity’s financial
     statements and Federal awards. (Source: Single Audit Act Amendments of 1996)

gg. Single Audit Key Management Liaison Official. Agency senior management official
    designated in writing by the Secretary or Deputy Secretary of Agriculture.

                                            B-5
hh. Single Audit Liaison Office. Division within the OCFO responsible for single audit
    policy and providing oversight guidance to agencies.

ii.   Single Audit Reporting Package. The reporting package an auditee forwards to the FAC
      or its successor system together with the SF-SAC at the conclusion of a single audit. It
      includes the following information:

      (1) The financial statements;

      (2) A schedule of expenditures of Federal awards;

      (3) Auditor’s opinions on the fair presentation of the financial statements and schedule
          of expenditures of Federal awards;

      (4) Auditor’s report on internal control and compliance pertaining to financial reporting
          and compliance with provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and award
          agreements;

      (5) Auditor’s report on internal control and opinion on compliance pertaining to major
          programs;

      (6) Auditor’s schedule of findings and questioned costs;

      (7) Auditee’s corrective action plans; and

      (8) A summary schedule of prior audit findings which includes planned and completed
          corrective actions.

      (Source: 2 CFR § 200.512(c), Reporting Package)

jj.   Staff Office. Departmental administrative office whose heads report to officials within
      the Office of the Secretary. (Source: DG 0100-002, USDA Departmental Directives
      Definitions Glossary)

kk. Standard Form – Single Audit Clearinghouse (SF-SAC). Data collection form for
    reporting on audits of NFEs. It contains general information on the auditee and auditor,
    audit information on the NFEs’ financial statements, and information on Federal
    program compliance. It is forwarded to the FAC or its successor system together with
    the single audit reporting package at the conclusion of the single audit. (See 2 CFR Part
    200, Appendix X, Federal Audit Clearinghouse Internet Data Entry System at
    https://facides.census.gov/ )

ll.   Subrecipient. NFE that receives a sub-award from a PTE to carry out part of a Federal
      program but does not include an individual that is a beneficiary of such a program. A



                                            B-6
    Subrecipient may also be a recipient of other Federal awards directly from a Federal
    Awarding Agency. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.93, Subrecipient)

mm. Suspension and Debarment. NFEs are subject to the non-procurement debarment and
    suspension regulations implementing Executive Orders 12549 and 12689, 2 CFR part
    180, OMB Guidelines to Agencies on Governmentwide Debarment and Suspension
    (Non-procurement). These regulations restrict awards, sub-awards, and contracts with
    NFEs that are debarred, suspended, or otherwise excluded from or ineligible for
    participation in Federal assistance programs or activities. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.213,
    Suspension and debarment)

nn. System for Award Management (SAM). It is the official U.S. Government system that
    consolidated the capabilities of Central Contractor Registration/Federal Register, Online
    Representations and Certifications Applications, and the Excluded Parties List System.
    (Source: 2 CFR § 25.310 & Appendix A to Part 25)




                                           B-7
                                       APPENDIX C

                        AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


2 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 180, OMB Guidelines to Agencies on
Governmentwide Debarment and Suspension (Non-procurement)

2 CFR Part 200, Uniform Administrative Requirements, Cost Principles, and Audit
Requirements for Federal Awards

2 CFR Part 200, Appendix XI, Compliance Supplement

2 CFR Part 200, Subpart F, Audit Requirements

2 CFR § 200.207, Specific conditions

2 CFR § 200.501, Audit requirements

2 CFR Part 417, Non-procurement Debarment and Suspension

31 United States Code (U.S.C.) § 3321, Disbursing Authority in the Executive Branch

41 U.S.C. § 134, Simplified Acquisition Threshold

41 U.S.C. § 2313, Database for Federal Agency Contract and Grant Officers and Suspension
and Debarment Officials

48 CFR Chapter 4, Subchapter B, Part 409, Subpart 409.4, Debarment, Suspension, and
Ineligibility

48 CFR Part 9, Subpart 9.4, Debarment, Suspension, and Ineligibility (Governmentwide
procurement Suspension and Debarment regulation)

Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO), Guidance
on Internal Control, Internal Control – Integrated Framework

Executive Order (EO) 12549, Debarment and Suspension, February 18, 1986

EO 12689, Debarment and Suspension, August 16, 1989

Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board, https://fasab.gov/accounting-standards/

Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR), 48 CFR Chapter 1

Federal Audit Clearinghouse

                                          C-1
Federal Register

Federal Service Desk web page

Financial Accounting Standards Boards (FASB), Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
(GAAP), Subpart F - Audit Requirements

Government Accountability Office (GAO), Generally Accepted Government Auditing
Standards (GAGAS), also known as the GAO Yellow Book

GAO, Standards for Internal Controls in the Federal Government, also known as the GAO
Green Book

Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Improvement Act of 2012 (IPERIA), P.L. 112-
248, January 10, 2013

OMB, Circular A-21, Cost Principles for Educational Institutions, revised May 10, 2004;

OMB, Circular A-87, Cost Principles for State, Local and Indian Tribal Governments,
revised May10, 2004;

OMB, Circular A-89, Federal Domestic Assistance Program Information, revised August 17,
1984;

OMB, Circular A-102, Grants Awards and Cooperative Agreements with State and Local
Governments, August 29, 1997;

OMB, Circular A-110, Uniform Administrative Requirements for Grants and Agreements
with Institutions of Higher Education, Hospitals, and Other Non-Profit Organizations,
November 19, 1993, as further amended September 30, 1999;

OMB, Circular A-122, Cost Principles for Non-Profit Organizations, revised May 10, 2004;

OMB, Circular A-123, Appendix C, Requirements for Payment Integrity Improvement, June
26, 2018

OMB, Circular A-133, Audits of States, Local Governments, and Non-Profit Organizations,
June 26, 2007, as amended

Sections of OMB, Circular A-50, Audit Follow-up (revised September 29, 1982) related to
audits performed under 2 CFR Part 200, Subpart F, Audit requirements.

OMB, Circular A-136, Financial Reporting Requirements, August 15, 2017, as amended

Public Contracts, 41 U.S.C. Section 101-153 and 1101-2313 (P.L. 111-350), January 4, 2011

                                         C-3
Single Audit Act Amendments of 1996, 31 U.S.C Sections 7501-7507 (P.L. 104-156), July 5,
1996

Standard Form, Single Audit Clearinghouse (SF-SAC), 2 CFR Part 200, Appendix X

System for Award Management, https://beta.sam.gov/

USDA, DG 0100-002, USDA Departmental Directives Definitions Glossary, September 26,
2018

USDA, DR 2280-001, Suspension and Debarment, January 16, 2013




                                         C-3
