                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                              Number:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION DR 2510-001
                                                              DATE:
                                                              June 4, 2015
SUBJECT: Claims Against the United States                     OPI:
                                                              Office of the General Counsel


1. PURPOSE

  This revised regulation prescribes procedures for handling claims against the United States
  pursuant to the Federal Tort Claims Act, Military Personnel and Civilian Employees’ Claims
  Act, and 31 U.S.C. § 3723, which arise from Department of Agriculture programs and
  activities. It does not set procedures for claims that must be handled under statutes granting
  authority to specific agencies. The regulation is revised to adjust the responsibilities for
  determining, settling, and paying claims submitted under the Federal Tort Claims Act, to
  update procedures for handling claims under the Military Personnel and Civilian Employees’
  Claims Act, and to update authorities and references throughout the regulation.

2. CANCELLATION

  Departmental Regulation 2510-001, Claims Against the United States, dated January 25,
  1995, is cancelled.

3. CLAIMS NOT COVERED BY THIS REGULATION

  Procedures for handling claims that must be submitted to the Secretary of Defense, Director
  of the Office of Personnel Management, Administrator of the General Services
  Administration, or the Director of the Office of Management and Budget for adjudication
  under 31 U.S.C. § 3702(d) will be set forth in other regulations.

4. DEFINITIONS

   a. In this regulation, “agency” and “staff office” have the meanings as defined in DR 0100-
        001.

   b. “Federal agency” means a department or entity in the executive branch of the Federal
       Government and any of its subcomponents.

   c. “Administrative Claim Report” means a report that provides a statement of the facts,
       summary of legal issues, contact list for witnesses, supporting exhibits, and agency or
       staff office record hold request by agency or staff office claims staff to agency or staff
       office record holders.
                                                 1
   d. “Tort Contact” means the person designated by an agency or staff office to manage all
       agency or staff office-related activities, including training and supervision of personnel.
       The Tort Contact is the sole liaison with OGC, unless the agency or staff office chooses
       to designate field personnel to serve as Tort Contacts. The Tort Contact should not
       routinely delegate responsibility for dealing with OGC to subordinates or other agency
       or staff office personnel. A staff office may designate an agency Tort Contact as its
       Tort Contact.

   e. “Quarters” means a house, apartment, or other residence assigned by the Government to
       an employee of USDA.

5. ABBREVIATIONS

   a. C.F.R. – Code of Federal Regulations

   b. DR – Departmental Regulation

   c. FTCA – Federal Tort Claims Act (28 U.S.C. §§ 1346(b), 2401(b), and 2671-2680)

   d. MPCECA – Military Personnel and Civilian Employees Compensation Act (31 U.S.C. §
       3721)

   e. OGC – Office of the General Counsel

   f. U.S.C. – United States Code

   g. USDA – Department of Agriculture

6. GENERAL REPONSIBILITIES

   a. The General Counsel will:

     (1) Consider, ascertain, adjust, determine, compromise, and settle claims pursuant to the
         FTCA, 28 U.S.C. §§ 1346(b), 2401(b), 2671-2780, and the regulations of the
         Attorney General contained in 28 C.F.R. Part 14 (7 C.F.R. § 2.31(a)); and

     (2) Settle claims for not more than $1,000 pursuant to 31 U.S.C. § 3723 (7 C.F.R. §
         2.31(o)).

   b. Agency and Staff Office Heads will:

     (1) determine, settle, and pay claims submitted by their employees under the MPCECA.



                                                 2
     (2) provide sufficient resources for the payment of claims that must be paid from agency
         or staff office appropriations.

     (3) establish a system for handling claims that is commensurate with the agency’s or
         staff office’s potential claims liability, based on past experience as to the number,
         magnitude, and complexity of claims arising from the agency’s or staff office’s
         activities. The system must be designed to meet OGC and other claims management
         requirements, and shall include, at a minimum, submission by the agency or staff
         office to OGC of a well-organized, properly-documented administrative claim report.

     (4) designate a Tort Contact. A staff office may designate an agency Tort Contact as its
         Tort Contact.

   c. Agency and Staff Office Tort Contacts will:

     (1) provide advice, guidance, training, and supervision to agency and staff office
         personnel on all claims arising under the FTCA and 31 U.S.C. § 3723.

     (2) be responsible for providing the Administrative Claim Report to OGC, as well as
         providing litigation-related documents, such as litigation hold information, draft
         answers, and discovery responses, as directed by OGC.

   d. Employees:

     (1) shall respond to inquiries from, and furnish information to, claimants and prospective
         claimants on procedures for filing claims and the claims review process, but may not,
         other than in the proper discharge of their official duties, act as “agent or attorney for
         prosecuting any claim against the United States, or [receive] any gratuity, or any
         share of or interest in any such claim, in consideration of assistance in the
         prosecution of such claim. . . .” (18 U.S.C. § 205)

     (2) are prohibited from making a statement to a claimant or his or her agent or attorney
         admitting liability or addressing the sufficiency of a claim.

7. PROCEDURES

   a. CLAIMS UNDER THE FTCA

     (1) Authority to Handle Claims

          (a) The General Counsel is delegated authority to consider, ascertain, adjust,
              determine, compromise and settle claims under the FTCA. (7 C.F.R. § 2.31(a))

          (b) Claims demanding compensation in amounts in excess of (i) $500,000 arising
              from motor vehicle accidents or similar personal injury claims and (ii) $100,000
              arising from law enforcement activities, forest fires, aviation, and regulatory

                                                 3
        activities of the Marketing and Regulatory Programs mission area, are handled
        by the Associate General Counsel and Assistant General Counsel for the
        General Law and Research Division. Claims below the preceding thresholds are
        handled by the Regional Attorneys at various OGC field offices. (See Appendix
        A)

    (c) All claims arising from a single occurrence should be added together for the
        purpose of determining whether the thresholds in this delegation are met.

    (d) Any OGC location that receives a tort claim from the public should refer that
        claim directly to the appropriate USDA Agency Tort Contact for processing
        under the DR, rather than referring the claim to another office within OGC. For
        a list of tort contacts, click USDA Torts Contacts.

(2) Agency and Staff Office Tort Contacts:

    (a) shall review all submissions to OGC for adequacy, completeness, and
        compliance with these procedures.

    (b) shall be familiar with the FTCA and with litigation procedures, and shall receive
        periodic training to keep current with developments in the field of claims
        management.

    (c) shall provide their name, address, telephone number and e-mail address, as well
        as the same information for an alternate, to the Assistant General Counsel,
        General Law and Research Division, and update as changes in personnel occur.

(3) Investigations

    When an agency or staff office receives a claim or learns of an incident likely to
    result in a claim, it is responsible for ensuring that an investigation of the incident is
    undertaken. The investigation should include collecting and saving any relevant
    documents or tangible things related to the incident. Any such investigation is
    conducted at the request of OGC, and any report derived from such investigation is
    considered to be prepared at the direction of OGC and attorney work-product.

(4) Time Requirements

    (a) When an agency or staff office receives a claim or potential claim, it must be
        date-stamped and signed immediately by the person who receives it. After
        agency or staff office processing, a claim must be forwarded to OGC no later
        than 4 months after it was received, unless a different deadline has been set by
        the appropriate OGC office.




                                            4
    (b) If an incident involves multiple claimants, the claims generally should not be
        forwarded to OGC until all claims from the same incident are received, or the
        two-year statute of limitations has expired, whichever comes first.

(5) Advice to Prospective Claimants

    (a) When a private person complains of property damage, personal injury, or death
        alleged to be caused by the negligent or wrongful act or omission of an agency
        or staff office employee, and expresses an intention to seek monetary
        compensation for damages from the Government, the agency or staff office must
        inform the person of procedures for filing a claim under the FTCA and should
        refer prospective claimants to 28 C.F.R. Part 14, and 7 C.F.R. § 1.51 for specific
        guidance.

    (b) Unless a private person appears to have incurred concrete damages and to have
        expressed an intention to seek monetary compensation from the Government,
        agency or staff office personnel should not encourage or require them to submit
        FTCA claims. Mere expression of dissatisfaction with the conduct of agency or
        staff office programs does not provide grounds for suggesting a claim under the
        FTCA would be an appropriate method to indicate such dissatisfaction.

    (c) The FTCA should not be suggested as an alternative remedy to parties who have
        had an appeal denied pursuant to appeal rights that are part of an agency or staff
        office program.

    (d) Prospective claimants should be given a copy of SF-95, “Claim for Damage,
        Injury, or Death.” Use of this form is optional. A claim, however, must be in
        writing and should be prepared in accordance with 28 C.F.R. Part 14 and the
        instructions set forth on the SF-95.

    (e) A claim should be filed with the local office of the agency or staff office that
        employs the allegedly responsible employee, or an agency or staff office-
        designated centralized claims office.

(6) Agency and Staff Office Processing of Claims

    (a) As soon as a claim is received by an agency or staff office, it should be reported
        to the Tort Contact for entry on a master calendar of tort claims. The claim
        should then be examined to determine whether it meets all the requirements of
        the FTCA and has been submitted in accordance with the requirements set forth
        in 28 C.F.R. Part 14 and 7 C.F.R. § 1.51.

    (b) If a claim does not meet all the requirements of the FTCA, the claimant should
        be informed of the specific defect(s), with reference to 28 C.F.R. Part 14 and 7
        C.F.R. § 1.51, and that OGC will not issue a determination on a claim until all
        defects are cured.

                                           5
    (c) If a claim does meet all the requirements of the FTCA, its receipt should be
        acknowledged and the claimant should be informed that the claim, following an
        agency or staff office investigation, will be forwarded to OGC for a
        determination. Agency and staff office personnel should never inform a
        claimant that a purported claim meets FTCA requirements.

    (d) Where a claim has been submitted by another person on the claimant’s behalf
        (including by an attorney), the Tort Contact shall ensure that the package
        submitted contains evidence of that individual’s authority to present a claim on
        behalf of the claimant as attorney, agent, executor, administrator, parent,
        guardian, or other representative. Following submission of such evidence, all
        correspondence should be directed to the attorney or other representative, rather
        than the claimant.

(7) Administrative Claim Report

    (a) When the claim is forwarded to OGC for determination, it must be accompanied
        by a memorandum in narrative form setting forth the agency’s or staff office’s
        position on the claim and must contain the following items:

        1   a background description of the program involved, referencing statutory
            authority and applicable regulations.

        2   a complete description of the events in question, including references to
            documents included in the response to every allegation made in the claim.

        3   an analysis of who was at fault for the losses or damages alleged in the
            claim, referencing the opinion of technical experts, who may be either non-
            involved agency or staff office personnel or outside consultants, as
            necessary.

        4   an analysis of damages claimed.

        5   any policy reasons for arguing for or against settlement.

        6   details of any claims USDA or the Federal government (e.g., recovery of
            expenses paid by Medicare) might have against the claimant, whether or not
            they arose out of the incident which is the subject of the claim against
            USDA.

        7   contact information, including names, titles, telephone numbers, physical
            addresses and email addresses, of any agency or staff office personnel likely
            to have information relevant to the claim.




                                          6
        8   copies of all documents relevant to the issues involved in the claim,
            including copies of the SF-95 or other claim filed by the claimant, all
            documentation submitted by the claimant, and all correspondence between
            the agency or staff office and the claimant (including Congressional
            inquiries and responses, FOIA requests, appeals or agency responses). .

    (b) The administrative claim report should be submitted to OGC in triplicate, with
        one paper copy of the report and two electronic copies, organized in the same
        manner as the paper copy. Original agency or staff office records should not be
        forwarded to OGC unless specifically requested. However, they should be
        preserved and remain available for use in litigation.

(8) Determination of Claims

    (a) OGC will determine whether claims should be allowed, compromised, or denied
        and will notify claimants of its determination. If a claim is allowed in full or
        compromised, OGC will notify the Tort Contact and the fiscal officer of the
        agency or staff office involved.

    (b) If a claim is denied, OGC will notify the claimant and his or her attorney or
        legal representative, and provide a copy of such denial to the agency Tort
        Contact. The notification will include a statement that if the claimant is
        dissatisfied with USDA’s action, he or she may file suit in a United States
        District Court not later than 6 months after the date of mailing of the
        notification. (28 U.S.C. § 1346(b)).

    (c) Prior to the commencement of suit and prior to the expiration of the 6-month
        period, a claimant or a claimant’s legal representative may file a written request
        with OGC for reconsideration of a final denial of a claim. (28 C.F.R. § 14.9(b))
        Upon the timely filing of a request for reconsideration, OGC shall have 6
        months from the date of filing in which to make a final disposition of the claim.
        The claimant's option under 28 U.S.C. § 2675(a) shall not accrue until 6 months
        after the filing of a request for reconsideration or upon denial of the
        reconsideration request.

(9) Payment of Claims

    (a) Regardless of the amount originally claimed, awards of $25,000 or less may be
        approved by USDA. Awards over $25,000 must be approved by the Attorney
        General (28 U.S.C. § 2672). OGC will take necessary actions to obtain this
        approval.

    (b) Payments of $2,500 or less will be made from the appropriation of the agency or
        staff office whose actions gave rise to the claim. Payments over $2,500 are paid
        by the Judgment Fund Branch, Financial Management Service (FMS), United
        States Department of Treasury.

                                          7
           1   Payment of $2,500 or less – After receipt of notice from OGC that it allows
               a tort claim, the agency will prepare an SF-1145, “Voucher for Payment
               Under Federal Tort Claims Act,” or other FMS approved payment form, and
               send it to the claimant for signature. When it is returned, the agency or staff
               office will process the form for payment out of the agency’s or staff office’s
               appropriation. If a claimant is represented by an attorney, the form must
               designate both the claimant and the attorney as payees, and include the
               attorney’s address and other information for payment to the attorney.

           2   Payment over $2,500 – OGC will forward to the agency or staff office
               completed forms FMS 194, 196 and 197, and for payments in excess of
               $25,000, a copy of the Department of Justice (DOJ) approval for settlement
               or settlement agreement as directed by DOJ. The agency or staff office will
               forward these forms to the Judgment Fund Branch for payment.

  (10) Finality of Settlement

      The acceptance by a claimant of any award, compromise, or settlement is final and
      conclusive on the claimant, and constitutes a complete release of any claim against
      the United States and against the Government employee whose act or omission gave
      rise to the claim. (28 U.S.C. § 2672)

b. CLAIMS UNDER 31 U.S.C. § 3723 (SMALL CLAIMS)

  (1) Authority to Handle Claims – The General Counsel is delegated authority to settle
      claims for not more than $1,000 that meet the requirements of 31 U.S.C. § 3723. (7
      C.F.R. 2.31(o)) These claims are handled by the Associate General Counsel for the
      General Law and Research Division, the Assistant General Counsel, General Law
      and Research Division, and by Regional Attorneys at various OGC field locations.

  (2) Procedure for Processing Claims – The same administrative procedure used to
      process FTCA claims under Section 7a should be followed for Small Claims.

  (3) Payment of Claims – Awards under 31 U.S.C. § 3723 will be paid from the
      appropriation of the agency or staff office whose activities gave rise to the claim.
      (31 U.S.C. § 1304).

c. CLAIMS UNDER MPCECA

  (1) Authority to Handle Claims – The head of each agency or staff office, or his or her
      designee, is delegated authority to determine, settle, and pay claims submitted by
      employees of USDA under 31 U.S.C. § 3721.

  (2) Claims – A substantiated claim for loss of, or damage to, personal property incident
      to service as a USDA employee where possession of such property is determined to

                                             8
be reasonable, useful or proper under the circumstances, may be settled and paid
under the MPCECA up to a maximum amount of $40,000, or in extraordinary
circumstances, $100,000, and property may be replaced in kind at the discretion of
the agency or staff office.

(a) Allowable Claims – A claim is allowable only if the employee was using the
    property incident to his or her service to USDA, with the knowledge and consent
    of his or her supervisor, and:

    1   the damage or loss was not caused wholly or partially by the negligent or
        improper action or inaction of the employee, his or her agent, family
        members or private employees; and

    2   the possession of the property lost or damaged, and the quantity and quality
        possessed, is determined to have been reasonable, useful, or proper under the
        circumstances: and

    3   the claim is substantiated by proper and convincing evidence.

(b) Types of Allowable Claims – The following are examples of the types of claims
    that are allowable, but this is not an exclusive list and other types of claims are
    allowable, unless specifically excluded under this section:

    1   Property loss, damage, or theft in quarters or other authorized places
        (including an alternate work location under an approved flexiplace
        agreement even if it is located in an employee’s principal residence) while
        such property is located at:

        a   Quarters assigned to or provided in kind to an employee by the agency or
            staff office.

        b   Any warehouse, office, working area, or other place (except quarters)
            authorized for the reception or storage or property.

        c   Quarters outside the United States privately leased by employees.

    2   Property damage to, or loss of property incident to transportation or storage
        of such property pursuant to order or in connection with travel under orders,
        including property in an employee’s custody or in the custody of a carrier, an
        agent, or Federal agency if recovery cannot be had from an insurer or carrier.

    3   Damage to, or loss of, property that results directly from enemy action or
        threat of enemy action, or combat, guerilla, brigandage, or other belligerent
        activity, or unjust confiscation by a foreign power or its nationals.




                                       9
    4   Damage to, or loss of, property that result directly from action to quiet a civil
        disturbance, to alleviate a public disaster, or to save human life or
        Government property.

    5   Damage to, or loss of, property when used for the benefit of the Government
        at the request of, or with the knowledge and consent of, superior authority,
        up to the amount not compensated by private insurance.

    6   Damage to, or loss of, clothing and accessories a person customarily wears
        and devices such as eyeglasses, hearing aids, dentures and prosthetics.

    7   Reimbursement for the payment of any sales tax or other such fees incurred
        in connection with repairs to an item, including the costs for obtaining
        estimates for repair only if it is clear that the claimant could not obtain an
        estimate without paying a fee. In that case, the fee is allowable only in an
        amount determined reasonable in relation to the value of the property or cost
        of repairs.

(c) Limitations on Allowable Claims– Claims of the type described below are only
    allowable subject to the restrictions noted below:

    1   Loss of money or currency, including coin collections, only when deposited
        with the Government for safekeeping, or when lost because of fire, flood,
        hurricane, other natural disaster, theft from quarters (as limited by section
        7c(2)(b)1), or under other reasonable circumstances in which it would be in
        the Government’s best interest to make payment. In cases involving theft
        from quarters, the evidence must conclusively show that quarters were
        locked at the time of the theft. Reimbursement for loss of money or
        currency is limited to the amount determined to be reasonable for the
        claimant to have in his or her possession at the time of the loss.

    2   Loss or damage to property owned by the United States only when employee
        is financially responsible for it to another Federal agency.

    3   Claims for loss of, or damage to, cellular telephones, fax machines,
        computers and related hardware and software except only when lost or
        damaged incident to fire, flood, hurricane, other natural disaster, theft from
        quarters (as limited by section 7c(2)(b)1), other reasonable circumstances in
        which it would be in the Government’s best interest to make payment, or
        unless being shipped as part of a change of duty station paid for by the
        agency or staff office. In incidents of thefts from quarters, it must be
        conclusively shown that the quarters were locked at the time of the theft.

    4   Claims for damage to, or loss of, automobiles or motor vehicles only if
        damage occurred under circumstances described in section 7c(2)(b)4.



                                      10
    5   When a claim is filed for property damage at a non-Government alternative
        work location at which claimant is working pursuant to an approved
        flexiplace work agreement, the claimant is required to present proof of
        insurance coverage, deductible amount, and the amount, if any, the claimant
        recovered from the insurer. If the claim is for an amount that exceeds the
        deductible on the insurance policy, the maximum allowable recovery will be
        the amount for the deductible. If the property is uninsured, the maximum
        allowed will be $1000.00.

(d) Claims not Allowable – Claims are not allowable for the following:

    1   Property loss, damage or theft at quarters occupied by claimant within the
        fifty states or the District of Columbia that were not assigned to the claimant
        or otherwise provided in kind by the Government.

    2   Loss or damage totaling less than $25.00.

    3   Loss or damage incident to the operation of a motor vehicle unless allowable
        under section 7c(2)(b)4.

    4   Loss or damage to articles of extraordinary value (such articles should be
        insured by owners).

    5   Loss or damage of property used for private business or profit.

    6   Loss due to theft unless due care was used to protect such protection.

    7   Loss or damage to property acquired, possessed or transported in violation of
        law or regulations.

    8   Loss or damage of small articles of substantial value when shipped with
        household goods or unaccompanied baggage.

    9   Loss or damage of articles sent through United States or international mail
        systems.

    10 Loss or damage of articles being worn unless allowable under section
       7c(2)(b)4.

    11 Transportation losses, if recovery can be had from insurer or carrier, or if
       claimant chose an unlicensed carrier.

    12 Losses recoverable pursuant to contract, or recoverable from insurer.

    13 Loss or damage caused in whole or in part by the negligent or wrongful act
       of the claimant or the claimant’s agent.

                                      11
(e) Prohibited Claims – A claim may not be presented by or for the benefit of a
    subrogee, assignee, conditional vendor, or other third party.

(f) Claims involving Commercial Carriers or Private Insurance – Employees are
    encouraged to carry private insurance against damage to or loss of personal
    property in order to cover risks excluded or limited by statute or this regulation.
    In the event that the property subject to the claim was lost or damaged while in
    the possession of a commercial carrier or was insured, the following procedures
    apply:

    1   Whenever property is damaged, lost or destroyed while being shipped
        pursuant to travel orders, the owner must file a written claim for
        reimbursement with the last commercial carrier known or believed to have
        handled the goods, or the carrier known to be in possession of the property
        when the damage or loss occurred, according to the terms of its bill of lading
        or contract, before submitting a claim against the Government under this
        regulation.

    2   Whenever property is damaged, lost or destroyed incident to service and is
        insured in whole or in part, the employee must make a demand in writing
        against the insurer for reimbursement under the terms and conditions of the
        insurance coverage, before filing a claim against the Government under this
        regulation.

    3   Failure to make a demand on a carrier or insurer or to make all reasonable
        efforts to protect and prosecute rights available against a carrier or insurer
        and to collect the amount recoverable from a carrier or insurer may result in
        reducing the amount recoverable from the Government by the maximum
        amount that would have been recoverable from the carrier or insurer had the
        claim been timely or diligently prosecuted.

    4   Subsequent to filing a claim against the carrier or insurer, the employee may
        submit a claim under this regulation, without waiting until the carrier or
        insurer finally approves or denies the claim, subject to the following
        conditions:

        a   Upon submitting the claim, the employee must certify that he or she has
            not recovered any payment from a carrier or insurer, and enclose all
            pertinent correspondence.

        b   If the carrier or insurer has not taken final action on the employee’s
            claim, the employee must immediately advise the carrier or insurer
            regarding the claim to the agency or staff office claims officer, and must
            provide a copy of this notice to the agency or staff office claims officer.



                                      12
        c   The employee must advise the agency or staff office claims officer of
            any action the carrier or insurer takes on the claim, and upon request,
            must furnish all correspondence, documents and other evidence pertinent
            to the matter to the agency or staff office claims officer.

    5   The employee must assign to the United States, to the extent he or she
        accepts any payment on the claim, all rights, title, interest in any claim he or
        she may have against the carrier, insurer, or other party arising out of the
        incident on which the claim against the United States is based. After
        payment of the claim by the United States, the employee must, upon receipt
        of any payment from a carrier or insurer, pay the proceeds to the United
        States to the extent of the payment he or she received from the United States.

    6   If the employee recovers for the damage or loss from the carrier or insurer
        before his or her claim is settled under this regulation, the amount of
        recovery will be applied to the claim as follows:

        a   If the employee recovers an amount that is greater than or equal to his or
            her total loss as determined under this regulation, no compensation will
            be allowed under this regulation.

        b   If the employee recovers an amount that is less than such total loss, the
            allowable amount is determined by deducting the recovery from the
            amount of such total loss. For this purpose, the total loss is determined
            without regard to the maximum payment limitation set forth in section
            7c(2). However, if the resulting amount after making this deduction
            exceeds the maximum payment limitations, payment will only be
            allowed up the maximum amount set forth in section 7c(2).

    7   In a claim arising from damage to an automobile or other motor vehicle, in
        no event may recovery exceed the reasonable deductible on the insurance
        policy.

(g) Deposit to Appropriations – Amounts received from third parties for damage to
    or loss of an employee’s personal property for which payment has been made
    under 31 U.S.C. § 3721 need not be deposited in the Treasury as miscellaneous
    receipts, but may be deposited to the appropriation from which payment was
    made.

(h) Preservation of Records – Copies of reports and documents supporting a claim
    should be retained until the two-year statutory limitation for the filing of claims
    has expired.

(i) Procedures for Filing a Claim:




                                      13
    1   The claim must be presented in writing, preferably using form AD-382,
        “Employee Claim for Loss or Damage to Personal Property” and should be
        submitted to the agency or staff office for which the employee works. If lieu
        of form AD-382, a written claim should include the employee’s name,
        agency or staff office, address, location where loss or damage occurred, date
        of loss or damage, a demand for compensation in a sum certain, description
        of the property, date property acquired, purchase price or value, value when
        lost or damaged, estimated cost of repair (if any), a brief description of the
        circumstances giving rise to the claim, and insurance information.

    2   The claim must be presented to the agency or staff office within two years
        after accrual of the claims, which occurs at the later of:

        a   The time of the accident or incident causing the loss or damage;

        b   The time the loss or damage should have been discovered by the
            claimant by the exercise of due diligence; or

        c   Where valid circumstances prevented the claim from being filed earlier,
            the time that should be construed as the date of accrual because of a
            circumstance that prevents the filing of the claim. If war or armed
            conflict prevents a claim from being filed, the claim accrues on the date
            hostilities terminate and the claim must be filed within two years of that
            date.

(j) Supporting Documentation – In addition to the information described in section
    7c(2)(i)1 above, the following documentation should also be submitted when
    applicable:

    1   Receipts, cancelled checks, or other documentation showing acquisition of
        the property.

    2   At least two itemized repair estimates or estimates as to the replacement cost
        of the property.

    3   A statement from the employee’s supervisor as to whether possession of the
        property was reasonable, useful or proper under the circumstances existing
        at the time and place of the loss or damage.

    4   Statements from other persons who have knowledge of the facts surrounding
        the claim. Where an accident contributed to the damage or loss of property,
        witness statements should be reported on SF-94, “Statement of Witness.”

    5   A copy of the police report.




                                       14
   6   When the loss or damage occurred in quarters or other authorized places, the
       claim should be accompanied by a statement indicating:

       a   the location of the place where the loss or damage occurred.

       b   a description of the measures taken to locate the property or minimize
           the damage.

       c   An explanation of the facts and circumstances surrounding the loss or
           damage, and any other information obtained by investigation.

       d   where the property was being used for the benefit of the Government, a
           statement from the employee’s supervisor that the employee was
           required to provide the property.

(k) Computation of Award

   1   The amount allowable for loss of or damage to any item of property may not
       exceed the lowest of:

       a   the amount requested for the item as a result of its loss, damage or the
           cost of its repair;

       b   the actual or estimated cost of repair;

       c   the actual value at the time of its loss, damage or destruction. Actual
           value is determined by using the current replacement cost or the
           depreciated value of the item since it was acquired, whichever is lower,
           less any salvage value of the item in question, if it is retained.

   2   Depreciation in value is determined by considering the type of article
       involved, its cost, its condition when damaged or lost, and the time elapsed
       between the date of acquisition and the date of damage or loss.

   3   Current replacement cost and depreciated value are determined by use of
       publicly available adjustment rates or through use of other reasonable
       methods at the discretion of the agency or staff office.

   4   Replacement of lost or damaged property may be made in kind wherever
       appropriate at the discretion of the agency or staff office.

   5   At the discretion of the agency or staff office, the employee may be required
       to turn over an item alleged to have been damaged beyond economical repair
       to the United States, in which case no deduction for salvage value will be
       made in the calculation of actual value.



                                     15
(l) Determination and Settlement of Claims – When the agency or staff office
    receives a claim and any supporting documentation, a determination in writing
    will be made as to the merits of the claim. If a claim is disallowed, the
    determination will explain the agency’s or staff office’s reasons for disallowance
    of the claim. If a claim is allowed in full or in part, the determination will notify
    the claimant of this fact and will set forth the payment process. Settlement of
    claims under this regulation are final and conclusive.

(m) Reconsideration – A claimant may seek reconsideration with regard to any items
    for which payment for which payment is denied, in whole or in part.
    Reconsideration must be requested in writing and must be received by the
    agency or staff office within 60 days after the date of denial of the claim. If
    reconsideration is granted, the final determination on reconsideration is final and
    conclusive. Requests for reconsideration must:

    1   present information that was not offered in support of the initial adjudication
        of the claim, and

    2   set forth in detail the factual or legal basis for challenging the initial denial
        of the claim.

(n) Attorney’s Fees – No more than 10 percent of the amount in settlement of each
    individual claim submitted and settled under this regulation shall be paid or
    delivered to, or received by, any agent or attorney on account of services
    rendered in connection with that claim. A person violating this section shall be
    fined not more than $1000.00 (31 U.S.C. § 3721(i)).

(o) False Claims – A person who files a false claim or makes a fraudulent statement
    in a claim against the United States may be imprisoned for not more than 5 years
    (18 U.S.C. §§ 287, 1001). In addition, that person may be liable for a civil
    penalty of not less than $5000.00 and not more than $10,000.00 and damages of
    triple the loss or damage sustained by the United States, as well as the costs of a
    civil action brought to recover any penalty or damages.


                                     -END-




                                       16
                                    Appendix A


https://ems-team.usda.gov/sites/OGC/GLR/Shared%20Documents/Torts/Regional%20Assignme
nt%20Table.pdf




                                          A-1
