                                    U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                       Washington, D.C. 20250



                                                                                            Number:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                                     2600-001

SUBJECT: Taxation of Fringe Benefits                                 DATE:
                                                                     February 21, 1990

                                                                     OPI: Office of Finance and
                                                                     Management


I      PURPOSE

              This regulation informs employees of the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) regulations on
              the taxation of certain noncash fringe benefits.

2      SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS

              This regulation supersedes DN 2600-1, Taxation of Fringe Benefits issued September 9,
              1987, and includes mandatory changes to reporting requirements for the infrequent use of
              employer-provided transportation between work and home.

3      BACKGROUND

              The Tax Reform Act of 1984 requires the reporting of certain employer-provided fringe
              benefits in an employee's gross compensation for tax purposes. As a result, Federal
              employees must pay Federal income taxes on the fair market value of noncash fringe
              benefits provided to them by the Government.

              The major Departmental benefit subject to this treatment is employer-provided
              transportation between home and work.

4      REFERENCES

                               a         Internal Revenue Service Temporary Regulations published at
                               Title 26, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 1, Section 1.61 on the
                               taxation of fringe benefits.

                               b         Internal Revenue Service Temporary Regulations, published at
                               Title 26, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 1, Section 1.132 on de
                               minimis fringe benefits.

                               c         Agriculture Property Management Regulations, Parts 104-
                               38.5003 and 104-38.5004, which address the use of Government
                               vehicles.
DR 2600-001                                                                           February 21, 1990


                                d        Agriculture Travel Regulations, OM 2300-1, which contain
                               policy for temporary duty travel, including local travel authorized for
                               official business.

                               e        Title I, Chapter 21, Section 4 of the National Finance Center
                               Payroll/Personnel Processing Manual, which describes procedures for
                               reporting employee personal use of Government-owned or -leased
                               vehicles on Time and Attendance (T&A) Reports.

5      DEFINITIONS

                               a        Control employee. An elected official or a Government
                               employee whose pay equals or exceeds the pay of a Federal
                               Government employee, holding a position at Executive Level V,
                               determined under Chapter 11 of Title 2, United States Code, as adjusted
                               by Section 5318 of Title 5, United States Code.

                               b        Reporting year. Same as the pay year.

                               c        Vehicle. Any motorized vehicle manufactured primarily for
                               use on public streets, roads, and highways.

6      APPLICABILITY

              Employees are liable for fringe-benefit taxes if they use a Government-owned or -leased
              vehicle (GOV) for commuting between home and work more than 1 day a month.

7      VEHICLES AS A FRINGE BENEFIT

                               a         General. Commuting transportation is a fringe benefit when
                               use of a Government vehicle is between residence and assigned work
                               site at the official duty station for which the agency may not authorize
                               an allowance under the provisions of the Agriculture Travel
                               Regulations, DM-2300-1.

                               b        Exclusions:

                                                 (1)      Use of a Government vehicle for commuting
                                                 is not more than I day a month. This amount of usage
                                                 is a de minimis fringe benefit not included in the
                                                 gross income of an employee.

                                                 (2)        Travel between residence and work site at
                                                 the official duty station which is reimbursable as an
                                                 official travel expense, for example, from home to
                                                 office on a day when travel involves an overnight
                                                 stay away from the local duty station commuting
                                                 area.

8      VALUATION OF FRINGE BENEFITS

              The IRS differentiates between regular employees and control employees to determine
              the value of commuting transportation fringe benefits.


                                                2
DR 2600-001                                                                          February 21, 1990


                               a        Control employees. The value of a control employee's benefit
                               includes the percentage of miles driven for commuting purposes
                               multiplied by the annual lease value of the vehicle, fuel costs of $0.055
                               multiplied by the number of miles driven, and the value of the
                               chauffeur services provided, if any.

                               b         Regular employee. The employee's taxable income includes
                               $1.50 multiplied by the number of one-way trips during the calendar
                               year. This amount compensates for the value of the vehicle,
                               maintenance, fuel, etc. If more than 1 employee commutes in the
                               vehicle, the amount includable in the income of each employee is $1.50
                               per one-way commute.

9      VEHICLE USAGE RECORDS

              Agencies must maintain adequate vehicle usage records for control employees, because
              these records determine the value of the fringe benefits. Regular employees must
              maintain vehicle usage records to support the T&A Reports.

10     REPORTING VEHICLE USAGE

                               a        Control employees. Control employees will use the Worksheet
                               for Reporting Automobile Commuting Use to calculate and report the
                               taxable benefit (see attachment 1). The Office of Operations and the
                               Office of Finance and Management jointly determine the value for
                               control employees.

                               b        Regular employees. Under Internal Revenue Service
                               Regulations, an employee cannot claim the de minimis use exemption
                               when the employee uses the GOV on more than 1 day per calendar
                               month in any single month during the year. Excess use, for example,
                               more than I day in any 1 month, requires reporting of all GOV use
                               during the year.

                               The regular employee who will use the GOV more than 1 day in any 1
                               calendar month during the year will record and report the number of
                               one-way commuting trips during each pay period to the T&A contact
                               (see attachment 2). An employee must report all one-way commuting
                               trips. Transaction code 17 records the number of one-way trips to and
                               from the employee's home in a GOV.

                                An employee who does not expect to use a GOV on more than 1 day in
                               any month and later no longer qualifies for the de minimis use
                               exemption is responsible for reporting the total number of one-way
                               commuting trips during the calendar year to the agency T&A contact
                               (see attachment 2). The T&A contact is responsible for reporting the
                               employee's total number of one-way commuting trips during the
                               calendar year on the last T&A Report ending during the calendar year.
                               Transaction code 17 records the number of one-way trips to and from
                               the employee's home in a GOV.

                               The National Finance Center determines and reports the amount
                               included in income for regular employees if use of a GOV for




                                                3
DR 2600-001                                                                         February 21, 1990


                               commuting exceeds 1 day per month in any single month during the
                               year.

11     EFFECT ON WITHHOLDING TAXES

              This regulation does not establish an income tax withholding requirement for affected
              employees. However, Social Security or the Medicare portion of Social Security, as
              appropriate, will be withheld at the end of the year.

END




                                                4
