                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                Number:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION DR 3080-001
                                                                DATE:
                                                                August 16, 2016
 SUBJECT:                                                       OPI:
 Records Management                                             Office of the Chief Information
                                                                Officer – Information Resources
                                                                Management



Section                                                                             Page

1.   Purpose                                                                        1
2.   Scope                                                                          2
3.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                             2
4.   Policy                                                                         2
5.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                     3
6.   Records Management Program Requirements                                        10
7.   Policy Exceptions or Waivers                                                   12
8.   Inquiries                                                                      12

Appendix A Contractor Requirements                                                  A-1
Appendix B Records Management Language for Contracts                                B-1
Appendix C Electronic Messaging                                                     C-1
Appendix D Definitions                                                              D-1
Appendix E Acronyms and Abbreviations                                               E-1
Appendix F Authorities and References                                               F-1



1. PURPOSE

     This regulation sets out and summarizes the policies, responsibilities for the creation,
     maintenance, use, and disposition of all records and other documentary materials throughout
     the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) in compliance with the Federal
     Records Act (FRA) as codified at 44 United States Code (U.S.C.) Chapters 29, 31, and 33;
     Subchapter B, Records Management, 36 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR); and all
     applicable National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) mandated guidance. It
     also sets out role and responsibilities of personnel in various USDA positions with respect to
     records.
2. SCOPE

  This directive applies to all USDA agencies, staff offices, employees, and contractors
  working for or on behalf of USDA and all USDA records, regardless of medium, which are
  created, collected, processed, used, stored, and/or destroyed by USDA agencies. Each
  USDA agency and staff office is obligated to meet the minimum requirements of this policy.
  Agencies are required to integrate records management into the overall information resources
  management program, in accordance with 36 CFR Subchapter B, Records Management, and
  Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130 (Revised), Management of
  Federal Information Resources.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  This directive supersedes Departmental Regulation (DR) 3080-001, dated May 23, 2013, in
  its entirety, is effective immediately and will remain in effect until superseded or overtaken
  by a subsequent DR or government-wide guidance.


4. POLICY

  It is USDA policy to preserve all official records, in accordance with applicable statutory and
  regulatory requirements, and to promote access to information by staff and the public, as
  appropriate. Each agency and staff office within USDA is required to establish and maintain
  a records management program meeting the following minimum requirements:

  a.   Accurately and completely create and preserve records, in any medium (including social
       media), containing documentation of the organization, functions, policies, decisions,
       procedures, and essential transactions of the agency or staff office that protects the legal
       and financial rights of the Government and persons directly affected by agency or staff
       activities as required by the FRA;

  b.   Establish records management standards and procedures for maintaining USDA records
       and information in a manner facilitating ease of use, access and disposition, and
       consistent with the regulations and guidelines implemented by NARA, the OMB, and
       the General Services Administration (GSA);

  c.   Establish effective management controls over the creation, maintenance and use, and
       disposition of Federal records in any medium, including but not limited to: paper, e-
       mail, instant messaging (IM), text messages, telephone messages, voice mail messages,
       presentations, Web sites, social media, word processing documents, spreadsheets, and
       information systems, throughout their life cycle;

  d.   Ensure records in any medium, are accessible to departmental officials and to the public
       as appropriate;



                                                2
  e.   Ensure the laws, regulations, and policies that apply to records and information used and
       maintained by USDA also apply to USDA records and information maintained and used
       on USDA’s behalf by USDA contractors. All records created by USDA contractors
       shall remain the property of USDA, and cannot be used except as explicitly authorized
       in writing by USDA (see Appendix A and B);

  f.   Establish procedures to ensure Federal records that are created by use of personal or non-
       official electronic messaging accounts for official USDA business are preserved for
       FRA purposes and placed in a record keeping system (see Appendix C);

  g. Establish procedures to ensure Federal records created by use of text messaging, IM or
      other transient messaging technologies are preserved for FRA purposes and placed in a
      record keeping system (see Appendix C); and

  h.   Establish and maintain a vital records program to ensure continuity of essential USDA
       activities during and following a national emergency or local natural or technological
       disaster (see also DR 3085-001, Vital Records Management Program).


5. ROLES AND REPONSIBILITIES

  a. USDA Secretary shall:

       (1) Make and preserve records containing adequate and proper documentation of the
           organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures, and essential transactions of
           the Department by establishing a records management program to ensure
           compliance with applicable Federal laws and guidelines;

       (2) Designate a Senior Agency Official (SAO), at the Assistant Secretary level or its
           equivalent, who has direct responsibility for ensuring USDA efficiently and
           appropriately complies with all applicable records management statutes,
           regulations, NARA policies, and requirements of the OMB/NARA M-12-18,
           Managing Government Records Directive. The Secretary has designated the
           Assistant Secretary for Administration as the SAO for records management.

  b. Under Secretaries, Agency, and Staff Office Heads shall:

       (1) Provide adequate staff resources to support records management processes within
           their respective organizations;

       (2) Participate in developing new or revised programs, processes, systems, and
           procedures to ensure adequate record keeping processes are established and
           implemented within their respective organizations;

       (3) Provide records management briefings for all managers and records management
           training to all staff within their organizations;

                                               3
    (4) Annually review the organization's record keeping practices in order to validate
        their accuracy and to ensure implementation;

    (5) Ensure Information Technology (IT) managers coordinate with appropriate records
        management professionals to address records management requirements as
        identified in this directive;

    (6) Ensure the records staff is fully involved in all projects concerning the creation,
        maintenance, use, and disposition of all USDA records;

    (7) Ensure organizations generating statements of work for USDA contracts involving
        creation or maintenance of Federal records include in the contracts appropriate
        records management requirements to comply with this directive and its authorities
        (see Appendix A and B); and

    (8) Ensure all records and other types of required documentary materials are not
        unlawfully removed from USDA by current or departing officials, employees, or
        contractors (see DR 3099-001, Records Management Policy for Departing
        Employees, Contractors, Volunteers and Political Appointees).

c. USDA SAO shall:

    (1) Ensure the Department efficiently and appropriately complies with all applicable
        records management statutes, regulations, NARA policies, and requirements of the
        OMB/NARA M-12-18;

    (2) Designate records officers (RO) within each USDA agency and staff office to
        develop and maintain a comprehensive records management program consistent
        with all established Departmental records management guidelines, and notify the
        departmental records officer of the assignment;

    (3) Ensure agency and staff office officials receive guidance on their programmatic and
        individual records management responsibilities and requirements; and

    (4) Submit the USDA’s annual records management report to the U.S. Government’s
        Chief Records Officer.

d. USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO) shall:

    (1) Review proposed Department reporting and record keeping requirements, including
        those contained in rules and regulations, to ensure they impose the minimum burden
        upon the public and have practical utility for the Department (see Government
        Paperwork Elimination Act (GPEA) and DR 3410-001, Information Collection
        Activities-Collection of Information from the Public);



                                            4
    (2) Administer the Departmental Records Management Program in compliance with
        NARA and other oversight agencies;

    (3) Address records management provisions in Capital Planning and Investment
        Control (CPIC) proposals and Enterprise Architecture (EA) plans:

        (a) In compliance with Records Management and OMB A-130 Circular, ensure
            records management and records archival functions are addressed in the
            requirements development phase for the design, development, and
            implementation of new or significantly revised information systems; and

        (b) Integrate planning for electronic records management systems into plans for
            resource allocation and use, including budgeting, acquisition, and use of IT.
            (see NARA, Criteria for Managing Email Records in Compliance with the
            Managing Government Records Directive M-12-18).

e. Departmental Records Officer (DRO) shall:

    (1) Develop Departmentwide policies, standards, and procedures for records
        management and provide oversight in their implementation;

    (2) Establish and maintain a list of USDA employees who are designated as agency or
        staff office RO;

    (3) Serve as the USDA representative to NARA, other Federal agencies, and external
        organizations on matters pertaining to the USDA’s records management program.
        Collaborate with NARA and other regulatory agencies such as OMB and GSA in
        applying standards, procedures, and techniques to improve the management of
        records and promote the maintenance of those records of continuing value;

    (4) Develop and implement management systems and procedures to ensure officials,
        employees, contractors, volunteers, and interns do not remove Federal records from
        Department custody without appropriate authorization (see DR 3099-001, Records
        Management Policy for Departing Employees, Contractors, Volunteers and
        Political Appointees);

    (5) Establish procedures for the participation of agency and staff office ROs in
        developing new or revised agency and staff office programs, processes, systems,
        and procedures to ensure adequate record keeping requirements are established and
        implemented;

    (6) Conduct reviews of agency and staff office ROs to evaluate program effectiveness
        and ensure conformance with Governmentwide and Departmentwide records
        management standards;




                                           5
    (7) Conduct periodic evaluations of records management programs within USDA, as
        part of the records management and oversight program;

    (8) Review and approve costs for the storage of Federal records including the invoices
        for records stored in the Federal Records Centers (FRC); and

    (9) Establish a Departmentwide vital records program in compliance with NARA
        requirements (see DR 3085-001).

f. Agency and Staff Office ROs shall:

    (1) Assist the DRO in administering the records management program to ensure
        uniformity throughout the Department;

    (2) Provide the DRO with information and documentation requested for review of the
        agency or staff office records management program. If requested, serve on the
        review team conducting an evaluation of the records management program of
        another agency or staff office;

    (3) Ensure their agency and staff office officials and employees receive guidance on
        their records management responsibilities and established record keeping
        requirements, by providing mandatory records management training appropriate for
        their records responsibilities;

    (4) Develop and maintain current records disposition schedules for all agency or staff
        office records. Review schedules, when notified of program changes resulting in:

        (a) Establishing new types of records;

        (b) An increase or decrease in the retention time of the records; or

        (c) New or revised electronic systems.

    (5) Ensure permanent records are preserved and transferred to NARA and temporary
        records are transferred into off-site storage or destroyed promptly, according to
        NARA-approved records disposition schedules, unless subject to litigation hold or
        other preservation requirements;

    (6) Conduct records management exit briefings, or establish protocols and procedures
        to ensure records management personnel conduct exit briefings, for employees and
        Presidential Appointees (see DR 3099-001);

    (7) Report any unlawful or accidental removal, defacing, alteration, or destruction of
        Department records to the DRO and to NARA;




                                           6
    (8) Coordinate with appropriate contracting officials to ensure necessary requirements
        are identified in contracts and deliverables, including:

        (a) Identify Federal records as contract deliverables or records for final turnover
            and other records specified as appropriate to the contract scope;

        (b) Distinguishing between Federal records and contractor-owned records;

        (c) Managing Federal records, in accordance with this directive and all other
            relevant laws, regulations, and USDA directives; and

        (d) Delivering records at appropriate intervals, in accordance with the contract, or
            at the termination of the contract (see Appendix A and B).

    (9) Ensure the identification, maintenance, and protection of their agency’s and staff
        office’s vital records meet NARA requirements (see DR 3085-001).

g. Program Managers shall:

    (1) Assign an official Records Management Liaison (RML) for each section within
        their operations. This custodian is responsible for records management compliance
        within that section. For each program or office at least one records custodian is
        required to provide day-to-day administration of an organization’s records
        management program and, as appropriate, to act as liaison with the agency or staff
        office RO. Provide names and contact information, and updates as changes occur,
        to the agency or staff office RO;

    (2) Create those records needed to ensure adequate and proper documentation of their
        area of responsibility. Establish and implement procedures to ensure records are
        maintained in such a manner that information and documents are readily
        retrievable, in accordance with the established agency and staff office file plan;

    (3) Ensure that when secondary or staff functional e-mail accounts for individuals,
        groups, or systems are created for business reasons, the records created are
        appropriately managed;

    (4) Implement procedures to ensure records are protected from theft, loss, and
        unauthorized access;

    (5) Transfer or destroy inactive records, according to the appropriate records
        disposition schedule;

    (6) Notify the agency or staff office RO of organizational or program changes that will
        result in establishment of new types of records, the transfer or termination of
        records no longer required, or an increase or decrease in the retention time of the



                                           7
        records; and

    (7) Ensure proper training of all personnel who create and use records, so as to ensure
        compliance with this directive and references.

h. Agency and Staff Office RMLs shall:

    (1) Implement records management procedures within their organizations, including
        developing file or records plans, conducting records inventories, identifying
        appropriate records disposition schedules, destroying records as scheduled (absent
        litigation hold or other similar hold), or transferring records to NARA;

    (2) Evaluate their organization’s records management program on a regular basis and
        ensure unscheduled records are brought to the attention of the agency or staff office
        RO, who assists in conducting a records appraisal, as appropriate;

    (3) Ensure personnel in their program are trained in their responsibilities to create,
        maintain, store, and dispose of Federal records, in accordance with NARA
        regulations and guidance and USDA records disposition schedules and/or file plans;
        and

    (4) Ensure records stored within their program area/offices are stored in accordance
        with NARA requirements for a Federal storage facility.

i. Agency CIOs shall:

    (1) Ensure the appropriate agency or staff office RO is included in the initial planning
        for new systems and plans for migration or updates from existing systems;

    (2) Provide guidance on the security of records in electronic media over the life of the
        record. Records must be valid, authentic, and reliable in order to meet legal
        requirements in a court of law;

    (3) Collaborate with the agency or staff office RO in the development of systems and
        protocols for the creation and use of electronic records according to OMB/NARA
        M-12-18, Federal regulations and Departmental policy, and that record keeping
        functionality is developed for all information systems managing electronic records.
        This includes coordinating with the agency or staff office RO to ensure compliance
        with record keeping requirements, determine retention periods, and implement
        authorized disposition instructions for system data and documentation. Coordinate
        with the agency or staff office RO when developing business cases as part of the
        CPIC process to ensure electronic records management requirements of
        OMB/NARA M-12-18 are met and incorporated into system design and
        development (see NARA, Criteria for Managing Email Records is Compliance with
        the Managing Government Records Directive m-12-18); and



                                            8
     (4) Notify the agency or staff office RO of technology changes that could affect access,
         retention, or disposition (archiving or disposing) of system records.

j.   Enterprise Architects shall ensure records management is considered in the business
     process analysis. Records management shall be a required layer of the architecture of
     each new segment development.

k.   Capital Planning and IT Governance Division shall incorporate records management and
     archival functions into the design, development, and implementation of information
     systems.

l.   Office of the General Counsel (OGC) shall notify the Department and agency or staff
     office ROs when a moratorium on records disposition is needed for litigation hold or
     other legal matters, the scope of the request, and when such moratoria are lifted (see DR
     3099-001).

m. Office of Communications, social media, USDA internal and external Web site sponsors
   shall:

     (1) Identify the record material contained therein, and ensure the proper archiving of
         that material in accordance with approved record disposition schedules; and

     (2) Identify the record material contained within Agency social media postings and
         ensure the proper archiving of that material in accordance with approved record
         disposition schedules. Most social media sites generally have/contain two types of
         record material:

          (a) Content records including entries, comments, blog posts, links, videos, and
              other social media communications; and

          (b) Site management and operations records including design, policy and
              procedures, and other Web management records.

          The above list is not all inclusive; if unsure, contact your agency or staff office RO
          to determine if additional records disposition schedules need to be developed.

n.   Contracting Officials shall:

     (1) Ensure clarity of records scope, applicable clauses, and contractor requirements
         language are incorporated into contracts;

     (2) Ensure contractor compliance with the records management requirements during
         contract performance;




                                              9
     (3) Notify Department and agency or staff office RO of all contracting staff
         arrival/departure as well as the start/end date of contracting project; and

     (4) Ensure appropriate records are managed and delivered properly by contractors (see
         Appendix A and B).

o.   Employees and Contractors shall:

     (1) Create and maintain adequate and proper documentation of the Department’s
         functions, policies, decisions, and essential transactions;

     (2) Understand what constitutes a Federal record and apply USDA and NARA
         regulations and guidance to all Federal records with which they come in contact;

     (3) Maintain record and non-record documentary material, according to prescribed
         Department policy and procedures;

     (4) Clearly designate as personal those papers of a private or non-official nature
         pertaining solely to their personal affairs; and file such records separately from the
         records of the office;

     (5) Safeguard records until they are authorized for disposition. The unauthorized
         removal, concealment, falsification, mutilation, and/or disposition of official
         records is prohibited by law and is subject to penalty 18 U.S.C. §2071
         (Concealment, Removal, or Mutilation Generally). Report any apparent instances
         of unauthorized disposition to his/her supervisor and the agency, or staff office RO;

     (6) Destroy records only in accordance with approved records disposition schedules,
         and never remove records or non-related materials from the Department without
         obtaining prior authorization;

     (7) Identify and maintain records in accordance with the agency’s and staff offices’
         continuity of operations program;

     (8) Understand and comply with the obligations of the FRA and USDA policy,
         including but not limited to use of personal and non-official electronic messaging
         accounts (see Appendix C);

     (9) Understand and comply with the USDA’s Capstone Approach to managing Federal
         e-mail records electronically, including managing e-mails outside of Capstone when
         required by business needs (see Appendix C); and

     (10) Complete mandatory records management training.




                                             10
6. RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS

  The following requirements must be met to ensure the adequacy of the USDA records
  management program:

  a.   The SAO will designate the agency and staff office RO to implement the records
       management program.

  b.   Establish record keeping requirements as prescribed by laws, regulations, directives, and
       processes, and reflect adequate and proper documentation of the Department’s
       organizations, missions, functions, policies, and decisions.

  c.   Maintain up-to-date inventories, file plans, or electronic information systems that
       provide for the identification, location, and retrieval of all categories of records created
       and received in the course of official business.

  d.   Request approval of disposition authorities from NARA for all unscheduled records.
       Apply records disposition schedules in accordance with applicable Federal regulations
       found in Records Management.

  e.   Maintain and dispose of records in accordance with NARA approved records disposition
       schedules.

  f.   Preserve records beyond their approved retention periods when they have been placed
       under a destruction moratorium for purposes of audits, litigation hold, Freedom of
       Information Act (FOIA) requests, and similar obligations (see DR 3090-001).

  g.   Provide annual mandatory records management training for all Federal personnel and
       contractors, as appropriate for their responsibilities. Such training will include records
       management training for all new employees (within 90 days of appointment) and an
       annual refresher course.

  h.   Ensure departing Federal employees identify and transfer any records in their custody to
       an appropriate custodian, or the person assuming responsibility for the work (see DR
       3099-001).

  i.   Maintain electronic records in accordance with Records Management, by building
       electronic record keeping functionality into the native electronic information system, or
       by capturing the electronic information system’s records in an electronic records
       management application (RMA). The use of any RMA that meets the functional
       requirement of Department of Defense (DoD) 5015.2-STD, Electronic Records
       Management Software Application Design Criteria Standard, satisfies this requirement.

  j.   Identify and address records management requirements during the planning,
       development, or redesign of electronic information systems with an emphasis on:



                                                11
     (1) Business processes that support the records management life cycle and the
         identification, description, and preservation of record content; and

     (2) Design and develop practices that incorporate records management requirements, to
         ensure new systems and system redesigns address applicable legal requirements for
         managing electronic records.

k.   Protect electronic records against technological obsolescence, in accordance with
     Records Management by:

     (1) Planning and budgeting for migration to a new system before the current system is
         retired, and ensuring the migration strategy addresses inactive electronic records
         stored off-line;

     (2) Retaining functionality and integrity of electronic records during upgrades of
         hardware and software to retain a usable format, ensure compatibility with current
         hardware and software, and preserve links between records and corresponding
         metadata; and

     (3) Decommissioning and migration of systems shall not be completed until records
         disposition has been completed.

l.   Manage e-mail records along with their metadata (including name of the sender and all
     addresses, date the message was sent and/or time of receipt) and attachments by means
     of an electronic information system (see Appendix C).

m. Back up all electronic systems containing electronic records regularly in accordance with
   business needs and manage backups in accordance with USDA records disposition
   schedules.

n.   Capture and manage records created or received via social media platforms, including
     Web sites and portals. Capture and preserve such records in accordance with NARA-
     approved records disposition schedules and USDA approved guidance. Manage Web
     content and operating records by ensuring records are captured, retained for appropriate
     retention periods, and disposed of in accordance with NARA-approved disposition
     schedules and record keeping guidance.

o.   Include in contracts explicit requirement(s) for delivery of all pertinent documentation of
     contractor program execution (see Appendix A and B).

p.   Conduct internal evaluations of records management practices and programs, including
     assessing the economy of the operation annually or at least every three years. Prepare
     and submit evaluation reports to DRO within 60 days of completing the evaluation.

q.   Identify and manage vital records in accordance with DR 3085-001.



                                             12
7. POLICY EXCEPTIONS OR WAIVERS

  All USDA agencies and staff offices are required to conform to this policy. Therefore,
  exceptions to this policy shall not be granted.


8. INQUIRIES

  The point of contact for this policy is the Associate Chief Information Officer (ACIO)
  Information Resource Management (IRM), Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO).


                                           -END-




                                             13
                                          APPENDIX A

                               CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS


This list of Contractor Requirements (CR) establishes the requirements for USDA contractors
who create, use, maintain, receive, disseminate, or dispose of USDA records in connection with
the performance of USDA-funded tasks or activities. Regardless of the performer of the work,
the contractor is responsible for complying with the CR list. The contractor is responsible for the
requirements of the document flowing down to sub-contractors at any tier, to the extent
necessary to ensure contractor compliance with the requirements.

1. Implement a records management training or awareness program that will provide
   appropriate training to contractor employees so as to ensure the management of USDA
   records in accordance with applicable legal requirements, including, Records Management.

2. Manage all data created, received, and maintained for the Government by contractors in
   accordance with 44 U.S.C. Chapters 21, 29, 31 and 33; the FOIA; the Privacy Act of 1974;
   and; Records Management.

3. Establish record keeping requirements that reflect adequate and proper documentation of the
   contractor’s work on behalf of USDA.

4. Maintain up-to-date inventories, file plans, or systems that provide for the identification,
   location, and retrieval of all categories of records created and received in the course of
   official business.

5. Work through the appropriate agency or staff office RO or agency or staff office RML, to
   request disposition authority for all unscheduled records and to transfer records to storage
   facilities.

6. Preserve records beyond their approved retention periods when they have been placed under
   a destruction moratorium for purposes of audits, litigation hold, FOIA appeals, and similar
   obligations. A destruction moratorium shall be lifted only by the OGC.

7. Store inactive records in facilities that meet the requirements of applicable Federal
   regulations found in, Records Management, and ensure all provisions are met when storing
   inactive records in agency, staff office, contractor, and records storage facilities.

8. Work with the appropriate contracting official and/or records professional to ensure Federal
   records are identified for turnover and/or delivery at the completion or termination of the
   contract.

9. When deliverables or turnover includes electronic records, provide sufficient technical
   documentation to ensure access to the records throughout their life cycle.



                                                A-1
                                          APPENDIX B

                RECORDS MANAGEMENT LANGUAGE FOR CONTRACTS


The following standard items relate to records generated in executing the contract and must be
included in a typical electronic information system procurement contract. The list below
identifies the minimum requirements:

1. Citations to pertained laws, codes and regulations such as 44 U.S.C. chapters 21, 29, 31 and
   33; FOIA (5 U.S.C. 552); Privacy Act of 1974 (95 U.S.C. 552a); 36 CFR Part 1222 and Part
   1228.

2. Contractor shall treat all deliverables under the contract as the property of the U.S.
   Government for which the Government Agency shall have unlimited rights to use, dispose
   of, or disclose such data contained therein as it determines to be in the public interest.

3. Contractor shall not create or maintain any records that are not specifically tied to or
   authorized by the contracting using Government IT equipment and/or Government records.

4. Contractor shall not retain, use, sell, or disseminate copies of any deliverables that contains
   information covered by the Privacy Act of 1974 or that which is generally protected by the
   FOIA.

5. The Government Agency owns the rights to all data/records produced as part of this contract.

6. The Government Agency owns the rights to all electronic information (electronic data,
   electronic information systems, electronic databases, etc.) and all supporting documentation
   created as part of this contract. Contractor must deliver sufficient technical documentation
   with all data deliverables to permit the agency to use the data.

7. Contractor agrees to comply with Federal and Agency records management policies,
   including those policies associated with the safeguarding of records covered by the Privacy
   Act of 1974. These policies include the preservation of all records created or received
   regardless of format (paper, electronic, etc.) or mode of transmission (e-mail, fax, IM, text
   messaging, etc.) or state of completion (draft, final, etc.).

8. No disposition of documents will be allowed without the prior written consent of the
   Contracting Officer (CO). The Agency and its contractors are responsible for preventing the
   alienation or unauthorized destruction of records, including all forms of mutilation. Willful
   and unlawful destruction, damage or alienation of Federal records is subject to the fines and
   penalties imposed by Concealment, Removal, or Mutilation Generally. Records may not be
   removed from the legal custody of the Agency or destroyed without regard to the provisions
   of the agency records disposition schedules.




                                                B-1
9. Contractor is required to obtain the CO’s approval prior to engaging in any contractual
   relationship (sub-contractor) in support of this contract requiring the disclosure of
   information, documentary material and/or records generated under, or relating to, this
   contract. The Contractor (sub-contractor) is required to abide by Government and Agency
   guidance for protecting sensitive and proprietary information.




                                            B-2
                                        APPENDIX C

                                ELECTRONIC MESSAGING


1. USE OF PERSONAL OR NON-OFFICIAL ELECTRONIC MESSAGING ACCOUNTS
   FOR OFFICIAL USDA BUSINESS

  Official Agency business should first and foremost be done on official USDA information
  systems. USDA employees have long been discouraged from conducting official business
  using non-official or private electronic messaging accounts under USDA Departmental
  Regulations. On November 26, 2014, the Presidential and FRA Amendments of 2014 was
  signed into law. This law created new disclosure requirements for officers or employees who
  use non-official electronic messaging accounts to conduct official business.

  Specifically, Federal government employees may not create or send a record using non-
  official accounts unless the employee either:

  a. copies his or her official electronic messaging account in the original creation or
     transmission or

  b. forwards a complete copy of the record to his or her official electronic messaging account
     not later than 20 days after the original creation or transmission.

  Electronic messages in this context include both e-mail and other electronic messaging
  systems used for communicating between individuals, such as text messaging IM programs.

  The law expressly provides that, under some circumstances, intentional violation of this
  requirement shall be a basis for a disciplinary action against the officer or employee, up to
  and including removal. Disclosure requirements for official business conducted using non-
  official electronic messaging accounts, 44 U.S.C. §2911.

  These FRA requirements are designed to ensure that any use of a non-official information
  system does not affect the preservation of Federal records for FRA purposes, or the ability to
  identify and process those records if requested under the FOIA, Privacy Act of 1974, or for
  other official business (e.g., litigation hold, congressional oversight requests, etc.).

  In accordance with existing Departmental policies, USDA employees are again discouraged
  from conducting official business using non-official or private electronic messaging
  accounts. Under the unusual circumstances where a USDA employee does use a non-official
  account to conduct official business, he or she must comply with the copying or forwarding
  requirements outlined above.




                                              C-1
2. USDA’S “CAPSTONE” APPROACH

  This policy implements OMB M-12-18, Part I, Goal 1.2, and NARA Bulletin 2013-02,
  Guidance on a New Approach to Managing E-mail Records. Bulletin 2013-02 provides
  agencies with a new records management approach, known as “Capstone” for managing
  Federal e-mail records electronically.

  Under the Capstone approach, USDA manages e-mail records based on the role of the e-mail
  account user and/or office rather than on the content of each e-mail. E-mail records are
  captured and managed according to user role using the following retention approach:

  a. E-mail Records of Designated Capstone Officials: E-mail records from the e-mail
     accounts of officials whose role within the agency predominantly creates permanent
     records: USDA will retain permanent e-mail records according to the approved Capstone
     records schedule and then accession them into the National Archives of the United States.
     For USDA, this applies to the e-mail records of designated USDA Capstone Officials.
     The USDA OGC and USDA’s agency and staff office RO maintain the official list of
     capstone officials’ e-mail accounts.

  b. E-mail Records Captured from E-mail Accounts Not Designated as Capstone Officials:
     E-mail records of all other USDA e-mail account users will be retained according to the
     Capstone records schedule and destroyed within the electronic record keeping system,
     unless subject to litigation hold or other preservation requirements.

  c. E-mail records retained with related records: When business needs require e-mail records
     to be retained with other record (such as part of a case file) in another record keeping
     system, you should manage these records outside of the electronic record keeping system
     and retain them according to the appropriate USDA Agency Records Disposition
     Schedule series instructions. Capstone does not replace existing business practices that
     require e-mail messages and other related records to be retained together in established
     record keeping systems. USDA agencies should evaluate Capstone in terms of their
     existing business processes.

  USDA will manage all e-mail records in an appropriate electronic system that supports
  records management and litigation hold requirements (which may include preservation-in-
  place models), including the capability to identify, retrieve, and retain the records for as long
  as they are needed.

  NOTE: Currently, Capstone applies only to USDA e-mail records, as defined above. All
  other records, either paper or electronic, are governed by USDA Agency Records Disposition
  Schedules.




                                               C-2
                                    APPENDIX D

                                    DEFINITIONS


Adequate and Proper Documentation. Record of the conduct of Government business that
is complete and accurate to the extent required to document the organization, functions,
policies, decisions, procedures, and essential transactions of the agency, and that is
designed to furnish the information necessary to protect the legal and financial rights of the
Government and of persons directly affected by the agency’s activities.

Appraisal. Process by which NARA determines the value and the final disposition of
Federal records, designating them either temporary or permanent.

Archive. A collection of non-current Federal records that has been removed permanently
from an agency and transported physically (in an acceptable) format to NARA. At that
point, NARA assumes legal responsibility for the preservation of the records because of
their continuing or enduring value.

Documentary Materials. A collective term for records and non-record materials that refers
to all media on which information is recorded, regardless of the nature of the medium or
the method or circumstances of recording.

File Plan. A classification scheme describing different types of files maintained in an
office, how they are identified, where they should be stored, how they should be indexed
for retrieval, and a reference to the approved disposition for each file. (See NARA, Best
Practices in Electronic Records Management, Appendix A. (Definitions)

Legal and Financial Rights Records. Vital records essential to protect the legal and
financial rights of the Government and of the individuals directly affected by its activities.
Examples include accounts receivable records, social security records, payroll records,
retirement records, and insurance records. These records were formerly defined as “rights-
and-interests” records.

Life Cycle of Records. The management concept that records pass through three stages:
creation, maintenance and use, and disposition.

Litigation Hold. The obligation of agencies, managers, and individual employees to ensure
the preservation of documentary materials that might be or might become relevant to
pending or threatened litigation. If the documentary material was created in electronic
format, it must be preserved in that original native format. (See DR 3090-001)

Metadata. Preserved contextual information describing the history, tracking, and/or
management of an electronic record.




                                          D-1
Non-record Material. Those Federally owned informational materials that do not meet the
statutory definition of records or that have been excluded from coverage by the definition.
Excluded materials are extra copies of documents kept only for reference, stocks of
publications and processed documents, and library or museum materials intended solely for
reference or exhibit.

Permanent Records. Any Federal record that has been determined by NARA to have
sufficient value to warrant its preservation in the National Archives of the United States,
even while it remains in the agency custody.

Personal Papers (Files). Documentary materials belonging to an individual that are not
used to conduct agency business. Personal papers (files) are excluded from the definition
of Federal records and are not owned by the Government.

Records. Records include all recorded information, regardless of physical form or
characteristics, made or received by an agency of the United States Government under
federal law or in connection with the transaction of public business and preserved or
appropriate for preservation by that agency or its legitimate successor as evidence of the
organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures, operations, or other activities of the
Government or because of the informational value of the data in them (see Definition of
Records, 44 U.S.C. §3301).

Records Disposition Schedule. A document, approved by NARA, which provides
authority for the final disposition of recurring or non-recurring records. Records shall not
be destroyed except as authorized by an approved records schedule. Also called File Plan.

Record Keeping System. Manual or electronic system that captures, organizes, and
categories records to facilitate their preservation, retrieval, use, and disposition.

Retention Period. The period of time that records are to be kept in accordance with NARA
approved records disposition schedules.

Social Media. Digital technologies and platforms that allow publishing, communications,
and collaboration among individuals and institutions.

Temporary Records. Records approved by NARA for disposal, either immediately or after
a specified retention period. Also called disposable records or non-permanent records.

Unscheduled Records. Records whose final disposition has not been approved by NARA.

Vital Records. Essential agency records that are needed to meet operational responsibilities
under national security emergencies or other emergency conditions (emergency operating
records), or to protect the legal and financial rights of the Government and those affected
by Government activities.




                                           D-2
                          APPENDIX E

              ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ACIO     Associate Chief Information Officer
CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
CIO      Chief Information Officer
CO       Contracting Officer
CPIC     Capital Planning and Investment Control
CR       Contractor Requirements
DoD      Department of Defense
DR       Departmental Regulation
DRO      Departmental Records Officer
EA       Enterprise Architecture
FOIA     Freedom of Information Act
FRA      Federal Records Act
FRC      Federal Records Center
GPEA     Government Paperwork Elimination Act
GSA      General Services Administration
IM       Instant Messaging
IRM      Information Resources Management
IT       Information Technology
NARA     National Archives and Records Administration
OCIO     Office of the Chief Information Officer
OGC      Office of the General Counsel
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
RMA      Records Management Application
RML      Records Management Liaison
RO       Records Officer
SAO      Senior Agency Official
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                               E-1
                                   APPENDIX F

                       AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


a. Concealment, Removal, or Mutilation Generally, 18 U.S.C. § 2071

b. Department of Defense (DoD) 5015.2-STD, Electronic Records Management Software
   Application Design Criteria Standard (2007)

c. Definition of Records, 44 U.S.C. § 3301

d. Disclosure requirements for official business conducted using non-official electronic
   messaging accounts, 44 U.S.C. § 2911

e. Federal Information Policy, 44 U.S.C. § 3506, Federal Agency Responsibilities

f. Federal Records Act of 1950, (FRA), 44 U.S.C. § 3101

g. Freedom of Information Act of 1996 (FOIA), 5 U.S. Code § 552 (1996)

h. Government Paperwork Elimination Act (GEPA), 44 U.S.C. § 3504, et seq. (2000)

i. NARA, Bulletin 2013-02, Guidance on a New Approach to Managing E-mail Records,
   August 29, 2013

j. NARA, Code of Federal Regulations, Records Management, 36 CFR Chapter XXI,
   Subchapter B (2015)

k. NARA, Criteria for Managing Email Records in Compliance with the Managing
   Government Records Directive M-12-18, April 6, 2016

l. OMB, Circular A-123, Management’s Responsibility for Internal Control

m. OMB, Circular A-130, Memorandum for Heads of Executive Departments and
   Agencies: Management of Federal Information Resources, November 28, 2000, revised

n. OMB/NARA, M-12-18, Managing Government Records Directive, August 24, 2015

o. Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. § 552a

p. USDA, DR 3085-001, Vital Records Management Program, May 23, 2013

q. USDA, DR 3090-001, Litigation Retention Policy for Documentary Materials
   including Electronically Stored Information, May 28, 2008



                                          F-1
r. USDA, DR 3099-001, Records Management Policy for Departing Employees,
   Contractors, Volunteers, and Political Appointees, July 2, 2012




                                    F-2
