                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250



         DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                  Number:
                                                                                  3050-001
                                                                DATE:
SUBJECT:                                                        May 11, 2012
Mail Management
                                                                OPI:
                                                                Office of Operations

   1. PURPOSE

      This regulation prescribes policies, responsibilities and procedures for mail
      management within the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA).

   2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

      This regulation revises DR 3050-1, and cancels DR 3050-1 dated May 28, 1996.

   3. POLICY

      It is the policy of this Department to comply with the Federal Management
      Regulations (FMR) Parts 102-192, Mail Management. Also, it is the policy of
      USDA to use the most economical classes and types of mail services available,
      that are consistent with operational needs. Mail processing operations will be
      prompt, efficient and as economical as possible. USDA mail centers must adhere
      to the GSA objective of timely and cost-effective dispatch and delivery of mail to
      the action office after its receipt from the Postal Service. USDA will cooperate
      fully with the United States Postal Service (USPS) in order to meet USDA's
      written communications requirements and to assure accurate reimbursement for
      services performed by the USPS.

   4. ABBREVIATIONS

      CASU           - Cooperative Administrative Support Unit
      CFR            - Code of Federal Regulations
      CMU            - Central Mail Unit
      DMM            - Domestic Mail Manual, U.S. Postal Service
      FMR            - Federal Management Regulations
      GSA            - General Services Administration
      IMM            - International Mail Manual, U.S. Postal Service
      MRMD           - Mail and Reproduction Management Division
      OMAS           - Official Mail Accounting System
      OO             - Office of Operations
      UPS            - United Parcel Services
      USC            - United States Code
  USDA          - United States Department of Agriculture
  USPS          - United States Postal Service

5. DEFINITIONS

  a. Agency Mail Manager – has oversight of the mail communications program
     of an agency at the national level within the Department. The Agency Mail
     Manager serves as a liaison to the Departmental Mail Manager and is a
     resource to agency personnel for mail management issues.

  b. Class of Mail - the five categories of domestic mail as defined by the United
     States Postal Service (USPS) in the Domestic Mail Manual (DMM). The
     categories are:

         (1) Express Mail

         (2) First Class and Priority Mail

         (3) Standard Mail (e.g. bulk marketing mail)

         (4) Periodicals

         (5) Package Services

  c. Commercial Payment Process – a postage accounting system that is an
     alternative to the Official Mail Accounting System (OMAS). In a commercial
     payment system, postage expenses are paid at the time that the transaction
     occurs.

  d. Co-mingling - the merging of outgoing mail from one facility or agency with
     outgoing mail from at least one other source.

  e. Departmental Mail Manager – Has oversight of the policy, planning, and
     coordination of USDA’s National Mail Management Program (NMMP).
     Ensures the Department’s compliance to mail safety and security, financial,
     reporting, and performance measurement policies.

  f. Expedited Mail - a generic term that means mail designated for delivery more
     quickly than the USPS’s normal delivery times (which may vary by class of
     mail). Examples of expedited mail include USPS Express Mail, overnight,
     and two-day delivery by other service providers.

  g. Facility Mail Manager - the person responsible for mail in a specific USDA
     mail facility. There may be many Facility Mail Managers within USDA and
     its agencies.



                                       2
h. Incoming Mail - refers to any mail that comes into USDA delivered by any
   service provider, such as USPS, UPS, FedEx, DHL, etc.

i. Internal Mail - mail generated within USDA that is delivered to a USDA
   facility, so long as it is delivered by agency personnel or a dedicated agency
   contractor (i.e., not a service provider).

j. Mail - all materials that might pass through the USDA mail processing center
   including:

       (1)   All internal, incoming, and outgoing materials such as envelopes,
             bulk mail, expedited mail, individual packages up to 70 pounds,
             publications, and postal cards.

       (2)   Similar materials carried by agency personnel, contractors, the
             United States Postal Service (USPS) and all other carriers of such
             items; and

       (3)   Electronic mail only if it is printed out and mailed as described in
             paragraphs (1) and (2) of this section; however, this part encourages
             agencies to maximize the use of electronic mail in lieu of printed
             media, so long as it is cost-effective.

k. Mail Costs - allocations and expenses for postage and all other mail costs
   (e.g. payments to service providers, mail center personnel costs, mail center
   overhead, etc.).

l. Mail Management Program - Federal Management Regulations (FMR)
   Parts 102-192 issued by the General Services Administration (GSA) requires
   federal government departments to develop and utilize efficient management
   procedures for their departmental mail programs. The objective of the Mail
   Management Program at USDA is to ensure rapid handling and accurate
   delivery of mail throughout all of USDA at a minimum cost consistent with
   USDA’s mission requirements. Within USDA, a Department level Mail
   Manager is appointed to oversee the Mail Management Program. In support of
   the Departmental Mail Manager, each USDA operating division (Agency)
   appoints a Mail Manager to direct the Mail Management Program at the
   Agency level.

m. Mail Piece Design – the layout and printing of items to be mailed such that
   they can be processed efficiently and effectively by automated mail-
   processing equipment.
n. Mail and Reproduction Management Division (MRMD) – Has full
   oversight of USDA’s national print production and mail management
   programs. The Departmental Mail Manager is appointed by the director of
   MRMD.

                                     3
o. Mail System - all of the components of the operation including methods for
   capturing data on mail users, their volumes, and costs.

p. Official Mail - all mail used to conduct the business of USDA is considered
   official mail. As such, USDA mail is considered Government property and is
   subject to rules governing the use of government property.

       (1)   Examples of mail matter that would not generally be considered as
             official mail include: Christmas cards, chain letters, job resumes,
             complaints (except those submitted to the Inspector General under
             Section 7 of the Inspector General Act of 1978), grievances, and
             similar personal matters.

       (2)   An agency head may request a ruling from the Director of
             Operations, as to whether a particular mail matter is official
             business. Any such request should include the reason why the
             agency head believes the matter to be official USDA business.

q. Official Mail Accounting System (OMAS) - is the Postal Services
   government-unique postage accounting system. Its purpose is to track postage
   used by most of USDA’s agencies. GSA has recommended that all
   government agencies convert to Commercial Payment Processes.

r. Outgoing Mail - generated within USDA that is going outside our facility and
   is delivered by a service provider.

s. Personal Mail - mail received or sent at a Federal agency by an agency
   employee or contract worker that does not involve the official business of the
   agency.

t. Postage - money or fees due that are paid to any service provider for mail
   services or delivery.

u. Private Express Statutes - refers to laws that establish the U.S. Postal
   Service’s limited monopoly on first-class mail delivery. The statutes allow for
   overnight delivery of letter mail by alternative delivery services and also for
   the delivery of books, magazines, and newspapers.

v. Presort – an outgoing mail preparation used to receive a discounted mailing
   postage rate by sorting mail according to USPS standards.

w. Program Level - subsidiary part of USDA that generates a significant
   quantity of outgoing mail.




                                    4
  x. Service Provider - an agency or company that delivers mail. Some examples
     of service providers are: USPS, UPS, FedEx, DHL, Courier Services, and the
     State Department, Diplomatic, Pouch and Mail Division.

  y. Special Services - mail services that require extra payment over basic
     postage; e.g., certified mail, registered mail, business reply mail, certificates
     of mailing, return receipts, and delivery confirmation.

  z. Unauthorized Use of Agency Postage - the use of penalty or commercial
     mail stamps, meter impressions or other postage indicia for personal or
     otherwise unofficial use.

  aa. Unsolicited Commercial Mail - mail that may or may not be program
      related. Examples include: Advertisements, requests for contributions,
      soliciting sales or subscriptions, training materials, and flyers. If this mail is
      adequately addressed for delivery, it may be forwarded to the appropriate
      program office. Inadequately addressed unsolicited commercial mail may be
      returned to the USPS as undeliverable.

  bb. Work Sharing - cost-effective ways of processing outgoing mail that qualify
      for reduced postage rates; examples include presorting bar coding,
      consolidating, and commingling.

6. RESPONSIBILTIES

  a. Mail and Reproduction Management Division (MRMD), Office of Operations
     (OO) will:

     (1)   Provide direction, leadership and policy for Departmental Mail Services.

     (2)   Circulate Departmental policies, standards, techniques and procedures,
           and represent the Department in the area of mail management.

     (3)   Develop, implement, and provide to GSA USDA’s annual mail
           management report. This plan must include:

           (a) Total amounts paid to all service providers.

           (b) Verify that facility security plans have been reviewed at the agency
               level.

           (c) Identify performance measures in use at the agency level.

           (d) A description of the USDA’s plans to improve the economy of mail
               operations.



                                         5
(4)   Ensure that mail costs are identified at the program level within the
      department. Program level costs can be identified by tracking mailing
      expenses by program areas, costs estimates, financial reports, reconciled
      Postal Service OMAS reports, and reconciled vendor data.

(5)   Establish written policies and procedures to provide timely and cost-
      effective dispatch and delivery of mail.

(6)   Ensure agency-wide awareness and compliance with standards and
      operational procedures established by all service providers used by the
      agency.

(7)   Monitor the agency’s mailings and other mail management activities,
      especially expedited mail, mass mailings, mailing lists, and couriers, and
      seek opportunities to implement cost-effective improvements and/or to
      enhance performance of the agency’s mission.

(8)   Develop and direct agency programs and plans for proper and cost-
      effective use of transportation, equipment, and supplies used for mail.

(9)   Ensure that expedited mail and couriers are used only as authorized by
      the Private Express Statutes (39 U.S.C. 601-606) and when necessary
      and cost-effective.

(10) Observe written policies and procedures to minimize personal mail or
     packages received or sent via incoming, outgoing, and/or internal
     agency mail.

      (a) Mail Center personnel are not required to deliver personal mail or
          packages received through their facility, unless authorized to do so
          in writing by their supervisor or the head of the office under special
          temporary circumstances.

      (b) Employees in transit as a result of a change in duty station, or on
          temporary detail, or temporarily assigned to a remote field location,
          may request the use of an office address until their situations are
          stabilized.

      (c) Employees should be discouraged from using their office address
          for delivery of savings bonds, salary checks, and per diem checks.

(11) Provide a liaison with the USPS and GSA, adherence to their rules,
     regulations and ensuring correct, speedy and economical movement of
     USDA mail within the postal system.




                                  6
   (12) Provide adequate liaison with the USPS on reimbursement for postal
        services.

   (13) Provide training assistance in mail management and mail services
        operations.

   (14) Ensure that USDA’s national mail management program complies with
        all applicable mail policies and procedures, including this Departmental
        Regulation and the Federal Management Regulations (FMR) Parts 102-
        192, Mail Management.

b. Department Agency Administrators and Staff Office Directors will:

   (1)   Establish a mail management program and ensure that their employees
         are aware of and comply with the provisions of the program.

   (2)   Appoint a qualified individual familiar with mail management as
         Agency / Facility Mail Manager to manage, control and coordinate
         matters regarding mail management and services within their local and
         field offices. The name, complete mailing address, and telephone
         number of the appointed person (or any replacement) will be sent to the
         Departmental Mail Manager.

   (3)   Work closely with program personnel to minimize postage and
         associated printing expenses through improved mail piece design, mail
         list management, electronic transmission of data in lieu of mail, and
         other appropriate measures.

   (4)   Coordinate all of the office’s large mailings and print jobs to ensure that
         the most efficient and effective procedures are used.

   (5)   Work closely with the Departmental Mail Manager, Agency Mail
         Manager, mail technical experts, and mail Facility Managers that handle
         significant quantities of mail or print functions for their program.

   (6)   Seek opportunities to centralize or consolidate mail services when
         USDA agencies are collocated in Federal Buildings or in nearby
         locations, in order to insure efficiency and economy to the government.
         These services may be currently available through a Cooperative
         Administrative Support Unit (CASU).

   (7)   Evaluate the use of Post Office Box rentals to ensure that economical
         and efficient systems are utilized for the receipt of incoming mail.

   (8)   Review and reconcile reports of postal accountability (OMAS or
         commercial vendors) to ensure accurate billing.

                                     7
   (9)         Implement performance measures for mail operations at the agency
         level and in all local and field office facilities and programs.

   (10) Observe written policies and procedures to reduce personal mail or
        packages received or sent via incoming, outgoing, and/or internal agency
        mail.

   (11) Ensure their agency’s national mail management program complies with
        all applicable mail policies and procedures, including this Departmental
        Regulation and the Federal Management Regulations (FMR) Parts 102-
        192, Mail Management.

c. Departmental Mail Manager is responsible for:

   (1)   Establishing and maintaining a system that tracks financial and other
         performance data. Also, providing MRMD at the end of each fiscal year,
         as required, with pertinent information and reports concerning mailing
         practices, volumes of official and commercial mail costs.

   (2)   Working with MRMD and agency budget personnel to implement
         commercial payment processes (where feasible) while working under
         temporary deviations.

   (3)   Working with agency accounting personnel to ensure that financial
         systems show allocations and expenses for postage and all other mail
         costs separately from all other administrative expenses.

   (4)   Ensuring that bills from all service providers are reconciled and paid on
         a timely basis.

   (5)   Coordinating with MRMD on matters regarding USPS services and
         reimbursements.

   (6)   Ensuring that their organization utilizes postal products and services that
         are efficient and economical.

   (7)   Keeping members of their organization informed of changes in
         regulations and mailing requirements as provided by MRMD.

   (8)   Continually reviewing and evaluating the use of mail products and
         services, within their organization, to ensure that economies are derived
         that benefit the organization.

   (9)   Ensuring that users at the program levels receive the training needed to
         reduce, track, and budget for their mailing expenses.

                                     8
   (10) Working with agency executives to ensure that, to the maximum
        practical extent, the person who makes the decision to mail any
        significant number of pieces of mail is the same person who controls the
        funds for postage.

   (11) Developing and directing Departmental programs and plans for proper
        and cost-effective use of transportation, equipment, and supplies used
        for mail.

   (12) Providing guidance to agency correspondence managers on
        correspondence management decisions such as development and design
        of mailing materials including Business Reply Mail, Letterhead, and
        Mail Piece Design.

   (13) Representing the Department in its relations with mail service providers
        (usually as a Contracting Officer’s Technical Representative), other
        agency mail managers, and the GSA Office of Governmentwide Policy.

   (14) Keeping USDA personnel informed of the objectives, policies,
        standards, and procedures for prompt, accurate and economical mail
        operations.

   (15) Ensuring that outgoing mail is economically and expeditiously
        dispatched.

   (16) Providing liaison with the USPS and GSA, adherence to their rules,
        regulations and ensuring correct, speedy, and economical movement of
        USDA mail within the postal system. Also, provide adequate liaison
        with the USPS on reimbursement of postal services.

   (17) Seeking opportunities to implement cost-effective improvements and to
        enhance performance of the agency’s mission.

   (18) Establishing written policies and procedures to minimize incoming and
        outgoing personal mail.

   (19) Providing continuous monitoring of USDA’s national Mail Management
        Program to achieve improvements.

   (20) Ensuring the Department’s National Mail Management Program
        complies with all applicable mail policies, and procedures, including this
        Departmental Regulation and Federal Management Regulations (FMR)
        Parts 102-192, Mail Management.

d. Agency and/or Facility Mail Manager is responsible for:

                                    9
(1)   Representing and performing for their agency at the national level while
      demonstrating a level of commitment to their role and responsibilities as
      a USDA Agency and/or Facility Mail Manager.

(2)   Ensuring their agency’s national mail management program complies
      with all applicable mail policies and procedures, including this
      Departmental Regulation and the Federal Management Regulations
      (FMR) Parts 102-192, Mail Management.

(3)   Providing consistent representation for their agency at internal agency
      mail managers’ meetings, discussions, and other various
      communications. Participating in a mail manager orientation.

(4)   Maintaining relationships with other agency/facility mail managers,
      external mail service providers, and mail technical experts.

(5)   Developing and monitoring the postage budget and expenditures for
      their agency at the national level and providing postage budget
      allocations and/or amendments to the Departmental Mail Manager. Also,
      providing in timely manner, monthly, quarterly, and/or annual reports to
      the Departmental Mail Manager. Typical reports include total postage,
      shipping, and related fees for their entire agency (headquarters and field
      offices) that is paid to each and every mailing and shipping service
      providers.

(6)   Implementing a written mail security policy that applies throughout the
      agency regardless of the facility’s mail volume.

(7)   Observing written policies and procedures to reduce personal mail or
      packages received or sent via incoming, outgoing, and/or internal
      agency mail.

(9)   Coordinating with program personnel to minimize postage and
      associated printing expenses through improved mail piece design,
      electronic transmission of data in lieu of mail, and other appropriate
      measures.

(10) Ensuring that all addresses on agency letters and packages meet address
     specifications. Also, ensuring that all mailing lists have been validated.

(11) Actively seeking opportunities to remain current on new technologies
     and practices that could reduce mailing costs or make use of mail
     services more effectively.




                                 10
     (12) Coordinating all of the agency or program's large mailings and
          associated print jobs to ensure that the most efficient and effective
          procedures are used.

     (13) Collaborating with agency finance officials to establish procedures for
          the timely processing of funds owed to service providers.

     (14) Addressing, including machine readability, formatting, use of correct
          street addresses, and minimizing use of hand-written addresses.

     (15) Ensuring that a USPS mail piece design analyst is consulted when
          creating a new mail piece.

     (16) Reviewing large mailings by mail managers before they are sent to
          printing or a print contractor.

     (17) Acceptance and processing of incoming and outgoing personal mail.

     (18) Limiting unsolicited mail and mail addressed to unknown persons and
          former employees.

     (19) Reporting all activities to include all postage costs associated with
          mailing, printing, and materials, to the agency mail manager, and

     (20) Administering policies for incoming and outgoing personal mail. In
          general, personal mail should be discouraged or prohibited. However, an
          agency may establish a policy to accept and process personal mail for
          personnel living on a Federal facility, personnel stationed outside the
          United States, or personnel in other situations who would otherwise
          suffer hardship.

e.   All USDA Mail Facilities will:

     (1)   Receive technical direction on USDA mail management policies,
           procedures, and issues from their National Agency or Facility Mail
           Managers

     (2)   Have a written mail security policy that applies throughout the agency
           regardless of the facility’s mail volume.

     (3)   Review outgoing mail to ensure that it is properly prepared and
           conforms to standards specified in the IMM and Eligibility Module in
           the DMM, and other appropriate sections. Ensure that outgoing mail
           meets all standards established by their service provider(s) for weight,
           size, hazardous materials content, etc.



                                      11
     (4)   Work closely with all facility personnel, especially program level users
           who develop large mailings, to minimize postage and associated printing
           expenses through improved mail piece design, mail list management,
           electronic transmission of data in lieu of mail, and other appropriate
           measures; keeping current on new technologies that could be applied to
           reduce mailing costs.

     (5)   Work with local managers to ensure that, to the maximum practical
           extent, the person who makes the decision to mail any significant
           number of pieces of mail is the same person who controls the funds for
           postage.

     (6)   Ensure that expedited mail and couriers are used only when authorized
           by the Private Express Statutes (39 U.S.C. 601-606) and when necessary
           and cost-effective.

     (7)   Provide centralized control of all mail processing activities at the
           facility, including all regularly scheduled, small package, and expedited
           service providers, couriers, equipment, and personnel.

     (8)   Review unauthorized use, loss, or theft of postage, including any
           unauthorized use of penalty or commercial mail stamps, meter
           impressions or other postage indicia, and immediately report such
           incidents to the USDA Inspector General.

     (9)   Provide training opportunities for all levels of agency personnel at the
           mail facility on incoming, outgoing, internal mail and security.

     (10) Obtain and refer to current postal publications appropriate to their
          mailing operations.

     (11) Deliver all mail that is adequately addressed to the appropriate mail stop
          in a timely and cost-effective way. All mail that is inadequately
          addressed will be returned to the USPS as undeliverable.

     (12) Ensuring their national mail management program complies with all
          applicable mail policies and procedures, including this Departmental
          Regulation and the Federal Management Regulations (FMR) Parts 102-
          192, Mail Management.

7. REFERENCES

  Basic laws and regulations applicable to official mail are:

  a. Title 39, USC, Chapter 32, which provides for the use of Penalty mail by
     executive agencies.

                                       12
  b. Title 18, USC, Section 1719, Franking Privilege," which provides penalties
     for the misuse of Government mail.

  c. FMR 102-192 establishes and defines the mail management function in
     Government agencies.

  d. Domestic Mail Manual (DMM), USPS, which provides regulations for
     domestic mail matter entering the USPS system.

  e. International Mail Manual (IMM), USPS, which provides guidance for
     preparation and postage costs for international mail.


8. MAIL OPTIONS AND USER RESPONSIBILITIES

  a. To ensure timely receipt and economy, select the class of mail and special
     service on the basis of the priority of the material being mailed. The agency
     Mail Manager will consult MRMD, when there are questions as to the
     appropriate class or service to be used. FOR EACH MAILING, IT IS THE
     RESPONSIBILITY OF THE ORIGINATOR TO IDENTIFY THE CLASS
     AND SPECIAL SERVICE DESIRED.

  b. All official outbound postal mail must be typed, using USPS standardized
     address format (see Appendix A & B). Outbound mail, generated by
     headquarter offices, that is not typed will not be accepted for processing by
     the Central Mail Unit (CMU). The USPS offers incentives for quality
     addresses. Typed mail is readable by optical character readers. Therefore,
     typed mail will receive expeditious handling and the potential for discounted
     postage rates.

  c. Official mail must be separated according to the class of mail and special
     service requested before it is presented to the post office.

9. INTERNAL MAIL SERVICE

  a. Authorized Use of Internal Mail Services - Internal mail services are limited
     to official mail. Personal mail, intended for internal or external delivery, will
     not be picked up or delivered* by Government or contractor employees since
     it would impede the productivity of MRMD and the Government’s efficiency
     and economy (*see DR 3050-001,Section 6a-(10) & FMR, Parts 102-192,
     Mail Management, Subpart F, (i) for stipulations).

  b. Establishing Route Stops - Route stops will be established and maintained by
     MRMD in collaboration with the offices. Action offices will immediately



                                       13
     notify MRMD, Mail Services Branch, Automation Relocation Team (ART)
     regarding changes in personnel receiving mail at respective mail drops.

  c. Scheduling Runs - Internal mail service runs should be scheduled to coincide
     with USPS delivery and pick up and with as much frequency needed to
     prevent a buildup of mail at any one location.

  d. Published Schedules - Internal service schedules are to be published and
     circulated to mail originators. Schedules will include times of USPS
     deliveries, interoffice pickup and delivery, and a cutoff time to receive mail to
     be processed for the last daily USPS mailing.

  e. Enroute Sorting – Forward Sorting during an internal mail run will expedite
     delivery to offices on the same run if the volume of mail is not too great.
     Large volumes of mail to be forward sorted should be returned to the mail unit
     to eliminate delays to the balance of the route and disruption of the published
     schedule.

  f. Interoffice Mail - Mail between agencies/staff offices within the Department
     must clearly identify the intended recipient by name, agency, and mail stop to
     ensure delivery without delay.


10. INCOMING MAIL

  a. Official Mail - Mail directed to officials or employees of the Department at
     their office address will be delivered to that office when such mail is claimed
     both by the official or employee and by the office. This also applies to mail
     addressed in this manner to former officials or employees of the Department.
     Such mail will be delivered to the appropriate program office for action.

  b. Routing - In order to speed the processing of incoming mail, the guidelines
     below should be followed.

     (1)   Route adequately addressed mail directly to the action office without
           opening the envelope unless instructions have been issued to open
           specific categories.

     (2)   Write routing directions on envelopes that have been opened rather than
           on a routing form and attach the envelope to the correspondence.

     (3)   Use office organizational and/or mail stop codes rather than the
           complete office title. Room numbers are to be used where they are
           required to make delivery.




                                       14
     (4)   Limit date/time stamping to classes of mail for which date/time
           stamping protects the interest of the Government, its employees and/or
           the public.

     (5)   Maintain an up-to-date routing guide to assist in accurate routing, and
           keep it current on organizational, functional, and personnel changes.

  c. Sorting - Incoming mail will be sorted to provide for minimum essential
     handling between the time it is received and the time it reaches the action
     office. A maximum of three sorts to achieve final delivery should be adequate.

  d. Special Handling - Special instructions should be provided to each mail
     station processing mail requiring special handling. The following items of
     mail require special handling: Registered mail, certified mail with return
     receipt, delivery confirmation, and mail brought to the Department by local
     independent couriers.

  e. Postage Due Mail - The USPS will offer to deliver mail with insufficient
     postage.

     (1)   Official Mail - Payment of postage due for official mail will be paid
           through an OMAS postage due account. Government agencies can no
           longer use penalty meter strips or penalty mail stamps to pay postage
           due.

     (2)   Public Mail - The Washington, DC, mail center refuses postage due mail
           received in the center. Each agency is to establish a policy to accept or
           refuse postage due mail received from the public at their mail centers.


11. OUTGOING MAIL

  a. Outgoing mail standards include the selection of the most cost-effective mail
     service by the originator, to facilitate transmission of official mail, use of
     appropriate envelope specifications, and direct accountability methods.

  b. Electronic Mail Service - Electronic Mail will be used for official business
     when it can be demonstrated that its use is cost-effective and will increase
     efficiency.

  c. Authorized Use of Official Mail - Official mail may only be used for mailing
     articles, documents and packages that are required to conduct Government
     business.

  d. Unauthorized Use of Official Mail - Mail such as personal letters, chain
     letters, Christmas cards, job resumes and applications, Freedom of

                                      15
     Information and Privacy Act requests and appeals, complaints, grievances,
     and all similar materials which do not relate exclusively to the business of the
     Government may not be sent as penalty or postage and fees paid mail. Federal
     employees and individuals outside the Government are prohibited by law and
     regulations from using penalty mail for private use. Anyone found using
     penalty mail for unofficial purposes may be fined up to $300. Federal
     employees are also subject to disciplinary action.

  e. Quasi-Official Mail - Any agency or office head may authorize the use of
     official mail services (not official postage) for community or government
     employee-related activities to be conducted under their auspices. The
     examples that follow are some activities that may be included:

                 - Government employee retirement functions.
                 - Agency/office sponsored sporting or recreation events.
                 - Agency/office sponsored special events.
                 - Red Cross blood bank appeals.
                 - State or local government sponsored activities.

  f. Return Address

     (1)   A complete return address must be indicated on outgoing official mail.
           The upper left corner of official mail shall contain the Departmental
           return address and identify the agency or staff office (stop code) of
           origin identified as the ZIP+4.

     (2)   The statement "Official Business," shall appear immediately below the
           return address of all official mail.


12. ENVELOPE STANDARDS/SPECIFICATIONS

  Envelope standardization is essential to meet the requirements established by the
  USPS, GSA and the Government Printing Office. All envelopes will be prepared
  for mailing in a manner that will accommodate the high-speed technology
  currently in use by the USPS.

  a. Standards

     (1)   Except for USPS required items and appropriate slogans that can be
           included on ad plates for metered mail, no other printed, stamped, or
           affixed markings or design shall be placed on official envelopes or on
           the front of official postcards without the approval of the Departmental
           Senior Information Resource Management official. Requests for
           markings or design additions will be submitted to the Departmental Mail



                                      16
         Manager, OO-MRMD, and will include a determination, in each
         instance, that use of a given marking or design will either:

         (a)   reduce costs;

         (b)   expedite mail delivery or handling;

         (c)   aid in the delivery of services to the public; or

         (d)   promote a program or activity having major national impact.

   (2)   Except for self-mailers, no printing is permitted on the inside of
         envelopes.

   (3)   Envelopes dispatched will use the most economical service consistent
         with delivery needs and must meet USPS requirements.

   (4)   The smallest standard size envelope available, that will accommodate
         the material to be sent, will be used. The USPS levies extra charges on
         larger size envelopes.

   (5)   Addresses will include, at a minimum, the five digit Zip Code and, when
         available, Zip+4 Code.

   (6)   Addresses will be typed, clear, correct, and properly placed on all
         envelopes.

   (7)   Addresses will be completely visible through window envelopes.

   (8)   Letter size window envelopes will be used to the maximum extent
         possible, except for mailing material that:

         (a)   contains national security information;

         (b)   is highly confidential to the Department or the addressee;

         (c)   contains material that is to be registered; or

         (d)   is sent to high level officials in Government or the private sector.

b. Specifications.

   (1)   Letter Envelope - Letter size envelopes are rectangle in shape with
         minimum dimensions of 5 inches in length, 3.5 inches in height and .007
         inches in thickness and maximum dimensions of 6 1/8 inches in height,
         11 ½ inches in length and ¼ inch in thickness. The standard letter size

                                     17
      envelopes used Departmentwide is white, approximately 9.25 by 4.25
      inches with black printing. Letter envelopes are used for one to five
      pages of correspondence that can be folded to .25 inch maximum
      thickness.

(2)   Flat Envelopes - Flat envelopes are rectangular in shape and exceed one
      or more of the maximum dimensions for letter size envelopes but do not
      exceed 15 inches in length, 12 inches in height, or .75 inches in
      thickness. The minimum size for flat envelopes is 6 1/8 inches in height,
      11 ½ inches in length and ¼ inch thickness. Flat envelopes will be used
      for communications that cannot be folded or, if folded, will exceed the
      .25 inch maximum width permitted for letter size envelopes. All new
      envelopes should be reviewed by the Departmental Mail Manager for
      format and USPS requirements prior to printing. The standard flat
      envelopes used Departmentwide are:

      (a)   White or Brown 12 by 9.5 inches (White preferred)

      (b)   White or Brown 15 by 10 inches (White preferred)

(3)   Batch Mailing - When several pieces of mail (at least six pieces) are sent
      to the same address, the mail should be consolidated into a single flat
      envelope for mailing.

(4)   Mail Pouches - When there is a recurring high volume of mail between
      two offices and the volume is too great for batch mailing, mail pouches
      should be considered as a cost-effective alternate to individual mailings.

(5)   Labels - Imprinted labels are to be used on imprinted flat envelopes and
      parcels too large to be mailed in flat envelopes.

(6)   Postcards - In order to qualify for the postcard rate, cards must be a
      minimum of 3-1/2 inches by 5 inches and be a maximum of 4-1/4 inches
      by 6 inches and will be imprinted with the same markings and indicia
      required for envelopes. Postcards that exceed the above measurements
      will be charged the full First-Class rate by the USPS.




                                 18
                             APPENDIX A

Addressing Formats



                              Domestic

MR AND MRS JOHN A SAMPLE
5505 W SUNSET BLVD APT 230
HOLLYWOOD CA 90028-8521


MR THOMAS SMITH, DIRECTOR
AGRICULTURAL MARKETING SERVICE
US DEPT OF AGRICULTURE
12 E BUSINESS LN STE 209
KRYTON TN 38188-0002


                             International

MS INGRID DIETRIC-FISCHER
HARTMANNSTRASSE 7
5300 BOON 1
GERMANY

MS HELEN SAUNDERS
1010 CLEAR STREET
OTTAWA OB1
CANADA

MS C P APPLE
APARTADO 3068
46807 PUERTO VALLARTA JALISCO
MEXICO




                                 A-1
                                         APPENDIX B

                              STANDARD ADDRESS ABBREVIATIONS

                  TWO-LETTER STATE AND POSSESSION ABBREVIATIONS

Alabama                             AL        Alaska                     AK
Arizona                             AZ        Arkansas                   AR
American Somoa                      AS        California                 CA
Colorado                            CO        Connecticut                CT
Delaware                            DE        District of Columbia       DC
Federal Sate of Micronesia          FM        Florida                    FL
Georgia                             GA        Guam                       GU
Hawaii                              HI        Idaho                      ID
Illinois                            IL        Indiana                    IN
Iowa                                IA        Kansas                     KS
Kentucky                            KY        Louisiana                  LA
Maine                               ME        Marshall Islands           MH
Maryland                            MD        Massachusetts              MA
Michigan                            MI        Minnesota                  MN
Mississippi                         MS        Missouri                   MO
Montana                             MT        Nebraska                   NE
Nevada                              NV        New Hampshire              NH
New Jersey                          NJ        New Mexico                 NM
New York                            NY        North Carolina             NC
North Dakota                        ND        Northern Mariana Island    MP
Ohio                                OH        Oklahoma                   OK
Oregon                              OR        Palau                      PW
Pennsylvania                        PA        Puerto Rico                PR
Rhode Island                        RI        South Carolina             SC
South Dakota                        SD        Tennessee                  TN
Texas                               TX        Utah                       UT
Vermont                             VT        Virgin Islands             VI
Virginia                            VA        Washington                 WA
West Virginia                       WV        Wisconsin                  WI
Wyoming                             WY

                      GEOGRAPHICAL DIRECTIONAL ABBREVIATIONS

North                                N        East                        E
South                                S        West                        W
Northeast                           NE        Southeast                  SE
Northwest                           NW        Southwest                  SW

                             SECONDARY ADDRESS UNIT INDICATORS

Apartment                          APT            Basement              BSMT
Building                           BLDG           Department            DEPT
Floor                              FL             Front                 FRNT
Hanger                             HNGR           Key                   KEY
Lobby                              LBBY           Lot                   LOT
Lower                              LOWR           Office                OFC
Penthouse                          PH             Pier                  PIER
Rear                               REAR           Room                  RM

                                            B-1
Side            SIDE         Slip         SLIP
Space           SPC          Stop         STOP
Suite           STE          Trailer      TRLR
Unit            UNIT         Upper        UPPR

               STREET ABBREVIATIONS

Alley        ALY             Annex        ANX
Arcade       ARC             Avenue       AVE
Bayou        BYU             Beach        BCH
Bend         BND             Bluff        BLF
Bluffs       BLFS            Bottom       BTM
Boulevard    BLVD            Branch       BR
Bridge       BRG             Brook        BRK
Brooks       BRKS            Burg         BG
Bypass       BYP             Camp         CP
Canyon       CYN             Cape         CPE
Causeway     CSWY            Center       CTR
Centers      CTRS            Circle       CIR
Circles      CIRS            Cliff        CLF
Cliffs       CLFS            Club         CLB
Common       CMN             Commons      CMNS
Corner       COR             Corners      CORS
Course       CRSE            Court        CT
Courts       CTS             Cove         CV
Coves        CVS             Creek        CRK
Crescent     CRES            Crest        CRST
Crossing     XING            Crossroad    XRD
Crossroads   XRDS            Curve        CURV
Dale         DL              Dam          DM
Divide       DV              Drive        DR
Drives       DRS             Estate       EST
Estates      ESTS            Expressway   EXP
Extension    EXT             Extensions   EXTS
Fall         FALL            Falls        FLS
Ferry        FRY             Field        FLD
Fields       FLDS            Flat         FLT
Flats        FLTS            Ford         FRD
Fords        FRDS            Forest       FRST
Forge        FRG             Forges       FRGS
Fork         FRK             Forks        FRKS
Fort         FT              Freeway      FWY
Garden       GDN             Garden       GDNS
Gateway      GTWY            Glen         GLN
Glens        GLNS            Green        GRN
Greens       GRNS            Grove        GRV
Groves       GRVS            Harbor       HBR
Harbors      HBRS            Haven        HVN
Heights      HTS             Highway      HWY
Hill         HL              Hills        HLS
Hollow       HOLW            Inlet        INLT
Island       IS              Islands      ISS
Isle         ISLE            Junction     JCT
Junctions    JCTS            Key          KY
Knoll        KNL             Knolls       KNLS
Lake         LK              Lakes        LKS


                       B-2
Land         LAND         Landing      LNDG
Lane         LN           Light        LGT
Lights       LGTS         Loaf         LF
Lock         LCK          Locks        LCKS
Lodge        LDG          Loop         LOOP
Mall         MALL         Manor        MNR
Manors       MNRS         Meadow       MDW
Meadows      MDWS         Mews         MEWS
Mill         ML           Mills        MLS
Mission      MSN          Motorway     MTWY
Mount        MT           Mountain     MTN
Mountains    MTNS         Neck         NCK
Orchard      ORCH         Oval         OVAL
Overpass     OPAS         Park         PARK
Parks        PARK         Parkway      PKWY
Parkways     PKWY         Pass         PASS
Passage      PSGE         Path         PATH
Pike         PIKE         Pine         PNE
Pines        PNES         Place        PL
Plain        PLN          Plains       PLNS
Plaza        PLZ          Point        PT
Points       PTS          Port         PRT
Ports        PRTS         Prairie      PR
Radial       RADL         Ramp         RAMP
Ranch        RNCH         Rapid        RPD
Rapids       RPDS         Rest         RST
Ridge        RDG          Ridges       RDGS
River        RIV          Road         RD
Roads        RDS          Route        RTE
Row          ROW          Rue          RUE
Run          RUN          Shoal        SHL
Shoals       SHLS         Shore        SHR
Shores       SHRS         Skyway       SKWY
Spring       SPG          Springs      SPGS
Spur         SPUR         Spurs        SPUR
Square       SQ           Squares      SQS
Station      STA          Stravenue    STRA
Stream       STRM         Street       ST
Streets      STS          Summit       SMT
Terrace      TER          Throughway   TRWY
Trace        TRCE         Track        Trak
Trafficway   TRFY         Trail        TRL
Trailer      TRLR         Tunnel       TUNL
Turnpike     TPKE         Underpass    UPAS
Union        UN           Unions       UNS
Valley       VLY          Valleys      VLYS
Viaduct      VIA          View         VW
Views        VWS          Village      VLG
Villages     VLGS         Ville        VL
Vista        VIS          Walk         WALK
Walks        WALK         Wall         WALL
Way          WAY          Ways         WAYS
Well         WL           Wells        WLS




                    B-3
