                                  U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                        Washington, D.C.


                                                                                       NUMBER:
                        DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION
                                                                                       3060-002


 SUBJECT: Secretarially Signed Documents         DATE: July 17, 2010

                                                 OPI: Office of the Executive Secretariat



1.    PURPOSE

      This regulation describes the process for transmitting official documents to the
      Immediate Office of the Secretary for final review and signature by the Secretary or
      Deputy Secretary of Agriculture. It does not alter or supersede the policies or procedures
      for the handling of documents established in other Departmental Directives, except with
      regard to the dispatch of the document to and from the Immediate Office of the Secretary.


2.    POLICY

      a. Official documents prepared for review and signature by the Secretary or Deputy
         Secretary of Agriculture shall be transmitted to the Immediate Office of the Secretary
         through the Office of the Executive Secretariat (OES), and once signed will be
         returned to the appropriate official through OES.

      b. This regulation does not apply to Sensitive Security Information or National Security
         Classified documents, which shall be handled in accordance with DR3440-01, USDA
         Classified National Security Information Program Regulation, and DR3440-02,
         Control and Protection of Sensitive Security Information.


3.    REFERENCES

      a.   DR0100-001, Departmental Directives System;
      b.   DM1260-001, Legislative Reports and Proposals;
      c.   DR1410-001, Publications Review/Clearance Policy;
      d.   DR3060-001, Correspondence Management;
      e.   DR3080-001, Records Management;
      f.   DR3440-01, USDA Classified National Security Information Program; and,
      g.   DR3440-02, Control and Protection of Sensitive Security Information.


4.    DEFINITIONS
     a. Agency refers to a bureau, mission area, and Departmental staff office, as defined in
        DR1010-001, Organization.

     b. Immediate Office of the Secretary refers to the office containing the Secretary,
        Deputy Secretary, and their immediate staff.

     c. Office of the Secretary refers to the office containing the Immediate Office of the
        Secretary, the offices of all Under and Assistant Secretaries, and Departmental Staff
        Offices which report directly to the Secretary.

     d. Official Document refers to all documents prepared, developed, reviewed, or utilized
        in the course carrying out official duties and responsibilities.

     e. Secretarially Signed Document refers to official documents prepared by agencies,
        Mission Areas, and offices for review and signature by the Secretary or Deputy
        Secretary of Agriculture. Examples of Secretarially Signed Documents include
        correspondence, decision memorandums, Departmental Directives, and certificates.


5.   RESPONSIBILITIES

     a. Officials preparing official documents for review and signature by the Secretary or
        Deputy Secretary shall:

        (1) Deliver all documents for review and signature by the Secretary or Deputy
            Secretary to the Office of the Executive Secretariat;

        (2) Ensure all documents have been reviewed and cleared by all appropriate officials,
            and that the document is accompanied by adequate supporting information to
            enable the Secretary or Deputy Secretary to assess the full implications of signing
            the document.

     b. The Office of the Executive Secretariat (OES) shall:

        (1) Track all documents submitted by Under Secretaries, Assistant Secretaries,
            Agency Heads, and Staff Office Directors for review and signature by the
            Secretary or Deputy Secretary;

        (2) Transmit documents to the Immediate Office of the Secretary in a timely manner;

        (3) Distribute returned documents in accordance with instructions from the Office of
            the Secretary and the office that prepared the document; and,

        (4) Maintain copies of all Secretarially Signed Documents as part of the Official
            Records of the Office of the Secretary.


                                             2
6.   RECORDS MANAGEMENT

     a. All documents shall be managed and preserved in accordance with the Federal
        Records Act, Departmental and Agency regulations, applicable record schedules, and
        all other applicable guidance.

     b. Secretarially Signed Documents, and all associated records generated during the
        analysis, drafting, and clearance of documents, are part of the Official Records of the
        Office of the Secretary, and shall be stored, handled, and preserved in accordance
        with guidance provided by OES, the Departmental Records Officer, and the General
        Counsel.




                                              3
