                     U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                            WASHINGTON, DC 20250


     DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                           Number: 3085-001
                                                       Date: August 19, 2011
SUBJECT:                                               OPI: Office of the Chief Information
Vital Records Management Program                       Officer



1.   PURPOSE

     This regulation outlines the policies and responsibilities for identifying and
     protecting records necessary for USDA to continue its essential functions and
     activities during and following an emergency, disaster, or event that could cause the
     disruption of normal operations. It augments information in DR 1800-1,
     Departmental Emergency Programs Responsibilities and the USDA Headquarters
     Continuity of Operations (COOP) Plan. The primary authority for establishing a
     vital records management program within the Federal Government is 36 Code of
     Federal Regulations (CFR), Subchapter B – Records Management, Part 1223,
     Managing Vital Records.

2.   BACKGROUND

     Preservation of vital records is a government-wide requirement imposed through a
     variety of laws and facilitated by the National Archives and Records Administration
     (NARA) guidance. Each Federal agency is required by statute and by regulation to
     establish and maintain a vital records management program. An effective vital
     records management program is essential to successful records management. Vital
     records include records and information necessary to continue the essential
     functions and activities of an agency in case of an emergency or disaster; and to
     protect the legal and financial rights of the agency, its employees, and the public.

3.   POLICY

     USDA is committed to working with its employees to protect and safeguard vital
     records. This regulation sets forth USDA’s policy and responsibilities in
     developing a vital records management program. The intent is to ensure that USDA
     critical records are identified, maintained and protected and no loss of critical
     information occurs during or after an emergency or disaster.

     a.    Each USDA agency and staff office head will establish a vital records
           management program in accordance with this regulation and DR 1800-1.

     b.    Each USDA agency and staff office head will select and safeguard records
           required to ensure the continuity of essential USDA functions during and
          following an emergency, disaster, or event that could cause the disruption of
          normal operations.

4.   AUTHORITY

     This regulation is published in accordance with the authority vested in the Secretary
     of Agriculture under 44 U.S.C. 2104 and 3101; and 44 U.S.C. Chapter 35; and
     delegated to the Chief Information Officer (7 CFR 2.89)

5.   ABBREVIATIONS

     CAT        COOP Crisis Action Team
     CFR        Code of Federal Regulations
     CIO        Chief Information Officer
     COOP       Continuity of Operations
     DR         Departmental Regulation
     ERF        Emergency Relocation Facility
     FEMA       Federal Emergency Management Agency
     FRA        Federal Records Act
     FOIA       Freedom of Information Act
     NARA       National Archives and Records Administration
     OCIO       Office of the Chief Information Officer
     POC        Point of Contact
     U.S.C.     United States Code

6.   REFERENCES

     a.   DR 3080-001, Records Management, April 11, 2007

     b.   DR 3090-001, Litigation Retention Policy for Documentary Materials
          including Electronically Stored Information, March 28, 2008

     c.   DR 1800-1, Departmental Emergency Programs Responsibilities, March 28,
          2001

     d.   DR 3440-001, USDA Classified National Security Information Program
          Regulation, January 9, 2008

     e.   DM 3440-001, USDA Classified National Security Information Program
          Manual, May 1, 2008

     f.   National Archives and Records Administration Guide, "Vital Records and
          Records Disaster Mitigation and Recovery"

     g.   36 CFR, Chapter 12, Subchapter B – Records Management, Part 1223,
          Managing Vital Records



                                            2
     h.   44 U.S.C. 3101, Records Management by Agency Heads; General Duties

7.   RESPONSIBILITIES

     a.   Secretary of Agriculture

          As the head of the Department, the Secretary of Agriculture is vested with the
          authority to make and preserve records containing adequate and proper
          documentation of the organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures,
          and essential transactions of the agency. (44 U.S.C. 3101.)

     b.   USDA’s Chief Information Officer (CIO)

          The Secretary of Agriculture has delegated to the CIO, through the Assistant
          Secretary for Administration, oversight responsibility for the
          Department-wide records management disposition program (7 CFR
          2.89(a)(10); 2.89(a)(11)(x). Oversight of the Vital Records Management
          Program is within the scope of this delegation. This responsibility includes
          the following:

          (1)    Review proposed USDA reporting and record keeping requirements,
                including those contained in rules and regulations, to ensure that they
                impose the minimum burden upon the public and have practical utility
                for USDA;

          (2)   Assist the Office of Management and Budget in the performance of its
                functions assigned under the:

                   (a) Data Quality Act (Pub. L. No. 106-554 § 515) and under the
                       Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3501-3520), including
                       review of USDA information activities,

                   (b) E-Government Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-347, 44 U.S.C.
                       Chapter 36;

          (3)   Administer the Departmental Records Management Program.

          (4)   Administer the Departmental Vital Records Management Program in
                compliance with the National Archives and Records Administration and
                other oversight Agencies.

     c.   The Departmental Vital Records Officer, Office of the Chief Information
          Officer

          (1)   Develops Departmental level USDA specific Vital Records Management
                Program requirements, policies, management procedures and guidance
                in compliance with the National Archives and Records Administration

                                           3
     (2)   Develops and distributes guidance related to identification,
           maintenance, and protection of rights and interest records.

     (3)   Conducts an annual review of USDA vital records management policies
           and procedures to ensure compliance with NARA regulations and
           assigns tasks to ensure compliance.

     (4)   Ensures Agency and Staff Office compliance through periodic audits
           and reports to Agency and Staff Office Heads on findings.

     (5)   Maintains liaisons with the NARA and other Federal agencies on
           matters affecting vital records.

d.   Agency and Staff Office Records Officers

     (1)   Guide and assist in inventorying agency records.

     (2)   Assist agency and staff office vital records coordinators to identify vital
           records.

     (3)   Provide guidance on maintenance practices in determining the
           appropriate method of protecting their vital records.

     (4)   Conduct general records management training.

     (5)   In conjunction with the agency and staff office vital records coordinators
           and the mission area, agency and staff office COOP POC ensures that
           copies of vital records are properly managed throughout their life cycle
           as they are updated, stored and replaced in accordance with established
           requirements.

e.   Agency Heads and Staff Office Heads

     (1)   Designate a vital records coordinator to implement, maintain and
           oversee the vital records management program.

     (2)   Ensure agency and staff office vital records management programs are is
           in compliance with Departmental, organization specific, and NARA
           requirements and guidelines.

     (3)   Identify and select those records essential to agency-wide effectiveness
           during and after an emergency or disaster. This includes selecting the
           appropriate media for storing records.




                                       4
     (4)   Ensure that vital records are protected against damage and loss.

     (5)   Ensure that records, selected for inclusion in the vital records
           management program, are current, complete, protected, and readily
           available to facilitate the continuity of USDA operations during and
           after an emergency or disaster.

     (6)   Ensure that their staff are aware of and execute appropriate measures to
           identify and protect vital records.

f.   Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Coordination, COOP Planning
     Division

     (1)   Ensures that the COOP POC and CAT members comply with the USDA
           HQ COOP Plan.

g.   Agency and Staff Office COOP POC

     (1)   Coordinate with the COOP Planning Division regarding the transfer of
           vital records and duplicated vital records to the COOP ERF and
           Devolution Site storage facility. Ensure the stored vital records
           inventory is maintained up to date and complete at all times.

     (2)   Manage the transfer of vital records and duplicated vital records to the
           agency and staff office COOP ERF and Devolution Site storage facility.
           Ensure the stored vital records inventory is maintained up to date and
           complete at all times.

     (3)   In conjunction with the agency and staff office vital records coordinators
           and the agency records officer ensures that copies of vital records are
           properly managed throughout their life cycle as they are updated, stored,
           and replaced in accordance with established requirements.

     (4)   Maintain copies of completed transmittal forms and the vital records
           inventory for the agency.

     (5)   Certify the currency of their organization’s vital records inventory
           located at the OSEC ERF and Devolution Site, and the organization’s
           own ERF and Devolution Site to the agency records officer following
           completion of a scheduled quarterly vital records inventory review and
           update.

     (6)   Ensure a select master set of Federal, USDA and agency directives,
           handbooks, forms and other issuances, both administrative and technical,
           are available electronically and in hard copy at their agency’s ERF and
           Devolution Site.



                                      5
     (7)   Provide locations of vital records and procedures for assessing and
           utilizing them.

h.   Agency and Staff Office Vital Records Coordinators

     (1)   Are responsible for the direct management and implementation of
           USDA and organization specific Vital Records Management Program
           policies, management procedures and access instructions, and all
           applicable guidance promulgated by NARA and the Federal
           Government.

     (2)   Work with the agency and staff office records officers to ensure the
           proper identification and selection of vital records, use of suitable
           storage media, and the maintenance of appropriate inventories.

     (3)   Are directly responsible for the currency, completeness, accessibility,
           proper storage, and protection against damage and loss of the vital
           records inventory at USDA HQ, their organization’s ERFs and
           Devolution Sites, and if applicable at the OSEC ERF and Devolution
           Site.

     (4)   In coordination with program managers, IT managers, employees,
           contractors, and volunteers as applicable, complete review and updates
           of the organization’s vital records inventory once a quarter at a
           minimum and otherwise as needed. Upon completion of the review,
           provide a copy of the inventory certified as current to the Records
           Officer and COOP POC.

     (5)   Ensure that agency and staff office personnel are aware of and execute
           appropriate measures to identify and protect vital records.

     (6)   Ensure vital records are readily available to facilitate USDA continuity
           of operations during and following an emergency, disaster, or event that
           could cause the disruption of normal operations.

     (7)   Conduct an annual comprehensive vital records program inventory
           review, documented with the date the review was conducted and the
           name of the reviewer.

     (8)   Conduct initial on-boarding and annual vital records briefings, and
           training sessions of COOP personnel, and ensure that their agency or
           staff office personnel are aware of and execute appropriate measures to
           identify and protect vital records.




                                       6
     i.   Program Managers

          (1)   Ensure vital records are identified, updated and protected.

          (2)   Ensure that their staffs are aware of and execute appropriate measures to
                identify and protect vital records.

     j.   Information Technology Managers

          (1)   Provide information technology (IT) support sufficient to support the
                effective and efficient production, storage, maintenance and retrieval of
                vital records in electronic formats.

          (2)   Provide technical advice and guidance by reviewing and assisting with
                hardware and software required to support the vital records program.

          (3)   Take steps to eliminate IT vulnerabilities that could threaten agency vital
                records.

          (4)   Procure, install, and upgrade, as appropriate, IT systems, software and
                equipment sufficient to support the vital records program including the
                implementation of redundant IT systems.

          (5)   Ensure the appropriate replication and recovery of databases containing
                vital information.

     k.   All Employees, Contractors and Volunteers

          (1)   Assist in the identification and protection of vital records.

          (2)   Assist the Vital Records Coordinator in identifying new vital records
                and those records no longer considered vital.

8.   IDENTIFYING VITAL RECORDS

     The identification and management of vital records is an essential part of the
     Federal agency’s emergency preparedness responsibility. An agency must provide
     for the protection and accessibility of its vital records and information necessary to
     conduct its essential functions under all conditions at its normal operating sites,
     ERFs and Devolution Sites. Agency and Staff Offices must also preserve as vital
     records evidence of the organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures,
     operations and other activities of the Government.

     Designation of vital records is a discretionary decision based on the agency mission,
     emergency functions, and emergency plans of operations. A document’s
     designation as a permanent record has no bearing on its designation as a vital
     record. Vital records generally fall into one of two categories:

                                             7
a.   Type I Emergency Operating Records that are those records needed to resume
     and continue operations during an emergency or disaster. They are also
     necessary for the resumption of normal operations after an emergency.
     Records that are normally considered vital include, but are not limited to:

     (1)  Statements of agency missions in an emergency;
     (2)  Primary Mission Essential Functions (PMEFs) documentation;
     (3)  Mission Essential Functions (MEFs) documentation;
     (4)  Delegations of authority and Orders of Succession;
     (5)  Regulations or announcements to be issued immediately at the beginning
          or end of an emergency or disaster;
     (6) Lists of employees assigned emergency duties;
     (7) Information concerning the whereabouts of vital records;
     (8) Building plans;
     (9) Agency program records needed to carry out essential functions;
     (10) System manuals.
     (11) Staffing assignments and related policy or procedural records and
          standard operating procedures (SOPs);
     (12) Devolution Plans;
     (13) Reconstitution Plans.

b.   Type II Legal and Financial Rights Records that are needed to re-create legal
     and financial operations, as well as to safeguard the interests of the
     organizations, its employees, and its clients. Legal and Financial Rights
     records are not vital records unless the agency is the statutory office of
     record. Legal and Financial Rights records include, but are not limited to:

     (1)  Information about agency personnel, property, damage, and assessment
          data;
     (2) Fiscal records such as periodic summaries of financial status and records
          of monies received by and owed to the Government;
     (3) Accounts receivable and payable;
     (4) Land titles, leases and contracts;
     (5) Personnel Records;
     (6) Payroll Records;
     (7) Memoranda of Understanding;
     (8) Grant files;
     (9) Social Security records;
     (10) Payroll records;
     (11) Retirement records;
     (12) Insurance records;
     (13) Property management and inventory;
     (14) Any additional Legal and Financial Rights Records considered critical
          for continued performance of essential functions.




                                      8
     Mirroring these two types of vital records, a vital records management program
     should enable accomplishment of two things. First, the program will provide a
     USDA agency with the information needed to conduct business under other than
     normal operating conditions and to resume normal business afterwards. Second, the
     program enables agency officials to identify and protect the most important records
     relating to the legal and financial rights of the agency and those affected by the
     agency’s actions.

9.   PROGRAM ELEMENTS

     a.   Practicality of the Program

          An agency’s program should meet its needs during an emergency, within
          budgetary limitations. The cost and complexity of ensuring the availability of
          every document that might conceivably be needed in an emergency would be
          prohibitive. In order to make a vital records inventory manageable and useful
          in an emergency, it is essential to distinguish between important records and
          truly vital records. Therefore, only those records needed during and after an
          emergency should be designated as vital records. In selecting such records,
          agencies need to keep in mind that individuals using the records during an
          emergency may not be the same individuals who normally use them.
          Important records may support a business operation, but loss of such records
          will not stop mission-critical operations. Records that are truly vital, by
          contrast, are essential for mission-critical, business operations and are
          irreplaceable. That is, the contents of vital records cannot be recreated, and
          the operations supported by these records cannot be performed without them.

          It is particularly important that the vital records program be kept practical
          because:

          (1)   It is an essential part of the emergency preparedness program designed
                to ensure the continuity of the Department under the most adverse
                circumstances. Overall preparedness may suffer if necessary
                information is not available when it is most needed; and

          (2)   This program must be kept current indefinitely. If the program is overly
                elaborate, cumbersome, or costly, it will inevitably become outdated.
                The procedures for ensuring vital records are available must be routine.




                                            9
      b.   Providing Copies of Vital Records

           Vital records will normally be maintained as duplicate copies of original
           records in paper or machine-readable form, whichever is most appropriate.
           These copies can be stored at designated Emergency Relocation Facilities and
           Devolution Sites or other designated locations depending upon the size and
           volume of the records, the frequency with which records need updating, the
           costs involved, and any security precautions that must be applied.

      c.   Machine-Readable Records

           Growth of automatic data processing systems has made it necessary to
           safeguard quantities of electronic media used for information storage. If vital
           records are maintained on electronic media, a copy of the program manual or
           other information required to use the records should be stored with them.

           Because of the fragile nature of information stored on electronic media,
           agencies must ensure that electronic media stored at vital records locations are
           protected against loss. Such protection should consist of periodic recalls and
           inspections of these records. Information stored on electronic media may
           have to be replaced, recopied, or in other ways restored if the inspection
           results in the detection of an unacceptable number of errors or if the
           equipment the records were originally created on changes.

           The major disadvantage of storing vital records in machine-readable form is
           that the equipment needed to access the information may not be available or
           may not be in working order in emergencies. Contingency plans must provide
           for emergency processing at an alternate site and assure that needed records
           are available.

      d.   Indexing Records

           As records are duplicated, they should be properly indexed to ensure easy
           access to specific information. Time is a crucial factor in reconstructing a
           database or a system of records that has been damaged or destroyed by a
           disaster. Therefore, regular systematic indexing of all stored information is a
           necessity.

10.   STORAGE

      a.   Selecting a Storage Site

           In choosing an off-site storage location, do not pick one too close to your
           office or building. If duplicate records are stored too close, the same disaster
           that affects the original records may also destroy the duplicate records.




                                            10
            Locations where vital records will be stored must provide adequate
            protection and accessibility. Records will be stored to ensure ease of access,
            retrieval, and control. Classified records must be handled in accordance with
            DR 3440-001, USDA Classified National Security Information Program
            Regulations and DM 3440-001, USDA Classified National Security
            Information Program Manual.

      b.   Legal and Financial Rights Records

           Federal Records Centers, regardless of geographic location, are available for
           agencies desiring to store their legal and financial rights records. In addition
           to storage space for paper records, most Federal Records Centers have
           environmentally controlled space suitable for the storage of vital records on
           magnetic tape and photographic film.

      c.   Emergency Operating Records

           Emergency operating records should be handled in accordance with each
           agency's internal emergency preparedness programs and forwarded to the
           Emergency Operating Facilities.

      d.   Rotation of Records

           All vital records, whether legal and financial rights or emergency operating
           records, must be periodically updated to ensure that they remain current,
           complete, and accessible.

11.   DISPOSITION OF RECORDS
       Maintain original vital records specified in the USDA records disposition schedule.
       Delete duplicate copies of vital records stored in separate locations when obsolete
       or superseded, and replace with updated revisions. Officials may not dispose of
       records prior to the authorized disposal date or retained beyond that date except in
       situations in which records might be relevant to pending or threatened litigation.


12.   DEFINITIONS

      Agency or Staff Office. A major line or program organization of the Department
      headed by an Administrator (or equivalent) who reports to the Secretary, Deputy
      Secretary, an Under or Assistant Secretary, or a General Officer.

      Archive. A collection of non-current Federal records that has been removed
      permanently from an agency and transported physically (in an acceptable) format to
      NARA. At that point, NARA assumes legal responsibility for the preservation of
      the records because of their continuing or enduring value.

      Department. The U.S. Department of Agriculture; also referred to as USDA.

                                            11
Disaster. An unexpected occurrence inflicting widespread destruction and distress
and having long-term adverse effects on agency operations.

Disposition. A comprehensive term that includes:

(1)   Destruction (disposal) of temporary records no longer needed for the conduct
      of business;

(2)   Transfer of inactive records to a Federal Records Center;

(3)   Transfer of permanent records, determined to have sufficient historical or
      other value to warrant continued preservation, to NARA; and,

(4)   Donation of temporary records to an eligible person or organization after the
      authorized retention period has expired and after NARA has approved the
      donation.

Emergency. A situation or occurrence that warrants immediate action to save lives
and protect property, public health, and safety. To some degree an emergency
disrupts USDA operations. Examples of an emergency are:

(1)   Natural Disaster
(2)   Man-made and Technological Hazards
(3)   Terrorism

Emergency Operating Records. Emergency operating records are those types of
vital records essential to the continued functioning or reconstitution of an
organization during and after an emergency. Included are emergency plans and
directive(s), orders of succession, delegations of authority, staffing assignments,
selected program records needed to continue the most critical agency operations, as
well as related policy or procedural records that assist agency staff in conducting
operations under emergency conditions and for resuming normal operations after an
emergency.

Information Accessibility. The application or configuration of Federal Information
Processing resources in a manner that accommodates the functional limitations of
individuals with disabilities so as to promote productivity and provide access to
work-related or public information resources.

Information Systems. The organized collection, processing, transmission, and
dissemination of information in accordance with defined procedures, whether
automated or manual.

Legal and Financial Rights Records. Legal and financial rights records are that type
of vital records essential to protect the legal and financial rights of the Government
and of the individuals directly affected by its activities. Examples include accounts

                                      12
receivable records, social security records, payroll records, retirement records, and
insurance records. These records were formerly defined as “rights-and-interests”
records.

Litigation Hold. The obligation of agencies, managers, and individual employees to
ensure the preservation of documentary materials that might be or might become
relevant to pending or threatened litigation. If the documentary material was
created in electronic format, it must be preserved in that original native format (See
DR 3090-001).

Metadata. Data that describe other data. The term may also refer to any computer
file or database that holds information about another database’s structure,
processing, changes, etc. Data dictionaries and data repositories are examples of
metadata.

Permanent Records. Records appraised by NARA as having sufficient historical or
other value to warrant continued preservation by the Federal Government beyond
the time they are needed for administrative, legal, or fiscal purposes.

Program Official. An official with primary responsibility for developing and/or
implementing a policy, program, or function.

Records. Includes "All books, papers, maps, photographs, machine-readable
materials, or other documentary materials, regardless of physical form or
characteristics, made or received by an agency of the United States Government
under Federal law or in connection with the transaction of public business and
preserved or appropriate for preservation by that agency or its legitimate successor
as evidence of the organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures,
operations, or other activities of the Government or because of the informational
value of data in them. Library and museum material made or acquired and
preserved solely for reference or exhibition purposes, extra copies of documents
preserved only for convenience of reference, and stocks of publications and of
processed documents are not included." (44 U.S.C. 3301).

Records Management. The planning, controlling, directing, organizing, training,
promoting, and other managerial activities related to the creation, maintenance, use,
and disposition of records to achieve adequate and proper documentation of Federal
policies and transactions, and effective and economical management of agency
operations.

Records Disposition Schedule. A document, approved by NARA, which provides
authority for the final disposition of recurring or nonrecurring records. Includes
Standard Form 115, Request for Records Disposition Authority, and the General
Records Schedules (GRS). Records shall not be destroyed except as authorized by
an approved records schedule.




                                       13
Temporary Records. Records approved by NARA for disposal, either immediately
or after a specified retention period. Also called disposable records or
nonpermanent records.

Trustworthiness of a Record. To demonstrate proof, records must have the qualities
of trustworthiness, that is, records with the following characteristics:

(1)   Authenticity – an accurate account of an activity, transaction, or decision
(2)   Reliability – content can be trusted as a full and accurate representation
(3)   Integrity – an assurance that the information has not been changed
      subsequently
(4)   Usability – the information can be located, retrieved, presented, and
      interpreted

Vital Records. Essential agency records that are needed to meet operational
responsibilities under national security emergencies or other emergency conditions
(emergency operating records) or to protect the legal and financial rights of the
Government and those affected by Government activities (legal and financial rights
records).




                                       14
