                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                               NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                       DR 3185-004
                                                               DATE:
 SUBJECT: Enterprise Zero Trust Architecture                   September 9, 2024
 OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer,                 EXPIRATION DATE:
 Cybersecurity and Privacy Operations Center                   September 9, 2029



Section                                                                                  Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                 1
2.   Scope                                                                                   1
3.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                      2
4.   Background                                                                              3
5.   Policy                                                                                  3
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                              9
7.   Penalties and Disciplinary Actions for Noncompliance                                   13
8.   Policy Exceptions                                                                      14
9.   Inquiries                                                                              14

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                   A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                  B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                   C-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of
          Agriculture (USDA) policy for transition to a zero trust architecture (ZTA). It guides
          the USDA to develop, implement, maintain, and document a federally compliant ZTA.

     b.   This directive serves as the foundation for USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
          offices as they develop and implement their own ZTA procedures. Their ZTA
          procedures will comply with Federal and Departmental requirements and with USDA’s
          zero trust (ZT) posture.


2. SCOPE

     a.   This DR applies to all:
       (1) USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, and personnel who work for or on
           behalf of USDA. The term “USDA personnel” includes USDA employees,
           appointees, contractors, partners, interns, fellows, affiliates, and volunteers;

       (2) Federal information per DR 3080-001, Records Management. This includes
           information in any medium or form. This also includes information generated,
           collected, provided, transmitted, stored, maintained, or accessed by or on behalf of
           USDA;

       (3) Information systems or services (including cloud-based services) USDA personnel
           use or operate. This also includes systems or services other organizations use or
           operate on behalf of the USDA, or those the USDA funds. These also include
           interconnections between or among systems or services; and

       (4) USDA facilities from which these information systems or services operate. The
           USDA may own or operate these facilities. This also includes contractor-,
           subcontractor-, or other organization-owned or operated facilities on behalf of
           USDA.

  b.   Nothing in this policy alters the requirements for protecting national security systems or
       information. This includes those identified in the Federal Information Security
       Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 United States Code (U.S.C.) § 3551, et seq.
       This also includes those identified in Committee on National Security Systems (CNSS)
       policies, directives, instructions, and standards, as well as intelligence community
       policies, directives, and instructions.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This DR is effective immediately when published. This DR will remain in effect until it
       is superseded or expires.

  b.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their ZTA procedures
       with this policy within 6 months of the publication date.

  c.   This DR addresses and meets the requirements of:

       (1) 7 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) § 2.32, Chief Information Officer;

       (2) 44 U.S.C. § 3506(b)(2), Federal Agency Responsibilities;

       (3) FISMA, 44 U.S.C. § 3551, et seq.;

       (4) National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Special Publication (SP)
           800-207, Zero Trust Architecture;



                                               2
       (5) Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130, Managing Information
           as a Strategic Resource;

       (6) OMB Memorandum M-19-26, Update to the Trusted Internet Connections (TIC)
           Initiative;

       (7) OMB M-22-09, Moving the U.S. Government Toward Zero Trust Cybersecurity
           Principles; and

       (8) OMB M-23-10, The Registration and Use of .gov Domains in the Federal
           Government.


4. BACKGROUND

  OMB M-22-09 sets forth a Federal ZTA strategy requiring Federal agencies to meet specific
  cybersecurity standards and objectives by the end of fiscal year 2024. These tasks reinforce
  the government’s defenses against increasingly sophisticated and persistent cyber threat
  campaigns. ZTA provides a defensible environment using five pillars. The five pillars are
  Identity, Device, Network, Applications & Workloads, and Data. Within its core tenets,
  ZTA assumes a threat within the network already exists. Therefore, no user, system, service,
  or network may access any data without expanded, ongoing device and user authentication.


5. POLICY

  a.   The USDA ZTA policy provides requirements to enforce Mission Areas’, agencies’, and
       staff offices’ responsibilities for managing all information technology (IT) resources.

  b.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will comply with all Federal laws,
       policies, requirements, standards, and guidance. They will also follow USDA directives
       and guidance on ZT.

  c.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will document and analyze lessons learned on
       their programs, security and privacy control activities, procedures, and tasks. They will
       use this qualitative and quantitative data to assess effectiveness and guide process
       improvement.

  d.   The five pillars of the ZTA defensible environment include the following requirements:

       (1) The ZTA Identity pillar principals require a centralized identity management
           system that integrates into applications and common platforms. This is in
           accordance with OMB M-22-09 and DR 3640-001, Identity, Credential, and Access
           Management (ICAM). As part of the ZTA Identity pillar principals and mandated
           requirements, all USDA staff, contract support, and system support automated



                                               3
    mechanisms must use USDA enterprise-managed identities. The centralized
    identity management system includes the following components:

    (a) An ICAM program.

    (b) The ability to:

         1   Maintain master user records for all agency users at the enterprise level;

         2   Centrally manage the identities, entitlements, and roles of all USDA
             persons (including USDA personnel, customers, citizens, and nonperson
             entities);

         3   Provide identity life cycle management and identity governance; and

         4   Manage access control policies through automated provisioning,
             management, and governance of both accounts and access entitlements
             across the USDA enterprise and sub-agency IT systems.

    (c) An eAuthentication service platform that:

         1   Centralizes authentication, federation, identity verification, credentialing,
             single sign-on, and authorization services for all internal employee-facing,
             and external citizen-facing, web applications and services, and mobile
             applications;

         2   Supports external identity providers, including other Federal agencies who
             partner with or obtain services from USDA, as well as citizen-facing
             identity providers such as Login.gov; and

         3   Serves as an identity provider to cloud and software-as-a-service
             applications that USDA uses, or other Federal agency-owned applications
             USDA personnel must access.

    (d) Phishing-resistant approaches, such as personal identity verification (PIV) and
        derived PIV credentials.

    (e) Fast Identity Online 2 specifications, for use when a PIV or derived PIV is not
        available. USDA may use these alternative credentials both in network logon
        and in the USDA eAuthentication platform for applications.

(2) The ZTA Device pillar requires ongoing, reliable, and complete asset inventories.
    The approach to keep this information current and accurate comprises hardware
    asset management (HWAM) and software asset management (SWAM) programs.
    These programs have the following components and requirements:




                                       4
    (a) Effective asset management providing visibility of known vulnerabilities on all
        USDA-owned devices and systems.

    (b) Enforcement of technical controls authorizing and authenticating only known
        or provisioned devices within the asset inventory.

    (c) HWAM and SWAM data tagged according to the connected network and
        associated with the relevant Mission Area corresponding to that network.

    (d) HWAM and SWAM asset data and endpoint detection and response (EDR)
        monitoring agent data. USDA’s security information and event management
        tool receives the data for aggregation. USDA then transmits that data to the
        Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), conforming to its
        Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation program.

    (e) An EDR agent on all managed devices, following these stipulations:

        1    The EDR agent only supports managed devices.

        2    The following devices do not qualify as managed devices. They need not
             meet the EDR agent requirement:

             a   Network switches, routers, firewalls, and other network Layers 2 and
                 3 devices;

             b   Printers and multifunction office machines;

             c   Network performance and management devices;

             d   Kiosks and point-of-sale payment systems;

             e   Cameras, thermostats, lab devices, appliances (e.g., refrigerators), and
                 other networked devices;

             f   Facility access controllers, door controls, card readers, and keypads;
                 and

             g   Smart displays.

(3) The ZTA Network pillar must resolve domain name system (DNS) queries using
    encrypted DNS. The Network pillar enforces authenticated hypertext transfer
    protocol secure (HTTPS) traffic. All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
    offices must make technical accommodations to meet the following requirements:




                                      5
(a) USDA uses HTTPS for all traffic. This includes external web traffic,
    application programming interface traffic, internal traffic, mobile applications,
    and other endpoints.

(b) Systems enable protective DNS.

(c) All networks within USDA enterprise networks, systems, and applications will
    undergo segmentation according to data sensitivity level or business functions.

(d) The CISA-protected DNS service will replace vendor-managed DNS service.

(e) Internal DNS infrastructure will use encrypted DNS.

(f) Endpoint browsers will use DNS over HTTPS. They will also use DNS over
    transport layer security (TLS). Group policy defines the allowable DNS
    endpoint list:

    1    Endpoints not connected to the USDA virtual private network (VPN)
         service will use the CISA-protected DNS endpoints as their DNS servers;

    2    Endpoints connected to the USDA VPN service will use the USDA
         enterprise DNS servers as if they were connected inside USDA; and

    3    Security measures will block all non-CISA DNS endpoints or non-USDA
         enterprise DNS endpoints.

(g) All data owners responsible for traffic traversing over port 80 (hypertext
    transfer protocol (HTTP)) must configure their sites with certificates.

(h) All USDA-owned .gov domains will conform to OMB M-23-10.

(i) The software-defined wide area network (SD-WAN) and TIC 3.0 adoption
    must distribute security at the network edge for all inbound and outbound
    traffic. SD-WAN supports the following:

    1    User and device authentication via multi-factor authentication (MFA)
         before connecting;

    2    Identity-based and role-based access policy; and

    3    Segmented access via security group tagging and VPN segmentation.

(j) Any implementation of deprecated cryptographic keys must be
    decommissioned.




                                   6
    (k) Standard encryption protocols must be upgraded to the latest version if
        applicable (i.e., TLS 1.3).

    (l) When mission-critical legacy systems are unable to support the latest
        encryption protocol, these systems will be macro- or micro-segmented through
        networking protocols. Personnel must submit a plan to migrate any sensitive
        data the legacy system stores or processes to an updated and encryption
        capable system within 6 months. They will submit the plan to their Mission
        Area Assistant Chief Information Security Officer (CISO).

(4) The ZTA Applications & Workloads pillar requires hosted application
    programming code analysis via automated inspection, when technically feasible.
    When automated inspection is not technically feasible, manual expert analysis is
    acceptable. Refer to OMB M-22-09 about immutable workloads. The Applications
    & Workloads pillar has the following additional requirements:

    (a) Code-based vulnerability analysis and inspection will occur prior to the release
        of a new functionality into production environments.

        1    Detected vulnerability reports will include at a minimum these data points:

             a    Operating system;

             b    Hosting platform;

             c    Library dependencies;

             d    Database access; and

             e    Vulnerability impact (low, medium, high, or critical).

        2    Personnel must resolve all vulnerabilities before a new functionality is
             promoted to production.

    (b) Conduct configuration scans on hosted applications. Ensure there are no
        deviations from the approved baseline in any authorized micro-segment.

    (c) All web-hosted or internet-accessible applications and their tools on each site
        will:

        1    Protect using a web application firewall;

        2    Conduct dynamic application security testing via continual vulnerability
             and configuration scans;




                                       7
         3    Scan for easily identifiable and reportable vulnerabilities. This meets
              public vulnerability disclosure requirements per OMB M-20-32,
              Improving Vulnerability Identification, Management, and Remediation.
              This also meets Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Binding
              Operational Directive (BOD) 20-01, Develop and Publish a Vulnerability
              Disclosure Policy;

         4    Maintain an accurate, comprehensive, and frequently updated inventory
              for visibility of accessible attack surfaces. Incorporate the vulnerabilities
              into the configuration management database. Integrate this into all USDA
              Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices; and

         5    Conduct monthly vulnerability scans of the enterprise network from the
              internet. Report scan results to the information security coordinator.

    (d) The chartered Cloud Working Group (CWG) is the primary point of contact
        and key stakeholder responsible for planning and testing automated dynamic
        code analysis for hosted applications. The team consists of four sub-teams:
        technical and tactical, strategy, policy, and acquisition.

    (e) Across all Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices, all vulnerability visibility
        within data centers and cloud service providers will be granular, down to the
        continuous integration and delivery pipelines.

(5) The ZTA Data pillar requires data classification, robust data tagging, data at rest
    and in-transit encryption, data governance, and data loss prevention. The Data
    pillar has the following additional requirements:

    (a) Personnel will categorize, by specific agency or theme, documents containing
        sensitive information and created in Microsoft 365.

    (b) A document categorization strategy group consists of:

         1    Chief Data Officer;

         2    Office of the General Counsel; and

         3    Office of Homeland Security and Privacy.

    (c) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will analyze data, implement a
        labeling schema, and protect sensitive data through direct encryption or by
        storing the documents in a secure storage location.

    (d) For systems storing sensitive data in the cloud, use independently managed
        encryption and decryption services.




                                        8
           (e) CWG will help identify the capabilities, gaps, and methods to monitor
               unexpected or anomalous decryption requests.

           (f) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will be responsible for developing,
               implementing, and enforcing training specific to labeling and categorizing data
               within their purview.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Secretary of Agriculture will:

       (1) Direct the heads of Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to implement ZTA
           plans and procedures, provide qualified personnel, and provide other resources;

       (2) Ensure responsible personnel notify and consult with internal and external parties in
           the mandated time periods. Notifications include strategic decisions, enterprise ZT
           capabilities, actual or suspected criminal activity or misuse, insider threats, and
           incidents affecting national security systems. This must be in accordance with
           Federal and Departmental requirements as part of the ZT implementation strategy;
           and

       (3) Ensure the USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO) and USDA CISO submit the
           reports showcasing the progression of cybersecurity maturity.

  b.   The CIO will:

       (1) Direct the development of ZTA to ensure all USDA personnel only have access to
           Federal information appropriate to their roles and duties;

       (2) Ensure USDA personnel can meet Federal ZTA requirements; and

       (3) Provide annual reports on ZTA effectiveness to the Secretary of Agriculture, senior
           leadership, System Owners, data custodians, and other stakeholders. Provide
           annual reports on the progress of the ZTA implementation. Ensure communication
           of the concepts, goals, and strategy.

  c.   The CISO will:

       (1) Develop, implement, manage, monitor, and oversee the implementation of ZTA as
           part of the USDA IT Security Program. Ensure it complies with Federal laws,
           regulations, and guidelines, as well as USDA policies. The CISO may assign a
           designee to carry out and oversee this function;

       (2) Establish, coordinate, and manage a network of ZTA points of contact across all
           Mission Areas;



                                              9
     (3) Ensure each Mission Area maintains oversight and compliance with ZTA
         requirements and this DR; and

     (4) Document and provide annual reports to the CIO on the status and maturity of the
         ZTA.

d.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs will:

     (1) Ensure the provisions of this policy are implemented for the information resources
         supporting the operations and assets under their control;

     (2) Ensure personnel in their area of responsibility perform their ZTA responsibilities,
         including notification and reporting, in a timely manner and in accordance with
         Federal and Departmental requirements;

     (3) Oversee the Mission Area ZTA implementation based on the Departmental program
         and in compliance with FISMA. All ZT requirements must meet or exceed the
         requirements of this DR;

     (4) Fund, establish, implement, and maintain the Mission Area, agency, and staff office
         ZT program to include resources, capabilities, ZT capability testing, and training of
         incident management personnel;

     (5) Ensure provision of management support and resources. Ensure assignment of
         those resources to agency and staff office ZT personnel;

     (6) Ensure their organization develops, documents, implements, reviews, updates, and
         approves a ZT plan and associated procedures. Those documents must align with
         Departmental policies, programs, and procedures and comply with Federal policies,
         regulations, standards, and guidelines for incident reporting and management;

     (7) Provide direction and guidance to Mission Area, agency, and staff office personnel
         for:

         (a) Compliance with Federal laws and requirements pertaining to ZTA and
             reporting; and

         (b) Compliance with Departmental ZT policy and procedure and other USDA
             policies and procedures impacted by ZT implementation.

     (8) Ensure USDA’s enterprise inventory system has a current and accurate inventory of
         all IT devices and systems in the scope of its responsibility. Identify high value
         assets to support ZTA.




                                            10
e.   Mission Area Assistant CISOs will coordinate with the CISO to implement, manage,
     and oversee ZTA implementation at the Mission Area level.

f.   Information System Security Managers (ISSM) will:

     (1) Coordinate with personnel who prepare procurement documents to ensure the
         documents contain ZTA requirements and implementation;

     (2) Ensure their personnel take annual, role-based ZT training, when required; and

     (3) Participate in ZT assessments and after-action reports, when required.

g.   System Administrators responsible for maintaining ZTA will:

     (1) Configure and update ZTA to secure critical assets and data from malicious activity.
         This includes but is not limited to:

         (a) Full adoption of MFA;

         (b) Continuous access evaluation;

         (c) Implementation of identity and access management;

         (d) Mature device identity and access control;

         (e) Configuration of network micro-segmentation as directed;

         (f) Upgrades to TIC 3.0, or higher;

         (g) Enforcement of encrypted DNS;

         (h) Ensuring hosted applications enforce least privilege and separation of duties;

         (i) Enabling data classification, robust data tagging, high-value data encryption,
             and data loss protection; and

         (j) Thorough testing of any service or security setting that could cause a risk to
             confidentiality, integrity, or availability.

     (2) Ensure the system reflects the correct number of assigned personnel;

     (3) Ensure the accuracy of the system, software, and device list; and

     (4) Maintain supporting documentation of the data recorded in the system.

h.   System Owners will:



                                            11
     (1) Follow the procedures for incidents or violations of security and privacy policy per
         DR 3505-005, Cybersecurity Incident Management. Work with ZT architects to
         identify automated triggers that could dynamically block access if an automated
         alert occurs; and

     (2) Protect USDA information resources regularly with automated detection tools using
         updated indicators from three main sources:

         (a) Tool vendors;

         (b) Cyber Defense Operations Division branches, specifically the Cybersecurity
             Watch Branch (CWB) and the Cybersecurity Threat Hunt and Intelligence
             Branch (CTHIB); and

         (c) The United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT).

i.   Contracting Officer Representatives will ensure all contract personnel follow ZT
     requirements.

j.   Contractors, Service Providers, or others acting for or on behalf of USDA will:

     (1) Comply with all Federal and Departmental incident management policies,
         regulations, guidelines, and procedures indicated in the document governing the
         relationship;

     (2) Protect USDA information resources regularly with automated detection tools.
         Tools will use updated tool vendor, CTHIB, or US-CERT provided indicators.
         Review the tool analysis results. Provide the results to CWB or other authorized
         parties; and

     (3) Report all suspected and actual incidents in the required time frame via methods
         indicated in the document governing the relationship.

k.   USDA Managers and Supervisors will:

     (1) Ensure their personnel follow the ZTA requirements as a condition for gaining and
         maintaining access to USDA systems per DR 3505-003, Access Control for
         Information and Information Systems;

     (2) Ensure their personnel report any known violation of this DR to their ISSMs; and

     (3) Ensure their personnel review DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and
         Conduct, and DR 3300-001, Telecommunications & Internet Services and Use, with
         their supervisor. Ensure this includes guidance on limited personal use of USDA
         information systems.



                                            12
  l.   All USDA personnel will:

       (1) Understand and comply with agency security and privacy policies and procedures;

       (2) Comply with the rules of behavior for the systems and applications to which they
           have access;

       (3) Work with management to meet ZT requirements;

       (4) Protect their agency’s information by monitoring their actions. These actions
           include but are not limited to:

           (a) Following proper password usage per DR 3505-003;

           (b) Using updated antivirus software;

           (c) Reporting any suspected incidents or violations of security and privacy policy
               per DR 3505-005; and

           (d) Following rules established to avoid social engineering attacks and to deter the
               spread of spam, viruses, and worms.

       (5) Review DR 4070-735-001 and DR 3300-001 with their supervisor. Ensure this
           includes guidance on limited personal use of USDA information systems.


7. PENALTIES AND DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS FOR NONCOMPLIANCE

  a.   DR 4070-735-001, Section 16, Computers, sets forth USDA policy, procedures, and
       standards on employee responsibilities and conduct regarding the use of computers and
       telecommunications equipment.

  b.   In addition, DR 4070-735-001, Section 21, Disciplinary or Adverse Action, states:

       (1) Any violation of the responsibilities or standards contained in this DR may be cause
           for disciplinary or adverse action; and

       (2) Any disciplinary or adverse action taken will be consistent with the applicable laws
           and regulations.


8. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will conform to this policy. If any Mission
  Area, agency, or staff office cannot meet a specific policy requirement, you may request a



                                              13
  policy exception. To do so, contact the Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO)
  Cybersecurity and Privacy Operations Center (CPOC) Security Management Division
  (SMD) Risk Management Branch via email at POAMProgram@usda.gov. Note that an
  approved policy exception is an acceptance of risk but does not constitute compliance.


9. INQUIRIES

  Send any questions or concerns about this DR to the OCIO CPOC Cyber Policy and
  Strategy Program via smd-pcb-policy@usda.gov.


                                          -END-




                                            14
                                APPENDIX A

                    ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


BOD        Binding Operational Directive
CFR        Code of Federal Regulations
CIO        Chief Information Officer
CISA       Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency
CISO       Chief Information Security Officer
CNSS       Committee on National Security Systems
CNSSI      Committee on National Security Systems Instruction
CPOC       Cybersecurity and Privacy Operations Center
CTHIB      Cybersecurity Threat Hunt and Intelligence Branch
CWB        Cybersecurity Watch Branch
CWG        Cloud Working Group
DHS        Department of Homeland Security
DNS        Domain Name System
DR         Departmental Regulation
EDR        Endpoint Detection and Response
E.O.       Executive Order
FIPS PUB   Federal Information Processing Standards Publication
FISMA      Federal Information Security Modernization Act
HTTP       Hypertext Transfer Protocol
HTTPS      Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure
HWAM       Hardware Asset Management
ICAM       Identity, Credential, and Access Management
IETF       Internet Engineering Task Force
ISSM       Information System Security Manager
IT         Information Technology
MFA        Multi-factor Authentication
NIST       National Institute of Standards and Technology
NISTIR     National Institute of Standards and Technology Interagency Report
NSM        National Security Memorandum
OCIO       Office of the Chief Information Officer
OMB        Office of Management and Budget
OWASP      Open Web Application Security Project
PIV        Personal Identity Verification
P.L.       Public Law
RFC        Request for Comments
SD-WAN     Software-Defined Wide Area Network
SMD        Security Management Division
SP         Special Publication
SWAM       Software Asset Management
TIC        Trusted Internet Connection
TLS        Transport Layer Security



                                      A-1
U.S.C.    United States Code
US-CERT   United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team
USDA      United States Department of Agriculture
VPN       Virtual Private Network
ZT        Zero Trust
ZTA       Zero Trust Architecture




                                   A-2
                                           APPENDIX B

                                          DEFINITIONS


Access Control. The process of granting or denying specific requests. Requests can be for
obtaining and using information and related information processing services. Requests can also
be to enter specific physical facilities (e.g., Federal buildings, military establishments, and border
crossing entrances). (Source: CNSS CNSS Instruction (CNSSI) 4009, Committee on National
Security Systems (CNSS) Glossary)

Access Control Policy. High-level requirements that specify how access is managed and who
may access information under what circumstances. (Source: NIST SP 800-192, Verification and
Test Methods for Access Control Policies/Models)

Authentication. Verifying the identity of a user, process, or device. This is often a prerequisite
to allowing access to resources in a system. (Source: NIST SP 800-53, Revision 5, Security and
Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations)

Authorization. Access privileges granted to a user, program, or process. Alternatively, the act of
granting those privileges. (Source: CNSSI 4009)

Continuous Delivery. The stage after continuous integration where code changes are deployed to
a testing or staging environment after the build stage. Continuous delivery to a production
environment involves the designation of a release frequency. This can be daily, weekly,
fortnightly, or some other period, based on the nature of the software or the market in which the
organization operates. On top of automated testing, there is a scheduled release process, though
the application can be deployed at any time by clicking a button. The deployment process in
continuous delivery is characterized as manual. However, tasks such as the migration of code to
a production server, the establishment of networking parameters, and the specification of runtime
configuration data may be performed by automated scripts. (Source: NIST SP 800-204C,
Implementation of DevSecOps for a Microservices-based Application with Service Mesh)

Continuous Integration. Continuous integration involves developers frequently merging code
changes into a central repository where automated builds and tests run. Build is the process of
converting the source code to executable code for the platform on which it is intended to run. In
the continuous integration or delivery pipeline software, the developer’s changes are validated by
creating a build and running automated tests against the build. This process avoids the
integration challenges that can happen when waiting for release day to merge changes into the
release branch. (Source: NIST SP 800-204C)

Device. In automated assessment, a type of assessment object that is either an IP addressable (or
equivalent) component of a network or a removable component that is of security significance.
(Source: NIST NIST Interagency Report (NISTIR) 8011, Volume 1, Automation Support for
Security Control Assessments)




                                                 B-1
eAuthentication. Provides secure, convenient access to multiple USDA applications, websites,
programs, and benefits that individual customers and employees are authorized to use. (Source:
USDA eAuthentication)

Least Privilege. The principle that a security architecture should be designed so that each entity
is granted the minimum system resources and authorizations that it needs to perform its function.
(Source: CNSSI 4009)

Multi-factor Authentication (MFA). An authenticator that provides more than one distinct
authenticator factor. One example is a cryptographic authentication device with an integrated
biometric sensor that is required to activate the device. (Source: NIST SP 800-63-3, Digital
Identity Guidelines)

Personal Identity Verification (PIV). A physical artifact (e.g., identity card, “smart” card) issued
to a government individual that contains stored identity credentials (e.g., photograph,
cryptographic keys, digitized fingerprint representation). The claimed identity of the cardholder
can be verified against the stored credentials by another person (human readable and verifiable)
or an automated process (computer readable and verifiable). PIV requirements are defined in
NIST Federal Information Processing Standards Publication (FIPS PUB) 201-3, Personal
Identity Verification (PIV) of Federal Employees and Contractors. (Source: CNSSI 4009)

Sensitive Information. Information, whereby the loss, misuse, or unauthorized access to or
modification of, could adversely affect the National interest, the conduct of Federal programs, or
the privacy to which individuals are entitled under the Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. § 552a,
Records Maintained on Individuals. Sensitive information does not include information that has
been specifically authorized under criteria established by an Executive Order (E.O.) or an Act of
Congress to be kept classified in the interest of National defense or foreign policy. (Source:
NIST SP 800-150, Guide to Cyber Threat Information Sharing)

Virtual Private Network (VPN). Protected information system link that uses tunneling, security
controls, and endpoint address translation giving the impression of a dedicated line. (Source:
CNSSI 4009)

Vulnerability. A known weakness in a system, system security procedures, internal controls, or
implementation by which an actor or event may intentionally exploit or accidentally trigger the
weakness to access, modify, or disrupt normal operations of a system, resulting in a security
incident or a violation of the system’s security policy. (Source: CNSSI 4009)

Zero Trust (ZT). A collection of concepts and ideas designed to minimize uncertainty in
enforcing accurate, least privilege per-request access decisions in information systems and
services in the face of a network viewed as compromised. (Source: NIST SP 800-207)

Zero Trust Architecture (ZTA). An enterprise’s cybersecurity plan that utilizes ZT concepts and
encompasses component relationships, workflow planning, and access policies. A ZT enterprise
is the network infrastructure (physical and virtual) and operational policies that are in place for
an enterprise as a product of a ZTA plan. (Source: NIST SP 800-207)



                                                B-2
                                          APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


7 CFR § 2.32, Chief Information Officer

44 U.S.C. § 3506(b)(2), Federal Agency Responsibilities

CISA, Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency website

CNSS, CNSSI 4009, Committee on National Security Systems (CNSS) Glossary, March 7, 2022

CNSS, Committee on National Security Systems website, May 6, 2016

DHS, BOD 20-01, Develop and Publish a Vulnerability Disclosure Policy, September 2, 2020

DOTGOV Online Trust in Government Act of 2020, Public Law (P.L.) 116-260, December 27,
2020

E.O. 13526, Classified National Security Information, December 29, 2009

E.O. 13556, Controlled Unclassified Information, November 4, 2010

E.O. 13587, Structural Reforms to Improve the Security of Classified Networks and the
Responsible Sharing and Safeguarding of Classified Information, October 7, 2011

E.O. 14028, Improving the Nation’s Cybersecurity, May 12, 2021

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. § 3551, et seq.

General Services Administration, Login.gov website

Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), Request for Comments (RFC): 1034, Domain Names –
Concepts and Facilities, November 1987

NIST, FIPS PUB 201-3, Personal Identity Verification (PIV) of Federal Employees and
Contractors, January 2022

NIST, NISTIR 8011, Volume 1, Automation Support for Security Control Assessments, June
2017

NIST, SP 800-53, Revision 5, Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and
Organizations, September 2020 with updates as of December 10, 2020

NIST, SP 800-61, Revision 2, Computer Security Incident Handling Guide, August 2012



                                             C-1
NIST, SP 800-63-3, Digital Identity Guidelines, June 2017

NIST, SP 800-150, Guide to Cyber Threat Information Sharing, October 2016

NIST, SP 800-192, Verification and Test Methods for Access Control Policies/Models, June
2017

NIST, SP 800-204C, Implementation of DevSecOps for a Microservices-based Application with
Service Mesh, March 2022

NIST, SP 800-207, Zero Trust Architecture, August 2020

NIST, SP 1800-16, Securing Web Transactions: TLS Server Certificate Management, June 2020

OMB, Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource, July 28, 2016

OMB, M-16-04, Cybersecurity Strategy and Implementation Plan (CSIP) for the Federal
Civilian Government, October 30, 2015

OMB, M-19-02, Fiscal Year 2018-2019 Guidance on Federal Information Security and Privacy
Management Requirements, October 25, 2018

OMB, M-19-26, Update to the Trusted Internet Connections (TIC) Initiative, September 12,
2019

OMB, M-20-32, Improving Vulnerability Identification, Management, and Remediation,
September 2, 2020

OMB, M-21-30, Protecting Critical Software Through Enhanced Security Measures, August 10,
2021

OMB, M-21-31, Improving the Federal Government’s Investigative and Remediation
Capabilities Related to Cybersecurity Incidents, August 27, 2021

OMB, M-22-01, Improving Detection of Cybersecurity Vulnerabilities and Incidents on Federal
Government Systems through Endpoint Detection and Response, October 8, 2021

OMB, M-22-09, Moving the U.S. Government Toward Zero Trust Cybersecurity Principles,
January 26, 2022

OMB, M-23-02, Migrating to Post-Quantum Cryptography, November 18, 2022

OMB, M-23-10, The Registration and Use of .gov Domains in the Federal Government,
February 8, 2023




                                             C-2
Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP), OWASP website

Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. § 552a, Records Maintained on Individuals

USDA, DR 3080-001, Records Management, August 16, 2016

USDA, DR 3130-010, United States Department of Agriculture Enterprise Information
Technology Governance, April 20, 2021

USDA, DR 3170-001, End User Workstation Configurations, October 13, 2022

USDA, DR 3180-001, Information Technology Standards, January 5, 2021

USDA, DR 3300-001, Telecommunications & Internet Services and Use, March 18, 2016

USDA, DR 3505-003, Access Control for Information and Information Systems, July 17, 2019

USDA, DR 3505-005, Cybersecurity Incident Management, November 30, 2018

USDA, DR 3520-002, Configuration Management, July 17, 2019

USDA, DR 3565-003, Plan of Action and Milestones Policy, September 25, 2013

USDA, DR 3640-001, Identity, Credential, and Access Management, June 8, 2021

USDA, DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007

USDA, eAuthentication website

The White House, National Security Memorandum (NSM)-10, National Security Memorandum
on Promoting United States Leadership in Quantum Computing While Mitigating Risks to
Vulnerable Cryptographic Systems, May 4, 2022




                                             C-3
