                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                               NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                       DR 3180-001
                                                               DATE:
 SUBJECT: Information Technology Standards                     January 5, 2021
                                                               EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer
                                                               January 5, 2026



Section                                                                                  Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                 1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                      2
3.   Scope                                                                                   2
4.   Background                                                                              2
5.   Policy                                                                                  3
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                              4
7.   Policy Exceptions                                                                       5
8.   Inquiries                                                                               6

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                   A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                  B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                   C-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the standards for the acquisition,
          configuration, and administration of information technology within the United States
          Department of Agriculture (USDA).

     b.   Application of the standards accompanying this regulation supports and implements the
          guidance issued by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), National Institute of
          Standards and Technology (NIST), and other Federal oversight entities; facilitates the
          uniform application of engineering and technical criteria, methods, processes, and
          practices when evaluating and procuring new technologies; ensuring new technologies
          align with USDA enterprise architecture business goals and processes; and meets the
          requirements of the following policy documents:

              OMB, Circular A-130, Management of Federal Information Resources; and
           OMB, Circular A-119, Federal Participation in the Development and Use of
           Voluntary Consensus Standards and in Conformity Assessment Activities.

  c.   The benefits of standardization to the department, mission areas, agencies, staff offices,
       and users are:

           Provides cost savings and improved integration through elimination or
           consolidation of duplicative processes, systems, and technologies;

           Ensures acquisition and use of standard information technologies and cloud services

           Ensures correctness, completeness, and currency of the Standard Profiles through
           the definition of roles, responsibilities, and processes;

           Enhances interoperability between programs, systems, and services; and

           Improves consistency, accuracy, and timeliness of information shared across the
           USDA enterprise.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  This regulation supersedes DR 3180-001, Information Technology Standards, dated May 12,
  2015.


3. SCOPE

  This regulation applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, employees, and
  contractors working for or on behalf of USDA.


4. BACKGROUND

  IT standards are rules or specifications designed to simplify, unify, or rationalize the design,
  interoperability, portability, and scalability of IT infrastructure components (e.g., network,
  hardware, systems, cloud services, and software).

  The Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, 40 United States Code (U.S.C.) § 11101, et seq., (formerly
  known as the Information Technology Management Reform Act (ITMRA)), was enacted to
  improve the way the federal government acquires, uses and disposes of information
  technology (IT).

  The E-Government Act of 2002, Public Law (P.L.) 107-347, 116 Stat. 2899 (codified at
  various sections of title 44) drives the design and development of an enterprise architecture
  within Federal Agencies. OMB Circular A-130 requires that Federal agencies build and



                                                2
  maintain both a Profile of Standards and Technical Reference Model (TRM). The TRM has
  become the Application Reference Model (ARM) and Infrastructure Reference Model (IRM)
  in the Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework (FEAF v2) that support IT investment
  management and development of enterprise architecture.

  OMB Circular A-119 requires Federal agencies to use voluntary consensus standards in lieu
  of government-unique standards, with the intention of reducing to a minimum the reliance by
  agencies on government-unique standards.

  The Common Approach to Federal Enterprise Architecture presents an overall approach to
  developing and using Enterprise Architecture in the Federal Government by promoting
  increased levels of mission effectiveness by standardizing the development and use of
  architectures within and between Federal Agencies. Related implementation guidance from
  the OMB is contained in various documents, including Circular A-11, Preparation,
  Submission and Execution of the Budget ; Circular A-130; Memorandum M-97-16,
  Information Technology Architectures; M-00-10, Procedures and Guidance on Implementing
  the Government Paperwork Elimination Act; M-05-22, Transition Planning for Internet
  Protocol Version 6 (IPv6); M-12-10, Implementing PortfolioStat; and the Digital
  Government Strategy. The FEAF v2 is the suite of tools to help government planners
  implement the Common Approach.


5. POLICY

  All USDA Mission Areas, agencies and staff offices must comply with the E-Government
  Act of 2002, OMB Circular A-130, OMB Circular A-119, and the FEAF v2, specifically the
  IRM artifact I-3 (Technical Standard Profile).

  This regulation requires that all Mission Areas, agencies and staff offices under the
  administrative oversight of the USDA Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) adhere
  to the USDA Standards Profile Forecast for systems, products, and applications. At a
  minimum, the USDA Standards Profile Forecast must be utilized when building out specific
  systems profiles. The other profiles attached to this directive must be utilized to identify
  specific and unique standards to each Mission Areas and their respective systems. All
  Mission Areas, agencies and staff offices must report to the USDA OCIO any deficiencies
  and provide status updates. The standards that are cited in the linked appendices will help
  Mission Areas, agencies and staff offices align their systems and applications to recognized,
  authoritative standards.

  a.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will adhere to the following requirements
       when determining applicable standards for their respective systems:

            Establish uniform engineering and technical criteria;

            Establish methods, practices, and processes;




                                               3
           Align with NIST and Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014
           (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. § 3551, et seq., security requirements;

           Establishing net-centric and interoperable shared services throughout the agency
           and USDA;

           Develop and establish technical maturity among systems and applications;

           Ensure alignment of investments, systems, and applications to include
           infrastructure;

           Manage the replacement of systems, applications, hardware, software, and other
           technologies that are in alignment with the current in force standards; and

           Promote best practice alignment with business, performance, application,
           infrastructure, data and security configurations.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO) will:

           Be the final approving authority on the adoption of all IT related standards for
           USDA infrastructure, with the goal of maximizing the benefit of technology
           purchases, and minimizing investment and operating expense; and

           Be the final reviewer and approver of exceptions to the IT standards when requested
           by the Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices.

  b.   The Information Resource Management Center (IRMC) Associate Chief Information
       Officer (ACIO) will:

           Develop policies, regulations, and requirements for the IT environment.

           Provide management and oversight activities related to business, performance,
           application, data, infrastructure, and security configurations, including but not
           limited to:

           (a) Reviewing and monitoring compliance with established policy requirements
               and standards; and

           (b) Reporting compliance and deviations to OMB.

  c.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs will:

           Implement the policies, requirements, and standards for the IT environment by:



                                               4
           (a) Developing internal procedures and controls in support of this regulation, as
               necessary;

           (b) Establishing effective communication between internal stakeholders and
               OCIO; and

           (c) Incorporating the policies, requirements, and standards into Mission Area
               capital planning and investment control (CPIC) processes.

           Implement and maintain business, performance, application, data, infrastructure and
           security configuration settings by:

           (a) Documenting all deviations from standard configurations with a detailed
               rationale for the deviations, and request for a waiver from USDA ACIO OCIO-
               IRMC;

           (b) Providing corrective action plans for the timely remediation of issues not
               authorized as an approved deviation;

           (c) Consider the use of enterprisewide Blanket Purchase Agreements (BPA) when
               Procuring hardware, software, and IT services or GSA schedule contracts;

           (d) Utilizing the Acquisition Approval Request (AAR) process, prior to any IT
               related procurements of $25,000 or higher with the following consideration.
               The AAR must identify whether the acquisition of hardware, software or
               contractor support being procured meets the applicable standards, identifies the
               BPAs to be used, and provides a detailed rationale if the products and services
               being procured do not meet the applicable standards;

           (e) Ensure adherence and compliance with NIST and (Federal Information
               Processing Standards) FIPS standards prior to utilizing ISO standards. NIST
               and FIPS standards should be used in preference to ISO standards. ISO
               standards would only apply if there are no applicable NIST or FIPS standards;
               and

           (f) Use the EA tool, Enterprise Architecture Visioning Environment (EAVE) to
               build out their respective profiles and forecast or provide an API to their EA
               repositories to provide the link needed to build out their profiles.


7. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are required to conform to this
  regulation; however, if a specific regulation requirement cannot be met as explicitly stated,
  Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may submit a waiver request. Approved waivers



                                               5
  will be tracked as Plans of action and Milestones (POA&M) items. The waiver request must
  explain the reason for the request, identify compensating controls and actions that meet the
  intent of the regulation, and identify how the compensating controls and actions provide a
  similar or greater level of defense or compliance than the regulation requirement. Mission
  Areas, agencies, and staff offices must address all policy waiver request memoranda to the
  USDA ACIO-OCIO-IRMC and submit the request to the Enterprise Architecture Division
  for review and decision via email to enterprise.architecture@ usda.gov.

  Unless otherwise specified, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will review and renew
  approved policy waivers every fiscal year. The ACIO OCIO-IRMC will monitor and
  approve waivers to this policy within 10 working days. If the ACIO OCIO-IRMC has not
  responded to the requesting Mission Area Assistant CIO or designee, the USDA OCIO will
  consider the waiver approved. The ACIO OCIO-IRMC will not disapprove waiver requests
  without documented consultation with, and concurrence from, the requesting Mission Area
  Assistant CIO or designee.

  The written exception will be in the form of a decision memorandum and will include:

  a.   Indication of Request for Exception;

  b.   Name of submitting agency or staff office;

  c.   Name and contact information of submitting person; and

  d.   Information technology description (hardware and software exception):

  e.   Justification to show good cause for the exception. The request should document the
       justifications for the exception; and

  f.   The impact of granting versus not granting the request.


8. INQUIRIES

  All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are to direct all questions and inquiries
  to the Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO), Information Resource Management
  Center (IRMC), EAD via email at enterprise.architecture@usda.gov.


                                              -END-




                                                6
                                APPENDIX A

                    ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AAR         Acquisition Approval Request
ACIO        Associate Chief Information Officer
ARM         Application Reference Model
BPA         Blanket Purchase Agreement
CIO         Chief Information Officer
CPIC        Capital Planning and Investment Control
DDMS        Department of Defense Discovery Metadata Specification (DoD Discovery
            Metadata Specification)
DoDAF       Department of Defense Architecture Framework
DR          Departmental Regulation
EAVE        Enterprise Architecture Visioning Environment
FEAF        Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework
FIPS        Federal Information Processing Standards
FISMA       Federal Information Security Modernization Act
IEC         International Electrotechnical Commission
IETF        Internet Engineering Task Force
IRM         Infrastructure Reference Model
ISO         International Organization for Standardization
IT          Information Technology
ITMRA       Information Technology Management Reform Act
JPEG        Joint Photographic Experts Group
MPEG        Moving Picture Experts Group
NCE         Net-Centric Environment
NIST        National Institute of Standards and Technology
NITF        National Imagery Transmission Format
OCIO        Office of the Chief Information Officer
OCIO-IRMC   Office Chief Information Officer-Information Resource Management Center
OMB         Office of Management and Budget`
OWL         Web Ontology Language
P.L.        Public Law
POA&M       Plan Of Action and Milestones
RFC         Request for Comments
TRM         Technical Reference Model
UCORE       Universal Core
U.S.C.      United States Code
USDA        United States Department of Agriculture
XML         Extensible Markup Language




                                     A-1
                                          APPENDIX B

                                          DEFINITIONS


Application Reference Model (ARM). The Application Reference Model (ARM) is the
framework for categorizing Federal IT systems and application components to help identify
opportunities for sharing, reuse, and consolidation or renegotiation of licenses. This information
will often be used in conjunction with the other Reference Models to identify these opportunities.
Application is defined as: Software components (including websites, databases, email, and other
supporting software) resting on Infrastructure that, when aggregated and managed, may be used
to create, use, share, and store data and information to enable support of a business function.
The ARM is a categorization of different types of software, components and interfaces. It
includes software that supports or may be customized to support business. It does not include
operating systems or software that is used to operate hardware (firmware) because these are
contained in the IRM. (Source: Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework, v 2.0)

Information Technology (IT). The term "information technology" means any equipment or
interconnected system or subsystem of equipment, that is used in the automatic acquisition,
storage, manipulation, management, movement, control, display, switching, interchange,
transmission, or reception of data or information by an executive agency. For purposes of the
preceding sentence, equipment is used by an executive agency if the equipment is used by the
executive agency directly or is used by a contractor under a contract with the executive agency
which (a) requires the use of such equipment, or (b) requires the use, to a significant extent, of
such equipment in the performance of a service or the furnishing of a product. The term
"information technology" includes computers, ancillary equipment, software, firmware and
similar procedures, services (including support services), and related resources. (Source: OMB,
Circular A-130 Revised, Management of Federal Information Resources)

Infrastructure Reference Model (IRM). The Infrastructure Reference Model (IRM) is the
framework and taxonomy-based reference model for categorizing IT infrastructure and the
facilities that host and contain the IT infrastructure. For the purposes of IRM, Infrastructure is
defined as “The generic (underlying) platform consisting of hardware, software, and delivery
platform upon which specific or customized capabilities (solutions, applications) can be
deployed.” The purpose of the IRM is to provide the foundation for classifying the technology
infrastructure and the physical infrastructure that is needed to support it. The IRM supports
definition of infrastructure technology items and best practice guidance to promote positive
outcomes across technology implementations. (Source: Federal Enterprise Architecture
Framework, v 2.0)

IT Standards Profile/Technical Standards Profile. The IT Standards Profile collates the various
systems and services, standards, and rules that implement and constrain the choices that can be
or were made in the design and implementation of an Architectural Description. It delineates the
systems, services, Standards, and rules that apply. The technical standards govern what
hardware and software may be implemented and on what system. The standards that are cited
may be international such as ISO standards, national standards, or organizational specific



                                                B-1
standards. With associated standards with other elements of the architecture, a distinction is
made between applicability and conformance. If a standard is applicable to a given architecture,
that architecture need not be fully conformant with the standard. The degree of conformance to a
given standard may be judged based on a risk assessment at each approval point. Note that an
association between a Standard and an architectural element should not be interpreted as
indicating that the element is fully compliant with that Standard. Further detail would be needed
to confirm the level of compliance. Standards Profiles for a particular architecture must maintain
full compatibility with the root standards they have been derived from. In addition, the IT
Standards Profile model may state a method of implementation for a Standard, as compliance
with a Standard does not ensure interoperability. The Standards cited are referenced as
relationships to the systems, services, system functions, service functions, system data, service
data, hardware and software items, or communication protocols. (Source: The DoDAF
Architecture Framework, Version 2.02)

Net-Centric Environment (NCE). The Net-Centric Environment is a framework for full human
and technical connectivity and interoperability that allows all users and mission partners to share
the information they need, when they need it, in a form they can understand and act on with
confidence; and protects information from those who should not have it. (Source: Net-Centric
Environment Joint Functional Concept, Version 1.0)

Standards Defined. The term “standard,” or “technical standard” as cited in National
Technology Transfer and Advancement Act of 1995, includes all of the following: (1) common
and repeated use of rules, conditions, guidelines, or characteristics for products or related
processes and production methods; and related management systems practices; and (2) the
definition of terms; classification of components; delineation of procedures; specification of
dimensions, materials, performance, designs, or operations; measurement of quality and quantity
in describing materials, products, systems, services, or practices; test methods and sampling
procedures; or descriptions of fit and measurements of size or strength. A standard is a
document, established by consensus that provides rules, guidelines or characteristics for
activities or their results (as defined in ISO/IEC Guide 2:2004). It is a basis for comparison; a
reference point against which other things can be evaluated. A standard is a formal document
that establishes uniform engineering or technical criteria, methods, processes and practices. A
standard is an exact value, a physical entity, or an abstract concept, established and defined by
authority, custom, or common consent to serve as a reference, a model, or a rule in measuring
quantities or qualities, establishing practices or procedures, or evaluating results. It is a fixed
quantity or quality. A data standard is an established structured representation for data exchange.
It is documented by a specification for an explicit set of requirements and may have associated
eXtensible Markup Language (XML) artifacts (e.g., schema, OWL, schematron, stylesheet).
Data standards containing one or more associated XML artifacts are designated technical data
standards (e.g., JPEG, MPEG, NITF, DDMS, UCORE). Data standards not containing XML
artifacts are designated abstract data standards (e.g., IETF RFC 3339, ISO Technical Committee
211, ISO 8601, ISO 3166). (Source: ISO/IEC Guide 2:2004, Standardization and related
activities)

Technical Reference Model (TRM). The Technical Reference Model (TRM) is a component-
driven, technical framework categorizing the standards and technologies to support and enable
the delivery of Service Components and capabilities. The TRM has been split into the ARM and


                                               B-2
IRM as defined above by the release of FEAF v2. (Source: Federal Enterprise Architecture
Framework, v 2.0)




                                            B-3
                                        APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


The Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, 40 U.S.C. § 11101, et seq., February 10, 1996

Common Approach to Federal Enterprise Architecture, May 2, 2012

Department of Defense, The DoDAF Architecture Framework, Version 2.02, August 2010

Digital Government: Building a 21st Century Platform to Better Serve The American People,
May 23, 2012

E-Government Act of 2002, P.L. 107-347, 116 Stat. 2899, December 17, 2002

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. § 3551, et seq.,
December 8, 2014

Internet Engineering Task Force/Request for Change (IETF/RFC) 3339, Date and Time on the
Internet: Timestamps, July 2002

International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 3166, Codes for the Representation of
Names of Countries and their Subdivisions

ISO 8601:2004, Data Elements and Interchange Formats -- Information Interchange --
Representation of Dates and Times

ISO/IEC Guide 2:2004, Standardization and related activities -- General vocabulary

ISO Technical Committee 211, Geographic Information/Geomatics

National Technology Transfer and Advancement Act of 1995; P.L. 104-113, 110 Stat. 775,
March 7, 1996 (codified in various sections of 15 U.S.C)

Net-Centric Environment Joint Functional Concept, Version 1.0, October 31, 2005

OMB, Circular A–11, Preparation, Submission, and Execution Of The Budget, July 2013

OMB, Circular A-119, Revised, Federal Participation in the Development and Use of Voluntary
Consensus Standards and in Conformity Assessment Activities, February 10, 1998

OMB, Circular A-130, Revised, Management of Federal Information Resources, February 8,
1996

OMB, Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework, v 2.0 (FEAF v 2.0), January 29, 2013



                                              C-1
OMB, Memorandum M-97-16, Information Technology Architectures, June 18, 1997

OMB, Memorandum M-00-10, OMB Procedures and Guidance on Implementing the
Government, April 25, 2000

OMB, Memorandum M-05-22, Transition Planning for Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6),
August 2, 2005

OMB, Memorandum M-12-10, Implementing PortfolioStat, March 30, 2012

USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System, January 4, 2018

USDA, USDA Standards Profile web page




                                           C-2
