                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                               NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                       DR 3130-010
 SUBJECT: United States Department of Agriculture              DATE:
 Enterprise Information Technology Governance                  April 20, 2021
 OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer – Information    EXPIRATION DATE:
 Resource Management Center                                    April 20, 2026



Section                                                                                 Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                1
2.   Scope                                                                                  2
3.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                     3
4.   Policy                                                                                 3
5.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                             5
6.   Inquiries                                                                             10

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                  A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                 B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                  C-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.   This Departmental Regulation (DR) serves as the policy for establishing and managing
          the United States Department of Agriculture’s (USDA’s) Enterprise Information
          Technology Governance (EITG) requirements, objectives, authorities, and roles and
          responsibilities, for major information technology (IT) investments, as defined in DR
          3130-008, Definition of Major Information Technology (IT) Investments. Specifically,
          this DR establishes a policy that incorporates those management oversight controls and
          processes that are consistent with The Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996 (CCA), 40 United
          States Code (U.S.C.) § 11101 et seq.. This DR also incorporates the language and
          provisions outlined in the USDA appropriations bill, Agriculture, Rural Development,
          Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2015, Public
          Law (P.L.) 113-235, Division A, and the Federal Information Technology Acquisition
          Reform Act (FITARA), P.L. 113-291, Title VIII, Subtitle D, §§ 831-837.

     b.   A key aspect of successful IT investment portfolio management and governance is
          leveraging solid project management principles that incorporate the best government and
          industry practices. This allows for a consistent and repeatable framework and
       implemented policy for planning, managing, governing, and overseeing all major IT
       investments over their entire life cycle.

  c.   This policy provides for a Departmentwide governance and integrated IT investment and
       project management framework that ensures all USDA major IT investments can
       achieve consistently successful outcomes that better align with business needs and the
       ability to meet approved cost, schedule, and performance goals and milestones.

  d.   This policy establishes project management and accountability environment where
       USDA major IT investments can achieve consistently successful outcomes. This
       requires the utilization of automated workflows and repeatable processes that are in
       alignment with Departmentwide, Mission Area, agency, and staff office specific
       business goals and objectives. Implementation of this policy allows the USDA to
       improve the quality of IT project planning and execution while reducing overall
       investment risk. This Departmentwide approach to IT governance, coupled with project
       management principles and best practices, places an emphasis on demonstrating
       measurable results for each of its major IT investments. This will better justify
       management and technical actions taken as major IT investments are developed and
       maintained.

  e.   This regulation prescribes the policies, responsibilities, and procedures for Mission
       Areas, agencies, and staff offices to establish Investment Review Boards (IRB).


2. SCOPE

  a.   This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, employees, and
       contractors that manage and support USDA major IT investments.

  b.   This DR applies to all USDA IT investments, throughout their lifecycle, regardless of
       funding source, whether owned and operated by USDA or operated on behalf of USDA.

  c.   This governance approach integrates and supports the following established USDA
       business processes to ensure a comprehensive IT investment portfolio management
       approach:

       (1) Capital Planning and Investment Control (CPIC);

       (2) Earned Value Management (EVM);

       (3) Enterprise Architecture (EA);

       (4) Project and Portfolio Management (PPM);

       (5) Cybersecurity and privacy;




                                               2
       (6) Acquisition Approval Request (AAR);

       (7) Risk Management Framework (RMF); and

       (8) IT budget formulation and execution management.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This DR supersedes DR 3130-010, United States Department of Agriculture
       Enterprise Information Technology Governance, dated December 3, 2015.

  b.   This DR supersedes DR3100-002, Agency IRM Review Board, dated December 13,
       1983.

  c.   This DR supersedes DR3600-000, USDA Information and Technology Transformation,
       dated November 02, 2004.

  d.   All USDA major IT investments are governed by both the Mission Area, agency, or staff
       office level and the Department’s Enterprise-level IRBs.

  e.   All USDA non-major IT investments are governed at the Mission Area, agency, or staff
       office level and utilizing IRBs that are in alignment with this Enterprise IT Governance
       policy and the procedures Integrated Information Technology Governance Framework
       (IITGF).

  f.   All USDA non-major IT investments are further governed by DR 3130-009, Non-Major
       Information Technology (IT) Investments.

  g.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their policies and procedures to
       comply with this DR within 6 months of publication.


4. POLICY

  a.   This USDA EITG policy provides direction enforcing the Mission Areas, agencies, and
       staff offices’ responsibility for managing all of their IT resources to improve the
       delivery of services to the public, to assist program management at both Departmental
       and Mission Area, agency, and staff office levels, to provide cost-effective technical
       solutions to satisfy program requirements, and to promote sharing of these resources to
       the greatest extent possible.

  b.   To ensure information management activities reflect the goals and priorities of Mission
       Area, agency, and staff office programs, each Mission Area, agency, and staff office will
       establish an IRB. These Boards will provide policy direction for IT investment activities
       as well as review and approval of specific IT investment actions.



                                               3
c.   These requirements of this DR are implemented through the Integrated IT Governance
     Framework (IITGF) Guidebook, which provides a consistent set of guidelines and best
     practices for managing all USDA major IT investments that encompass the following:

     (1) An approach for planning, managing, and governing each major IT investment over
         its entire life cycle;

     (2) Commitment to adhering to the investment life cycle phases as presented in the
         USDA IITGF with associated EITG deliverables and prescribed investment life
         cycle phase exit criteria; and

     (3) IITGF decision gate reviews that assess the major IT investment progress against
         established investment life cycle exit criteria, cost, schedule, and performance
         milestones, before advancing to the next life cycle phase.

d.   The Executive Information Technology Investment Review Board ((EITIRB), also
     referred to as the “E-Board”) and the Integrated Advisory Board (IAB) serve as
     executive-level governance bodies within the USDA that provide strategic and executive
     leadership, and technical subject matter expertise, respectively, for governance reviews
     and subsequent recommendations concerning major IT investments. The E-Board
     membership consists of:

     (1) The Deputy Secretary, serving as the E-Board Chair;

     (2) Mission Area Under Secretaries;

     (3) The Assistant Secretary for Administration, serving as the USDA Chief Acquisition
         Officer (CAO);

     (4) The Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights;

     (5) The USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO);

     (6) The USDA Chief Financial Officer;

     (7) The Director, Office of Budget, and Program Analysis; and

     (8) The Director, Office of Communications.

e.   The Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) will provide guidance and support
     to Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to ensure that their IT Governance
     processes align with Departmental requirements.




                                            4
  f.   To ensure that USDA operates the most efficient and effective EITG process, the
       Department will periodically review and revise this policy and related guidance to
       ensure that it reflects best practices across Federal agencies.


5. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Secretary will:

       (1) Support the establishment, operation, and management of this policy; and

       (2) Serve as the final decision authority for recommendations from the E-Board
           concerning major IT investments proceeding through the IITGF.

  b.   b. The Deputy Secretary will:

       (1) Serve as the Chair of the E-Board and make final recommendations to the Secretary
           concerning major IT investments proceeding through the IITGF; and

       (2) Consult with Mission Area Under Secretaries and the CIO as necessary to review
           and prioritize the USDA major IT investment portfolio.

  c.   Mission Area Under Secretaries will:

       (1) Advise, assist, and provide recommendations to the Secretary, Deputy Secretary,
           and the CIO regarding IT investment priorities;

       (2) Serve as voting members of the E-Board;

       (3) Support Mission Area personnel in the implementation of this policy and the IITGF
           process;

       (4) Support the governance of USDA major IT investments under their Mission Area
           based on quantitative and qualitative assessment criteria; and

       (5) Support goals for improving the effectiveness and efficiency of IT investments and
           the EITG.

  d.   The E-Board Chair will:

       (1) Convene and preside at E-Board meetings and approve the agenda;

       (2) Revise, by a majority vote of the E-Board members, the E-Board Charter;

       (3) Ensure E-Board members receive and review IAB summary recommendations for
           major IT investments proceeding through the IITGF;



                                              5
     (4) Facilitate the E-Board governance review and assessment process that culminates in
         an E-Board Governance Assessment Scorecard; and

     (5) Provide governance recommendations to the Secretary.

e.   The E-Board will:

     (1) Evaluate, assess, and recommend submitted major IT investments to ensure they are
         managed as strategic business resources; and

     (2) Ensure that proposed major IT investments:

         (a) Contribute to the Secretary’s strategic vision and business requirements;

         (b) Comply with business goals established for the USDA EA and CPIC
             processes, as well as the risk management framework;

         (c) Employ sound cybersecurity measures;

         (d) Provide positive return on investment and acceptable project risk; and

         (e) Utilize an appropriate acquisition strategy; and

     (3) Submit governance recommendations concerning major IT investments to the
         Secretary who will make the final governance decision.

f.   The IAB Chair will:

     (1) Reserve the authority to delegate functions and responsibilities as necessary to carry
         out the IAB functions;

     (2) Provide executive-level direction to the IAB members;

     (3) Facilitate recommendations that align with the Secretary’s goals, objectives, and
         priorities; and

     (4) Request advice or expertise from outside the IAB as necessary.

g.   The IAB will:

     (1) Be chaired by the OCIO Information Resource Management Center (IRMC)
         Associate Chief Information Officer (ACIO);

     (2) Be comprised of technical subject matter experts representing Mission Areas,
         agencies, and staff offices in the disciplines of:



                                             6
         (a) EA;

         (b) CPIC;

         (c) Cybersecurity and privacy;

         (d) Records management;

         (e) Section 508 accessibility;

         (f) Human resources;

         (g) Finance and budget;

         (h) Acquisition;

         (i) Data analytics;

         (j) IT Modernization

         (k) Enterprise applications; and

         (l) Network support.

         Additionally, the USDA Chief Information Officer Council (CIOC) and additional
         members can be added as needed and approved by the IAB Chair;

     (3) Review and provide recommendations of major IT Investment Tailoring Agreement
         (ITA) requests as outlined in the IITGF taking into consideration the size of the
         investments including the development and operations cost, risk management,
         system development methodology, and scope of influence;

     (4) Serve in an advisory role and submit technical, subject matter recommendations
         regarding major IT investments to the E-Board; and

     (5) Provide advice and recommendations to the CIO, as needed.

h.   The USDA CIO will:

     (1) Serve as the USDA senior official to advise the Secretary and Deputy Secretary on
         EITG matters;

     (2) Serve as the principal senior official for developing, establishing, executing, and
         maintaining the IITGF process;




                                             7
     (3) Ensure that this policy is implemented and followed for all USDA major IT
         investments; and

     (4) Advise and assist the Under Secretaries, Mission Area Assistant CIOs, and the E-
         Board in executing IT investment and governance oversight.

i.   The OCIO IRMC ACIO will:

     (1) Serve as the Chair of the USDA IAB;

     (2) Develop, establish, execute, manage, implement, and support this policy and the
         IITGF; and

     (3) Oversee the IITGF implementation of USDA major IT investments by providing
         training and disseminating EITG information to Departmental, Mission Area,
         agency, and staff office employees.

j.   The Director, OCIO IRMC Capital Planning and IT Governance Division (CPITGD),
     will;

     (1) Manage the day-to-day operations and processing of the EITG and IITGF;

     (2) Support the IAB and E-Board as needed; and

     (3) Assign an IT Governance Lead to fully support the IITGF implementation of
         USDA major IT investments by providing timely and effective EITG training and
         disseminating EITG information to USDA, Mission Area, agency, and staff office
         employees.

k.   Agency and staff office IT Directors will:

     (1) Comply with the IITGF process and make any recommendations for improvements
         to the CIO in writing;

     (2) Ensure that agency or staff office internal IT investment governance management
         review processes are not less restrictive than those presented in the IITGF;

     (3) Require that agency or staff office Program and Project Managers submit
         documentation accordingly to the IITGF;

     (4) Recruit personnel to participate in EITG reviews; and

     (5) Update the IAB and E-Board on the progress throughout the life cycle of major IT
         investments.

l.   Mission Area, agency, and staff office major IT investment Business Owners will:



                                             8
     (1) Identify the business needs and performance measures to be satisfied by the major
         IT investment;

     (2) Support IITGF decision gate reviews;

     (3) Validate that the major IT investment continues to meet business requirements
         throughout its life cycle; and

     (4) Participate in user acceptance testing to validate that requirements are being met, as
         needed.

m. Mission Area, agency, and staff office major IT investment Program and Project
   Managers will:

     (1) Ensure that staff and contractors comply with the requirements of this DR for day-
         to-day management and governance of their major IT investment;

     (2) Ensure that all appropriate business stakeholders and technical experts are involved
         throughout the life cycle of an IT project;

     (3) Throughout the major IT investment life cycle, communicate evolving business
         needs or changing conditions to support the continuation of the investment or its
         retirement; and

     (4) Provide governance documentation as provided for in the IITGF for the effective,
         timely, and efficient review of major IT investments throughout the entire
         investment life cycle;

     (5) Coordinate with the IAB Chair, an ITA request to customize IITGF requirements,
         decision gates, and associated deliverables, if applicable; and

     (6) Comply with IITGF decision gate review requirements and ensure that the set of
         deliverables for each decision gate is complete.

n.   Mission Area, agency, and staff office IRBs will:

     (1) Review and approve Mission Area, agency, or staff office IT budgets and Long-
         Range IT Plans;

     (2) Establish system development priority;

     (3) Review and approve the IT portion of the Mission Area, agency, or staff office
         acquisition or procurement plan;




                                             9
      (4) Assure that proper security requirements are met in accordance with Office of
          management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-123, Management's Responsibility for
          Enterprise Risk Management and Internal Control, and other Federal and
          Departmental regulations;

      (5) Assure that Mission Area, agency, or staff office's total data requirements are
          considered in reviewing proposals for the development of information systems;

      (6) Assure that when a major systems effort is initiated, a project manager is named
          within clear delegations of authority and responsibility for decision-making during
          the development of the system;

      (7) Review and approve all major planned information resource management projects
          or systems at initiation and major milestones during implementation. These
          milestone reviews should be established by the Mission Area’s Governance Board
          and align with the Department’s Enterprise Governance Framework milestones;

      (8) Assure all appropriate oversight standards are being followed by properly
          identifying major investments and elevating them to the Department for required
          approvals;

      (9) Identify poor performance and wasteful spending for non-major IT investments and
          conduct Program Reviews and TechStats to turnaround troubled programs or
          terminate failed programs timely manner; and

      (10) Review all other major operating systems periodically to modify or eliminate
           systems that are not meeting program requirements or that have reached the end of
           life.


6. INQUIRIES

  Direct all questions concerning this DR to the OCIO IRMC ACIO at
  capitalplanningdivision@usda.gov.


                                          -END-




                                            10
                                APPENDIX A

                   ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AAR        Acquisition Approval Request
ACIO       Associate Chief Information Officer
AgITCPIC   Agriculture Information Technology Capital Planning and Investment Control
CAO        Chief Acquisition Officer
CCA        Clinger-Cohen Act
CIO        Chief Information Officer
CIOC       Chief Information Officer Council
CPIC       Capital Planning and Investment Control
CPITGD     Capital Planning and Information Technology Governance Division
DM         Departmental Manual
DME        Development, Modernization and Enhancement
DR         Departmental Regulation
EA         Enterprise Architecture
EITG       Enterprise Information Technology Governance
EITIRB     Executive Information Technology Investment Review Board (E-Board)
EVM        Earned Value Management
FITARA     Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
FY         Fiscal Year
GAO        Government Accountability Office
IAB        Integrated Advisory Board
IITGF      Integrated Information Technology Governance Framework
IRB        Investment Review Board
IRMC       Information Resource Management Center
IT         Information Technology
ITA        Investment Tailoring Agreement
OCIO       Office of the Chief Information Officer
O&M        Operations and Maintenance
OMB        Office of Management and Budget
P.L.       Public Law
PPM        Project and Portfolio Management
RMF        Risk Management Framework
RMO        Risk Management Office
U.S.C.     United States Code
USDA       United States Department of Agriculture




                                     A-1
                                      APPENDIX B

                                      DEFINITIONS


a.   Business Owner. The Business Owner is responsible for authorizing and ensuring that
     funding and resources are in place to support the major IT investment.

b.   Enterprise Architecture (EA). A strategic information asset base which defines the
     mission, the information necessary to perform the mission, the technologies necessary to
     perform the mission, and the transitional processes for implementing new technologies
     in response to changing mission needs. The EA includes baseline architecture, target
     architecture, and a sequencing plan. It is a framework for streamlining business
     processes, information flows, applications, and infrastructure to support Agency and
     interagency goals. (Source: OMB, Circular A-130, Managing Information as a
     Strategic Resource)

c.   Enterprise Information Technology (IT) Governance (EITG). A set of responsibilities
     and practices exercised by a board and executive management with the goal of providing
     strategic direction, ensuring that objectives are achieved, ascertaining that risks are
     managed appropriately, and verifying that the enterprise’s resources are used
     responsibly.

d.   Governance. A set of processes that ensures the effective and efficient use of
     information technology in enabling an organization to achieve its goals.

e.   Information System. A discrete set of information resources organized for the
     collection, processing, maintenance, use, sharing, dissemination, or disposition of
     information. (Source: 44 U.S.C. § 3502(8), Definitions)

f.   Information Technology (IT). This term refers to any equipment or interconnected
     system or subsystem of equipment that is used in the automatic acquisition, storage,
     manipulation, management, movement, control, display, switching, interchange,
     transmission, or reception of data or information by an executive Agency. IT is related
     to the terms capital asset, IT Investment, program, project, sub-project, service, and
     system. It also includes computers, ancillary equipment (including imaging peripherals,
     input, output, and storage devices necessary for security and surveillance), peripheral
     equipment designed to be controlled by the central processing unit of a computer,
     software, firmware and similar procedures, services (including support services), and
     related resources; but does not include any equipment acquired by a Federal contractor
     incidental to a Federal contract (40 U.S.C. § 11101, Definitions); however OMB policy
     includes this: "supercomputers, software for mission systems, telecommunications, and
     satellite signal processing.” (Source: USDA, OCIO, IRMC, CPITGD, USDA DME and
     O&M Definitions (and Additional IT-Related Definitions), October 2017)

g.   IT Investment Management. A management process to identify, select, control, and
     evaluate investments in information systems and resources. The process effectively and


                                            B-1
     efficiently links mission needs, information, and IT; integrates with organizational
     planning, budgeting, procurement, management (financial, human resources, and
     program), and assessment; coordinates with the Department’s current and targeted enterprise
     architecture; and maximizes the value while assessing and managing the risks in the
     selection, control, and evaluation of information resources.

h.   IT Portfolio Management. The combination and management of all IT assets, resources,
     and investments owned or planned by an organization to achieve its strategic goals,
     objectives, and mission.

i.   Integrated IT Governance Framework (IITGF). Is an integral part of enterprise IT
     governance and consists of the leadership, structures, and processes that ensure that an
     organization’s IT sustains and extends its strategies and objectives. Integrated IT
     governance requires a structure and processes to support repeatable decision making,
     alignment of IT activities to the enterprise’s strategic goals and objectives, and a clearer
     understanding of authority and accountability.

j.   Investment Tailoring Agreement (ITA). Tailoring consists of a request to the IAB for
     customizing or waiving IITGF-specific phases, activities, decision gates, deliverables, or
     investment governance reviews based on specific investment requirements or specific
     business needs. Tailoring requests can be completed at any stage of the IITGF process
     documented in the ITA deliverable. It is the agency or staff office project manager’s
     responsibility to ensure that the major investment meets the required governance needs.

k.   Life Cycle. A set of processes and their temporal relationships that describe a
     continuous flow of actions and states associated with the existence of system. The linear
     sequence of phases of a system’s existence that span an initiating action to a closing
     action, with an implied future re-execution of the sequence. (Source: USDA, OCIO,
     IRMC, CPITGD, USDA DME and O&M Definitions (and Additional IT-Related
     Definitions), October 2017)

l.   Major IT Investment. An IT Investment in Part 1 and Part 2 of the IT Portfolio requiring
     special management attention because of its importance to the mission or function to the
     government; significant program or policy implications; high executive visibility; high
     development, operating, or maintenance costs; unusual funding mechanism; or
     definition as major by the Agency’s CPIC process. OMB may work with the Agency to
     declare IT Investments as major IT Investments. Agencies must consult with assigned
     OMB desk officers and Resource Management Offices (RMO) regarding which
     Investments are considered “major.” Investments not considered “major” are “non-
     major.” (Source: OMB, FY 2021 IT Budget – Capital Planning Guidance; see also DR
     3130-008, Definition of Major Information Technology Investments)

m. Project. A project can be defined as a temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique
   product or service. Projects are different from other ongoing operations in an
   organization, because unlike operations, projects have a definite beginning and an end –
   they have a limited duration. (Source: USDA, OCIO, IRMC, CPITGD, USDA DME
   and O&M Definitions (and Additional IT-Related Definitions), October 2017)


                                             B-2
n.   System. A system is a generic IT term used for brevity to mean either an application or
     general support system. A collection of computing and/or communications components
     and other resources that support one or more functional objectives of an organization.
     (Source: USDA, OCIO, IRMC, CPITGD, USDA DME and O&M Definitions (and
     Additional IT-Related Definitions), October 2017)




                                          B-3
                                       APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


40 U.S.C. § 11101, Definitions

44 U.S.C. § 3502(8), Definitions

Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies
Appropriations Act, 2015, P.L. 113-235, Division A, December 16, 2014

The Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, 40 United States Code (U.S.C.) § 11101 et seq., February10,
1996

Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), P.L. 113-291, Title VIII,
Subtitle D, §§ 831-837, 2014

Government Accountability Office (GAO), GAO-04-394G, Information Technology Investment
Management: A Framework for Assessing and Improving Process Maturity, Version 1.1, March
1, 2004

GAO, GAO-09-3SP, Cost Estimating and Assessment Guide: Best Practices for Developing and
Managing Capital Program Costs, March 2009

OMB, Circular A-11, Preparation, Submission, and Execution of the Budget, Current Year

OMB, Supplement to Circular A-11 Capital Programming Guide, Version 3.1, 2020

OMB, Circular A-123, Management's Responsibility for Enterprise Risk Management and
Internal Control, July 15, 2016

OMB, Circular A-130, Management Information as a Strategic Resource, November 28, 2000

OMB, FY 2021 IT Budget – Capital Planning Guidance

OMB, Memorandum M-10-27, Information Technology Investment Baseline Management
Policy, June 28, 2010

OMB, Memorandum M-11-29, Chief Information Officer Authorities, August 8, 2011

OMB, Memorandum M-13-09, Fiscal Year 2013 PortfolioStat Guidance: Strengthening
Federal IT Portfolio Management, March 27, 2013

OMB, Memorandum M-15-14, Management and Oversight of Federal Information Technology,
June 10, 2015



                                             C-1
USDA, Departmental Manual (DM) 3560-001, Security Requirements for CPIC, February 17,
2005

USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System, January 4, 2018

USDA, DR 3130-008, Definition of Major Information Technology Investments, August 13,
2020

USDA, DR 3130-009, Non-Major Information Technology (IT) Investments, September 28, 2020

USDA, Executive Information Technology Investment Review Board (E-Board) Charter,
forthcoming

USDA, Integrated Advisory Board (IAB) Charter, May 2014

USDA, USDA Information Technology Capital Planning and Investment Control (AgITCPIC)
Guide, Version 2.0, March 1, 2019; updated to Version 2.1, September 1, 2019

USDA, Information Technology Strategic Plan FY2019-FY2022, Version 1.0, October 2019

USDA, Integrated IT Governance Framework: Guidebook, June 2018

USDA,USDA Strategic Plan FY2018-FY2022, 2018

USDA, OCIO, IRMC, CPITGD, USDA DME and O&M Definitions (and Additional IT-Related
Definitions), October 2017




                                           C-2
