                               U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                     WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                   Number:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION DR 3130-012
                                                                   DATE:
                                                                   March 4, 2016
 SUBJECT: Information Technology Cost Estimating                   OPI:
                                                                   Office of the Chief Information
                                                                   Officer, Information Resource
                                                                   Management



Section                                                                                          Page

1. Purpose                                                                                         1
2. Special Instructions/Cancellations                              ..                              2
3. Background                                                        ..                            2
4. Scope                                                                ..                         3
5. Policy                                                                    .                     3
6. Roles and Responsibilities                                                    .                 5
7. Procedures                                                                     .                7
8. Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                                      7
9. Authorities and References                                                         ..           7
10. Inquiries                                                                                      8


1. PURPOSE

   a.     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of
          Agriculture (USDA) policy governing the use of information technology (IT) cost
          estimating key principles and uniform best practice guidance for all major and non-
          major USDA IT investments, projects, or systems. This DR incorporates leading
          practices that create a “forcing function” of tasks, activities, or events that will drive the
          USDA to take action and produce a unified set of IT cost estimating activities and
          results. These practices, in conjunction with other investment-related knowledge,
          including work breakdown structures (WBS), schedules, risks, and lessons learned, will
          effectively inform USDA IT investment decision making.

   b.     This DR also supports the new IT budget authority provisions provided by the Federal
          Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), P.L. 113-291, Title VIII,
          Subtitle D, §831-837 (2014), which requires Federal Chief Information Officers (CIO)
          to fully define and understand the costs of agency IT investments, products, and
          services.
2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  c.   This DR is effective immediately once published.

  d.   All USDA agencies and staff offices shall align their policies with this DR within 12
       months of the published date.


3. BACKGROUND

  a.   In accordance with a July 11, 2012, Government Accountability Office (GAO) report,
       Information Technology Cost Estimation – Agencies Need to Address Significant
       Weaknesses in Policies and Practices, GAO-12-629, the GAO recommended that the
       Secretary of Agriculture, among other Agency or department heads listed in the report,
       “direct responsible officials to modify policies governing cost estimating to ensure that
       they address the weaknesses that we [GAO] identified.” To address this particular
       weakness, the USDA shall establish policies governing the use of IT cost estimating
       across the Department based on the GAO cost estimating guidelines and applied
       commensurate with the USDA investments size, cost, and scope.

  b.   Developing and validating high-quality IT cost estimates, per the guidance and practices
       provided in the GAO Cost Estimating and Assessment Guide – Best Practices for
       Developing and Managing Capital Program Costs, GAO-09-3SP, March 2009, all meet
       the following characteristics:

       (1) Credible: when assumptions and estimates are realistic. The cost estimate has been
           cross-checked and reconciled with independent cost estimates, a level of confidence
           has been identified and a sensitivity analysis, as defined in GAO-09-3SP, has been
           conducted;

       (2) Well documented: maintain supporting documentation that includes a narrative
           explaining the process, sources, and methods used to create the IT cost estimate and
           identifies the underlying data and assumptions used to develop the IT cost estimate;

       (3) Accurate: when actual costs do not materially deviate from the assessment of costs
           likely to be incurred;

       (4) Comprehensive: when it accounts for all possible costs associated with an
           investment or project, is structured in sufficient detail to ensure that costs are
           neither omitted nor duplicated, and has been formulated by an estimating team with
           disciplines aligned with the investment’s development methodology; and

       (5) Current: cost estimates must be updated at regular intervals or after events that
           impact the underlying assumptions of the estimate.



                                                  2
4. SCOPE

  a.   This DR applies to all USDA agencies and staff offices.

  b.   This DR applies to all USDA major IT investments, as defined in DR 3130-008,
       Definition of Major Information Technology (IT) Investments, and non-major IT
       investments, as defined in DR 3130-009, Non-Major Information Technology (IT)
       Investments, throughout their entire lifecycle, regardless of funding source, whether
       owned and operated by USDA, or operated on behalf of USDA.


5. POLICY

  a.   Follow the 12-step GAO cost estimating approach presented in Figure 1 below (source:
       GAO-09-3SP, Chapter 1, Page 8, Figure 1) to capture the high-level business
       requirements that drive the need for a proposed technology solution; support the
       enterprise IT governance process; and minimize risk in the creation of high quality IT
       cost estimates.


                                              FIGURE 1


                                THE COST ESTIMATING PROCESS




  b.   Tailor this 12-step GAO methodology for ease of Department-wide adoption into these
       five discrete steps:

       (1) Mission Need Identification: define the mission objectives, business needs, and the
           problem, gap, or issue that this IT investment, product, or service will resolve;
                                                 3
     (2) Capability Definition: implementing a standard IT cost estimating process will
         provide for a meaningful comparison of capabilities between IT investment
         alternatives;

     (3) Solution Concept: design a solution concept that efficiently addresses business and
         technical capabilities;

     (4) Cost/Benefit Estimation: justify the cost and benefit basis; and

     (5) Organizational Commitment – submit the results of the IT cost estimating analysis,
         including investment mission alignment, cost and benefit estimate, risk, and
         assumptions to the Associate Chief Information Officer (ACIO), Information
         Resource Management (IRM) for review and approval.

c.   Implement the following practices and foundational criteria to enforce recommended
     cost analysis and estimating best practices to enable defensible IT investment proposals:

     (1) Clear requirements for cost estimating: account for incremental and/or full
         investment lifecycle costs that contribute to the probability of an investment’s
         success and potentially reduce budget and schedule overruns;

     (2) Compliance with cost estimating leading practices: require reviews of cost
         estimates for major IT investments to ensure they are reliable and defensible;

     (3) Process to collect and store cost-related data: develop a process to collect and store
         actual cost-related data from past estimates to support future estimates;

     (4) Training: training in the cost estimation approach as presented in this DR will be
         offered to all personnel with program management and investment oversight
         responsibilities;

     (5) Management review and approval: require the IT cost estimates be reviewed and
         submitted to the ACIO IRM before the annual IT portfolio reviews;

     (6) Develop a cost element structure (CES): require the use of a cost element structure
         (CES) to inform comprehensive cost and resource estimation for IT investments;
         and

     (7) Provide cost estimating methods, tools, and templates: manage the methods, tools,
         and templates to maintain relevancy across the USDA for IT investment planning.

d.   Agencies and staff offices may already have established cost estimating plans,
     techniques, and procedures based on their specific requirements and established
     methodologies, but all IT cost estimates should satisfy, at a minimum, the requirements



                                               4
       addressed in this DR. This DR adds additional controls without addressing the actual
       methodologies applied.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO) shall:

       (1) Establish policies governing the use of cost estimating across the USDA, based on
           the GAO-09-3SP cost estimating guidelines;

       (2) Establish, implement, and maintain an effective USDA IT cost estimating process
           with associated policies, guidance, tools, and training;

       (3) Require that USDA IT investment cost estimates, as incorporated in the IT Portfolio
           (formerly the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Exhibit 53), be reviewed
           by the USDA Chief Financial Officer (CFO) and Director, Office of Budget and
           Program Analysis (OBPA) during the annual budget request, Passback, and
           monthly submissions to OMB;

       (4) Review cost estimates of IT-related costs in IT acquisitions;

       (5) Establish an effective approach for developing high quality IT cost estimates that
           promotes informed decision making, realistic budget formulation, and meaningful
           progress measurement; and

       (6) Conduct IT investment portfolio reviews with agencies and staff offices that include
           IT cost estimates developed from key principles and best practices addressed in this
           DR.

  b.   The USDA CFO shall:

       (1) Collaborate with the USDA CIO to confirm that the USDA IT Portfolio includes
           appropriate cost estimates of all IT resources included in budget requests prior to
           submission to OMB; and

       (2) Ensure IT acquisitions and procurements are supported by sound, reasonable IT
           cost estimates.

  c.   The Director, OBPA shall:

       (1) Collaborate with the USDA CIO and USDA CFO to affirm that the USDA IT
           Portfolio includes appropriate cost estimates of all IT resources included in budget
           requests prior to submission to OMB; and




                                                 5
     (2) Ensure IT acquisitions and procurements are supported by sound, reasonable IT
         cost estimates.

d.   The ACIO IRM shall:

     (1) Ensure that agencies and staff offices are provided training opportunities in
         developing IT cost estimating based on key principles and best practices presented
         in this DR;

     (2) Provide IT cost estimating tools, guidelines, and templates to agencies and staff
         offices;

     (3) Ensure IRM staff is available to assist agencies and staff offices with preparing IT
         cost estimates; and

     (4) Facilitate the annual IT investment portfolio reviews with agencies and staff offices
         that include IT cost estimates developed from key principles and best practices
         addressed in this DR.

e. The Director, Capital Planning and IT Governance Division (CPIGD) shall:

     (1) Assist agencies and staff offices with training and development of IT cost estimates;

     (2) Provide IT cost estimating tools, guidelines, and templates to agencies and staff
         offices;

     (3) Ensure investment documentation outlines and provides supporting evidence of cost
         estimating based upon the key principles and best practices addressed in this DR;

     (4) Assist agencies and staff offices with preparing IT cost estimates as part of the
         USDA Capital Planning and Investment Control (CPIC) process as outlined in the
         USDA Information Technology Capital Planning and Investment Control Guide;
         and

     (5) Facilitate IT investment portfolio reviews with agencies and staff offices that
         includes IT cost estimates developed from key principles and best practices
         addressed in this DR.

f. Agency and staff office CIOs shall:

     (1) Provide IT cost estimates in accordance with key principles and best practices
         provided in this DR as part of the annual USDA IT portfolio review process
         conducted by the USDA CIO; and

     (2) Submit to the ACIO, IRM IT cost estimates supporting documentation for the
         USDA IT investment portfolio review and IT governance processes.

                                               6
  g. Agency and staff office IT Program/Project Managers shall:

      (1) Prepare IT cost estimates in accordance with the principles and best practices
          presented in this DR; and

      (2) Take advantage of training opportunities for IT cost estimating, as needed, and use
          any tools, guidelines, and templates provided by the ACIO, IRM.


7. PROCEDURES

  Procedures and operational practices applicable to this DR shall be further delineated in a
  Departmental Manual (DM) that will present detailed IT cost estimating processes and
  procedures.


8. ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

  ACIO               Associate Chief Information Officer
  CES                Cost Element Structure
  CFO                Chief Financial Officer
  CIO                Chief Information Officer
  CPIC               Capital Planning and Investment Control
  CPIGD              Capital Planning and IT Governance Division
  DM                 Departmental Manual
  DR                 Departmental Regulation
  FITARA             Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
  GAO                Government Accountability Office
  IRM                Information Resource Management
  IT                 Information Technology
  OBPA               Office of Budget and Program Analysis
  OCIO               Office of the Chief Information Officer
  OMB                Office of Management and Budget
  P.L.               Public Law
  USDA               United States Department of Agriculture
  WBS                Work Breakdown Structure


9. AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES

  Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), P.L. 113-291, Title
  VIII, Subtitle D, §831-837 (2014)

  GAO, GAO-09-3SP, GAO Cost Estimating and Assessment Guide – Best Practices for
  Developing and Managing Capital Program Costs, March 2009

                                                 7
   GAO, GAO-12-629, Information Technology Cost Estimation – Agencies Need to Address
   Significant Weaknesses in Policies and Practices, July 11, 2012

   USDA, DR 3130-008, Definition of Major Information Technology (IT) Investments,
   February 27, 2015

   USDA, DR 3130-009, Non-Major Information Technology (IT) Investments, November 18,
   2015

   USDA, USDA Information Technology Capital Planning and Investment Control Guide,
   May 1, 2013


10. INQUIRIES

   Direct all questions concerning this DR to Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO)
   IRM, CPIGD at CapitalPlanningDivision@ocio.usda.gov.


                                             -END-




                                                8
