                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                        DR 3145-001
 SUBJECT: Oversight and Management of the Federal               DATE:
 Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act                  May 7, 2021
 (FITARA)
 OPI: Office of the Chief Information Office – Information      EXPIRATION DATE:
 Resource Management Center                                     May 7, 2026



Section                                                                                   Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                 1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                      2
3.   Scope                                                                                   2
4.   Background                                                                              2
5.   Policy                                                                                  3
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                              4
7.   Compliance                                                                             13
8.   Policy Exceptions                                                                      13
9.   Inquiries                                                                              14

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                    A-1
Appendix B – Authorities and References                                                    B-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of
          Agriculture (USDA) policy governing the oversight and management of the Federal
          Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), Public Law (P.L.) 113-291.

     b.   FITARA requires that the USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO) coordinate FITARA-
          related activities with other senior Department officials including the following: Chief
          Financial Officer (CFO), Chief Acquisition Officer (CAO), Chief Operating Officer
          (COO) (represented by the USDA Deputy Secretary), Senior Procurement Executive
          (SPE), Chief Human Capital Officer (CHCO), and the Director, Office of Budget and
          Program Analysis (OBPA).

     c.   The USDA CIO, CFO, COO, CAO, SPE, CHCO, and OBPA, as a group, will be
          identified in this DR as the Chief Executive Officers (CXO). The CXOs are tasked with
          fully defining and understanding the costs of the Department’s information technology
       (IT) investments, products, and services to be included and incorporated into the USDA
       budget formulation, budget execution, acquisition, governance, program management,
       information security, cybersecurity, and IT workforce planning processes.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This DR supersedes DR 3145-001, Oversight and Management of the Federal
       Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), dated September 13, 2016.

  b.   This DR is effective immediately upon publication and remains in effect until it is
       superseded or expires.

  c.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their policies and
       procedures, as appropriate, with this DR within 6 months of the published date.

  d.   Nothing in this DR is intended to supplant the delegation of authorities and
       responsibilities of the USDA CIO under 7 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) § 2.32,
       Chief Information Officer, or any other authorities otherwise provided by law, Federal
       regulation, or USDA Departmental directives.


3. SCOPE

  This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, employees, appointees,
  contractors, and others who work for, or on behalf of, USDA and are tasked with the
  accomplishment and implementation of the requirements identified in FITARA, OMB, and
  USDA guidance.


4. BACKGROUND

  FITARA was enacted on December 19, 2014, and outlines specific requirements related to
  Federal CIO authority enhancements; enhanced transparency and improved risk management
  in IT investments; portfolio reviews; the Federal Data Center Consolidation Initiative
  (DCOI); expansion of training and use of IT cadres; maximizing the benefit of the Federal
  strategic sourcing initiative (SSI); Category Management and the Governmentwide software
  purchasing program.

  In order to provide more specific guidance for the implementation of FITARA, Office of
  Management and Budget (OMB) issued Memorandum M-15-14, Management and Oversight
  of Federal Information Technology. M-15-14 states that each covered Agency will:

  a.   Conduct a self-assessment to identify current conformity and compliance;




                                               2
  b.   Develop an Agency Common Baseline implementation plan describing the changes to
       be made to ensure that all OMB Common Baseline for IT Management and CIO
       Assignment Plan (OMB Common Baseline) requirements would be implemented by
       December 31, 2015; and

  c.   Update the implementation progress in the Actions and Milestones Table document.

  OMB also established an Actions and Milestones Table to track and identify the progression
  of tasks related to the success of the common baseline implementation.

  On May 15, 2018, Executive Order (E.O.) 13833, Enhancing the Effectiveness of Agency
  Chief Information Officers, was signed by the President to implement successful IT
  management practices from the private sector, enabling Agencies to reduce costs, better
  protect sensitive data, and improve services offered to the public. The E.O. provides covered
  Agency CIOs, as described in the Chief Financial Officers (CFO) Act of 1990, P.L. 101-576,
  greater visibility into and control over their Agency’s IT resources, enhancing their
  effectiveness and better positioning them to modernize their IT systems, execute IT programs
  more efficiently, reduce cybersecurity risks, and serve the American people well.

  In response to FITARA and objectives further delineated in M-15-14, USDA developed the
  United States Department of Agriculture Federal Information Technology Acquisition
  Reform Act Common Baseline and Implementation Plan (USDA Common Baseline Plan),
  dated November 14, 2015, which further delineates the role of the USDA CIO in establishing
  an inclusive, integrated governance process that manages IT as a strategic resource.

  The USDA Common Baseline Plan establishes a framework for USDA to implement the
  specific authorities that FITARA gives to the USDA CIO under the CFO Act of 1990 and
  builds upon the responsibilities outlined in the Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, 40 United States
  Code (U.S.C.) § 11101 et seq. The OMB Common Baseline and USDA Common Baseline
  Plan speak to the roles and responsibilities of the CXOs, which includes the USDA CIO.

  In conjunction with the activities listed above, the USDA CIO, or designee, will engage at
  the Departmental level and throughout all Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices using IT
  governance bodies and decision-making processes in the key areas of finance, budget,
  acquisition, and human resources. The USDA CIO will engage directly with these
  stakeholders, ensuring active involvement in policy decisions that are related to IT.


5. POLICY

  a.   The USDA Deputy Secretary will ensure engagement at the Department level and within
       the Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to consistently align USDA’s budget,
       finance, acquisitions, governance, program management, human resources, information
       security, cybersecurity, and IT communities to FITARA.




                                              3
  b.   The USDA CIO will use the enhanced authority provided under FITARA to ensure
       greater transparency and risk management of IT investments; review of Mission Area,
       agency, and staff office IT portfolios; consolidation of data centers; expansion of IT-
       related training (e.g., acquisition, program management, networks, systems, contracting)
       and use of IT cadres; maximizing the benefit of the Federal SSIs; Category
       Management; and Federal software purchasing programs.

  c.   The USDA Deputy Secretary will ensure all applicable policies, procedures, and
       governance structures are consistent with FITARA’s requirements.

  d.   The USDA CIO may, where authorized by FITARA, delegate authority for fulfilling
       FITARA requirements.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  All roles and responsibilities identified in FITARA, and further delineated in M-15-14, are in
  effect. The USDA SPE may fulfill the CAO requirements identified in M-15-14, and the
  USDA OBPA Director may fulfill the budget formulation requirements normally performed
  by the CFO.

  a.   The USDA Deputy Secretary, serving as the USDA COO, will:

       (1) Serve as the Chair of the Executive Information Technology Investment Review
           Board (E-Board);

       (2) Finalize recommendations to the Secretary concerning major IT investments
           proceeding through the USDA IT governance process;

       (3) Review and prioritize the USDA major IT investments portfolio consulting with
           USDA Under Secretaries and the USDA CIO, as necessary.

       (4) Approve self-assessment and plan documents; and

       (5) Oversee progress towards implementing FITARA actions within the USDA
           Common Baseline Plan and the Actions and Milestones Table.

  b.   The Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA), serving as the CAO, will:

       (1) Manage the overall IT acquisition strategy and IT contract portfolio for the
           Department;

       (2) Review the IT acquisition process in coordination with the USDA CIO, SPE, and
           CFO to ensure FITARA requirements are met;




                                              4
     (3) Delegate policy and oversight aspects of IT acquisitions to the USDA SPE, as
         appropriate; and

     (4) Address other CAO responsibilities as outlined and updated in the USDA Common
         Baseline Plan and the Actions and Milestones Table.

c.   The USDA CIO will:

     (1) Leadership and Accountability

         (a) Report directly to the Secretary and or Deputy Secretary of Agriculture
             regarding IT matters and receive management guidance from the Deputy
             Secretary, serving as the Department’s COO;

         (b) Designate a USDA Chief Information Security Officer (CISO);

         (c) Develop a USDA assignment plan to delegate aspects of the USDA Common
             Baseline Plan to other CXOs;

         (d) Provide a delegation of authority memorandum to the Mission Area Assistant
             CIOs, in a rules-based manner, if a Mission Area, agency, or staff office
             assumes responsibility for a USDA Common Baseline Plan activity;

         (e) Use PortfolioStat to improve the management of the USDA IT portfolio;

         (f) Use TechStat sessions to review high-risk IT investments to recommend
             termination or corrective actions; and

         (g) Address other USDA CIO and OCIO responsibilities as outlined and updated
             in the USDA Common Baseline Plan and the Actions and Milestones Table.

     (2) IT Strategic Planning

         (a) Establish goals for improving USDA operations through IT;

         (b) Measure performance of how well IT supports USDA programs;

         (c) Prepare an annual report on the progress of achieving the USDA IT strategic
             planning goals;

         (d) Benchmark USDA IT processes against the private and public sector; and

         (e) Ensure that USDA IT processes are analyzed and revised as appropriate before
             making significant IT investments.




                                           5
(3) IT Budget

    (a) Fully participate in IT planning, programming, and budgeting decisions;

    (b) Participate in the planning, programming, and budgeting stages for programs
        that include IT resources;

    (c) Designate a representative for participating in Mission Area, agency, and staff
        office investment review boards that include IT resources;

    (d) Review and approve funding for IT reprogramming requests (i.e., changes in
        funding levels for IT resources that require Congressional notification);

    (e) Define, in consultation with the CFO and OBPA Director, the level of detail
        with which IT resource levels are described distinctly from other resources
        throughout the planning, programming, and budgeting stages;

    (a) Evaluate whether to continue, modify, or terminate any acquisition,
        investment, or activity that includes a significant IT component and advise the
        Secretary;

    (f) Coordinate with the Secretary and the USDA CFO to ensure that financial
        systems are approved and effectively implemented;

    (g) Manage IT investments and advise and assist the USDA Secretary, Deputy
        Secretary, Under Secretaries, Mission Area Assistant CIOs, and executive
        governance boards, in the following:

        1    Executing IT investments;

        2    IT governance oversight; and

        3    Improving IT personnel capabilities;

    (h) Define Departmentwide policy for the level of detail of planned IT expenditure
        reporting for all transactions that include IT resources;

    (i) Review and approve the IT budget requests in collaboration with the Director,
        OBPA and other appropriate CXO as it relates to their scope of responsibility
        (e.g., financial, acquisition, human resources, property); and

    (j) Establish and maintain a process to regularly engage with program managers to
        evaluate IT resources supporting each Mission Area, agency, and staff office
        strategic objective.




                                       6
(4) Acquisition

    (a) Maintain an inventory of data centers and a strategy to consolidate and
        optimize them;

    (b) Manage the IT execution decision and the governance and oversight processes
        related to IT;

    (c) Define overall policies for capital planning, enterprise architecture, project
        management, and reporting for IT resources;

    (d) Participate, or designate a representative, on executive level governance boards
        that include IT resources, including Mission Area, agency, and staff office
        investment review boards;

    (e) Certify that IT investments are adequately implementing incremental
        development, as defined in capital planning guidance issued by OMB; and

    (f) Review and approve IT contracts, acquisition plans, and acquisition strategies.

(5) IT Organization and Workforce

    (a) Annually assess the requirements established for Mission Area personnel
        regarding IT management knowledge and skills;

    (b) Annually assess the extent to which USDA personnel meet IT management and
        information security knowledge and skill requirements;

    (c) Annually report to the Secretary of Agriculture on progress made in improving
        IT personnel capabilities;

    (d) Annually develop strategies for hiring and training to rectify any knowledge
        and skill deficiencies;

    (e) Collaborate with the Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM) in
        establishing a documented process for:

        1    Review and concurrence of performance assessments for Mission Area
             Assistant CIO positions at the Senior Executive Service (SES), Senior
             Level (SL), and General Schedule (GS)-15 level; and

        2    USDA CIO involvement in the recruitment and selection of SES, SL, and
             GS-15 Mission Area Assistant CIO positions;

    (f) Provide guidance to Mission Areas on recruitment and selection activities for
        Mission Area Assistant CIO positions in collaboration with OHRM. “Mission



                                        7
        Area Assistant CIO” is defined as SES, SL, or GS-15 positions classified as
        having a key IT role for a component organization;

    (g) Provide guidance to Mission Areas in establishing and implementing a formal
        documented process for the USDA CIO’s involvement in the performance
        evaluation of Mission Area Assistant CIOs in collaboration with the OHRM;

    (h) Recommend approval or disapproval of a proposed Mission Area Assistant
        CIO recruitment or reassignment action based on the needs of the Department
        before any staffing activities begin;

    (i) Review and approve the hiring manager’s tentative executive and non-
        executive Mission Area Assistant CIO selection;

    (j) Develop proposed mandatory language for the Office of the Chief Information
        Officer (OCIO) performance goals annually; no later than 30 days before the
        beginning of the new performance year;

    (k) Provide ongoing feedback, with documentation, to Mission Area Assistant
        CIOs throughout the performance year;

    (l) Provide input into the Mission Area Assistant CIO performance evaluations;

    (m) Ensure the USDA IT Leadership Directory as identified in the OMB Common
        Baseline is populated, kept up-to-date, and posted in concert with the CHCO;
        and

    (n) Establish a set of technical, and as applicable, leadership, competency
        requirements for all IT staff to ensure that USDA can:

        1    Anticipate and respond to changing mission requirements;

        2    Maintain workforce skills in a rapidly developing IT environment; and

        3    Recruit and retain the IT talent needed to accomplish the mission.

(6) Information Security

    (a) Ensure that senior USDA officials, including the Mission Area Assistant CIOs,
        carry out their information security responsibilities, through delegation of
        authority to the USDA CISO; and

    (b) Ensure that USDA personnel are held accountable for complying with the
        Departmentwide information security program, through delegation of authority
        to the USDA CISO.




                                       8
d.   The USDA CFO will:

     (1) Collaborate with the USDA CIO and his or her staff in overall portfolio planning of
         IT investments;

     (2) Provide guidance and advice for capturing spending data that will be electronically
         accessible by the USDA CIO to assist in evaluating the compliance of investments;
         and

     (3) Address other CFO and Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO)
         responsibilities as outlined and updated in the USDA Common Baseline Plan and
         the Actions and Milestones Table.

e.   The Director, OBPA will:

     (1) Coordinate with the USDA CIO in the development of guidance for Mission Area,
         agency, and staff office submissions of IT-related budget materials throughout all
         stages of the budget formulation process;

     (2) Collaborate with the USDA CIO in the review and analysis of budget and other
         funding proposals with IT impacts;

     (3) Collaborate with the USDA CIO on the annual development and signature of a joint
         certification letter;

     (4) Collaborate with the USDA CIO for the Department’s Strategic Planning and
         Performance Management activities;

     (5) Meet with the USDA CIO before the start of the annual budget formulation process
         to develop joint guidance and agree to a calendar of deliverables and data requests
         for USDA;

     (6) Coordinate with the USDA CIO in the development of guidance on budgetary
         reprogramming activities and associated Congressional notification requirements
         where there is an impact on IT; and

     (7) Address other OBPA responsibilities as outlined and updated in the USDA Common
         Baseline Plan and the Actions and Milestones Table.

f.   The Director, Office of Contracting and Procurement (OCP), serving as the SPE, will:

     (1) Establish policy regarding the acquisition of IT products and services and ensuring
         that IT procurements comply with all applicable laws, regulations, guidance, and
         procedures;




                                            9
     (2) Collaborate with the USDA CIO to issue IT policy related to the acquisition of IT
         products and services, including policy to ensure IT acquisitions are approved by
         the USDA CIO prior to obligating funds;

     (3) Ensure contract actions that contain IT are consistent with CIO approved
         acquisition strategies and plans; and

     (4) Address other USDA SPE and OCP responsibilities as outlined and updated in the
         USDA Common Baseline Plan and the Actions and Milestones Table.

g.   The USDA Director, OHRM, serving as the CHCO, will:

     (1) Administer USDA human resources and human capital policies for all IT positions;

     (2) Provide technical guidance and direction for IT-related human resources functions
         to ensure compliance with Federal regulations and USDA policies;

     (3) Notify the USDA CIO of any proposed SES, SL, or Scientific and Professional (ST)
         Mission Area Assistant CIO recruitment actions for consultation regarding position
         structure and recruitment strategies;

     (4) Review and either approve or recommend changes to proposed mandatory
         performance plan language for Mission Area Assistant CIOs within 5 working days
         of receiving it from the USDA CIO;

     (5) Provide annual guidance on establishing performance plans specifying the approved
         mandatory language for executive level Mission Area Assistant CIOs;

     (6) Advise the CIO on any collective bargaining agreement implications related to
         competency requirements;

     (7) In collaboration with the USDA CIO, establish a set of technical competency
         requirements for all IT staff;

     (8) Notify the CIO of the need to participate on recruitment boards for staffing SES
         Mission Area Assistant CIO positions;

     (9) Provide technical guidance and direction for all IT related human resource functions
         to ensure compliance with Federal regulations and USDA policies;

     (10) In concert with the USDA CIO, ensure the USDA IT Leadership Directory is
          populated, kept up-to-date, and posted as identified in the OMB Common Baseline;
          and

     (11) Address other CHCO and OHRM responsibilities as outlined and updated in the
          USDA Common Baseline Plan and the Actions and Milestones Table.



                                           10
h.   The USDA Associate Chief Information Officer (ACIO), Information Resource
     Management Center (IRMC) will:

     (1) Collaborate with OHRM, OCP, the IT Workforce Program Manager, and FITARA
         Operations Director in identifying, analyzing, and addressing IT workforce
         competency gaps;

     (2) Develop technical solutions for the Mission Area Assistant CIOs performance plan
         scorecards;

     (3) Participate on governance boards, as appropriate; and

     (4) Address other IRMC responsibilities as outlined and updated in the USDA Common
         Baseline Plan and the Actions and Milestones Table.

i.   The USDA IRMC Director, FITARA Operations will:

     (1) Establish the processes and procedures that will bring USDA into compliance with
         FITARA;

     (2) Assist USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices in establishing
         management practices that align IT resources with the Department’s strategic
         missions, goals, programmatic priorities, and statutory requirements as related to
         FITARA processes;

     (3) Establish Departmentwide IT management controls that meet FITARA
         requirements while providing Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices with the
         flexibility to adapt to Department processes and unique mission requirements;

     (4) Establish and update, as needed, the USDA Common Baseline Plan roles,
         responsibilities, and authorities of the USDA CIO and the roles and responsibilities
         of other applicable CXOs for managing IT as a strategic resource

     (5) Assist the Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to strengthen the USDA CIO’s
         accountability for IT cost, schedule, performance, and security;

     (6) Provide Department-level oversight that will ensure consistent Departmentwide
         interpretation and use of FITARA terms and requirements;

     (7) Lead the Department’s effort in establishing and executing an inclusive IT
         governance process that will enable effective planning, programming, budgeting,
         and execution for IT resources;

     (8) Receive, review, and provide recommendations to the USDA CIO on policy waiver
         exceptions;



                                            11
     (9) In keeping with FITARA provisions, provide appropriate visibility and involvement
         of the USDA CIO in the management and oversight of IT resources across the
         USDA; and

     (10) Address other FITARA Operations Director and OCIO responsibilities as outlined
          and updated in the USDA Common Baseline Plan and the Actions and Milestones
          Table.

j.   The USDA Associate CIO, Client Experience Center (CEC) will:

     (1) Collaborate with the USDA CIO, SPE, and CFO communities and Director,
         FITARA Operations to identify, analyze, and address IT Category Management key
         principles to acquire and manage the organization’s common requirements in a
         more collaborative and coordinated way;

     (2) Work closely with the Federal IT Category Manager to develop and implement IT
         category-specific strategies, including, but not limited to, gathering Departmental
         sales and pricing data, and developing teams of experts;

     (3) Report to the Federal IT Category Manager, OMB, and other interested parties on
         the success of IT Category Management through the assessment of metrics,
         including increasing savings, reducing duplication, increasing spend under
         management, achieving Governmentwide small business goals, and other relevant
         category management issues; and

     (4) Address other IT Category Management responsibilities as outlined and updated in
         the USDA Common Baseline Plan and the Actions and Milestones Table.

k.   USDA Mission Area Assistant CIOs will:

     (1) Review and approve annual and multi-year planning, programming, budgeting, and
         execution decisions as well as all management, governance, and oversight processes
         related to the Mission Area IT;

     (2) Develop Mission Area IT budget proposals and IT reprogramming requests in
         collaboration with the USDA CIO and OBPA Director;

     (3) Provide oversight and management of IT investments as presented in the USDA
         Common Baseline Plan and the Action and Milestones Table for their respective IT
         portfolios;

     (4) Ensure that program managers define IT performance metrics and strategies to
         support fulfillment and traceability of Departmental strategic objectives defined in
         the USDA Strategic Plan FY 2018 – 2022;




                                            12
       (5) Develop SES, SL, ST, and GS-15 recruitment packages in coordination with the
           USDA CIO and OHRM Director to include, but not limited to:

           (a) Making tentative selections;

           (b) Obtaining the USDA CIO’s approval on tentative selections; and

           (c) Notifying the USDA CIO of any proposed actions for pre-consultation;

       (6) Develop performance plans that contain the USDA CIO’s performance goals;

       (7) Ensure persons applying for positions with IT-related competencies are made aware
           of the requirements when applying for the position;

       (8) Ensure persons currently occupying positions with new IT-related competencies are
           made aware of the requirements and given tools, resources, and a deadline for
           attaining them;

       (9) Address any employee’s failure to attain the necessary IT competencies;

       (10) Update Mission Area policies, processes, and procedures based on guidance from
            the CXOs’ policies and procedures, and FITARA-related policies and guidance;

       (11) Ensure the Mission Area achieves and maintains the highest maturity level in IT
            management; and

       (12) Support implementation of FITARA requirements as provided for in M-15-14.


7. COMPLIANCE

  a.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will comply with this DR and other
       USDA policies and guidance by providing the required FITARA products identified in
       the USDA Common Baseline Plan and the Actions and Milestones Table.

  b.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices not able to create the required products must
       submit a waiver request as noted in Section 8 of this DR.


8. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  a.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are required to conform to this
       policy. If a policy requirement cannot be met as explicitly stated, the Mission Area,
       agency, or staff office may submit a waiver request memorandum. These waiver
       requests will explain the reason for the request, identify compensating controls and
       actions that meet the intent of the policy, and identify how the compensating



                                              13
       controls/actions provide a similar or greater level of compliance than the policy
       requirement.

  b.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will address all policy waiver request
       memoranda to the USDA CIO and submit the request for review and determination to
       AgITGovernance@ocio.usda.gov, with “FITARA” in the subject line. Upon receipt of
       requests, the FITARA Operations Director will review and provide recommendations to
       the USDA CIO.


9. INQUIRIES

  Direct all questions concerning this DR to the FITARA Operations Director at
  AgITGovernance@ocio.usda.gov, with “FITARA” in the subject line.


                                            -END-




                                              14
                               APPENDIX A

                  ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ACIO      Associate Chief Information Officer
ASA       Assistant Secretary for Administration
CAO       Chief Acquisition Officer
CEC       Client Experience Center
CFO       Chief Financial Officer
CFR       Code of Federal Regulations
CHCO      Chief Human Capital Officer
CIO       Chief Information Officer
CIOC      Chief Information Officer Council
CISO      Chief Information Security Officer
COO       Chief Operating Officer
CXO       Chief Executive Officers (senior USDA officials such as a CAO, CFO,
          CHCO, CIO, COO)
DCOI      Data Center Optimization Initiative
DM        Departmental Manual
DR        Departmental Regulation
E-Board   Executive Information Technology Investment Review Board
E.O.      Executive Order
FITARA    Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
FOIA      Freedom of Information Act
FSSI      Federal Strategic Sourcing Initiative
FY        Fiscal Year
GS        General Schedule
IRM       Information Resources Management
IRMC      Information Resource Management Center
IT        Information Technology
OBPA      Office of Budget and Program Analysis
OCFO      Office of the Chief Financial Officer
OCIO      Office of the Chief Information Officer
OCP       Office of Contracting and Procurement
OHRM      Office of Human Resources Management
OMB       Office of Management and Budget
P.L.      Public Law
SES       Senior Executive Service
SL        Senior Level
SPE       Senior Procurement Executive
SSI       Strategic Sourcing Initiative
ST        Scientific and Professional
U.S.C.    United States Code
USDA      United States Department of Agriculture




                                    A-1
                                          APPENDIX B

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Accountability, 40 U.S.C. § 11316

Agency Chief Information Officer, 40 U.S.C. § 11315

Capital Planning and Investment Control, 40 U.S.C. § 11302

Capital Planning and Investment Control, 40 U.S.C. § 11312

Chief Financial Officers (CFO) Act of 1990, P.L. 101-576, November 15, 1990

Chief Information Officer, 7 CFR § 2.32

Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, 40 U.S.C. § 11101 et seq., February 10, 1996

E.O. 13833, Enhancing the Effectiveness of Agency Chief Information Officers, May 15, 2018

Federal agency responsibilities, 44 U.S.C. § 3506

Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), P.L. 113-291, December
19, 2014, as amended

General Services Administration, Federal Strategic Sourcing Initiative (FSSI)

OMB, Circular A-130, Memorandum for Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies:
Management of Federal Information Resources, November 28, 2000, revised

OMB, Federal Chief Information Officer and Administrator, Office of Information and
Regulatory Affairs Memorandum, Applying FITARA Baseline to Statistical Agencies and Units,
May 4, 2016

OMB, M-12-10, Implementing PortfolioStat, March 30, 2012

OMB, M-13-09, Fiscal Year 2013 PortfolioStat Guidance: Strengthening Federal IT Portfolio
Management, March 27, 2013

OMB, M-15-14, Management and Oversight of Federal Information Technology, June 10, 2015

OMB, M-16-02, Category Management Policy 15-1: Improving the Acquisition and
Management of Common Information Technology: Laptops and Desktops, October 16, 2015




                                              B-1
OMB, M-16-12, Category Management Policy 16-1: Improving the Acquisition and
Management of Common Information Technology: Software Licensing, June 2, 2016

OMB, M-16-14, Category Management Policy 16-2: Providing Comprehensive Identity
Protection Services, Identity Monitoring, and Data Breach Response, July 1, 2016

OMB, M-16-19, Data Center Optimization Initiative (DCOI), August 1, 2016

OMB, M-16-20, Category Management Policy 16-3: Improving the Acquisition and
Management of Common Information Technology: Mobile Devices and Services, August 4, 2016

OMB, M-18-12, Implementation of the Modernizing Government Technology Act, February 27,
2018

Performance and Results-Based Management, 40 U.S.C. § 11313

Resources, Planning, and Portfolio Management, 40 U.S.C. § 11319

USDA, Actions and Milestones Table

USDA, Departmental Manual (DM) 3107-001, Management of USDA IT Enterprise Initiatives
Procedures, May 18, 2016

USDA, DR 3105-001, USDA Chief Information Officers Council, April 6, 2016

USDA, DR 3107-001, Management of USDA IT Enterprise Initiatives, May 12, 2016

USDA, DR 3111-001, Departmental Long-Range IRM Planning, February 2, 1989

USDA, DR 3130-008, Definition of Major Information Technology Investments, August 13,
2020

USDA, DR 3130-009, Non-Major Information Technology (IT) Investments, September 28, 2020

USDA, DR 3130-010, United States Department of Agriculture Enterprise Information
Technology Governance, December 3, 2015

USDA, DR 3130-011, Information Technology Program and Project Manager Certification
Requirements, February 4, 2016

USDA, DR 3130-012, Information Technology Cost Estimating, March 4, 2016

USDA, DR 3130-013, Information Technology Capital Planning and Investment Control, July 8,
2016

USDA, DR 3185-001, Enterprise Architecture, July 29, 2019



                                           B-2
USDA, DR 3545-001, Information Security Awareness and Training Policy, October 22, 2013

USDA, DR 3620-001, USDA eLearning Services, Courseware and Content, September 9, 2019

USDA, Office of the Chief Information Officers Process Guide: Recruitment and Performance
Management

USDA, OHRM Advisory 2016-006, Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
(FITARA) Implementation, July 6, 2016

USDA, Contracting Desk Book

USDA, Secretary’s Memorandum 1076-033, Realignment of the USDA Departmental FOIA
Office, September 24, 2019

USDA, Secretary’s Memorandum 1076-034, Realignment of the Office of the Chief Information
Officer, September 30, 2019

USDA, Strategic Plan FY 2018 – 2022, May 2018

USDA, Agriculture Acquisition Regulation

USDA, United States Department of Agriculture Federal Information Technology Acquisition
Reform Act Common Baseline and Implementation Plan, version 2.0, November 14, 2015




                                            B-3
