                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, DC 20250

                                                                  NUMBER:
   DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                        DR 3160-001
                                                                  DATE:
  SUBJECT: Licensed Information Technology (IT) Software          May 16, 2019

  OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer – Client           EXPIRATION DATE:
  Experience Center                                               May 16, 2024



Section                                                                                    Page

1. Purpose                                                                                 1
2. Background                                                                              2
3. Scope                                                                                   2
4. Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                      2
5. Policy                                                                                  2
6. Procedures                                                                              4
7. Roles and Responsibilities                                                              4
8. Penalties and Disciplinary Actions for Non-Compliance                                   5
9. Policy Exceptions                                                                       6
10. Inquiries                                                                              6

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                    A-1
Appendix B – Authorities and References                                                    B-1



1. PURPOSE

   a.     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the policy for maintaining established
          licensed software within the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA).

   b.     This policy also clarifies the ramifications of duplication and distribution of
          unauthorized software and seeks to prevent such action. Unauthorized copying of
          software by individuals can harm the entire USDA by subjecting the Department to legal
          liabilities and making it more difficult to negotiate agreements that make software
          available at reasonable cost.
2. BACKGROUND

  The Federal Government spends a significant amount annually on software acquisitions to
  conduct business or enable mission functions. It is incumbent on USDA to ensure practices
  as a purchaser and user of licensed software are carried out effectively, efficiently, and in
  compliance with all applicable legislation and copyrights, such as the Federal Information
  Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), Public Law (P.L.) 113-291 Section 831-837;
  the Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 United States
  Code (U.S.C.) § 3551; and Office of Management and Budget (OMB), Memorandum M-16-
  12, Category Management Policy 16-1: Improving the Acquisition and Management of
  Common Information Technology: Software Licensing.


3. SCOPE

  This DR applies to all USDA Mission Area Assistant Chief Information Officers (CIO),
  employees, appointees, contractors, volunteers, and others working for or on behalf of USDA
  who manage USDA-supplied computer hardware and software in the performance of their
  duties.


4. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their licensed software IT policy and
  procedures with this policy within 6 months of the publication date.

  a.   This DR supersedes DR 3160-001, Computer Software Piracy, dated March 29, 2007.

  b.   This DR is effective immediately and will remain in effect until superseded or until
       expiration.

  c.   If a specific provision of this DR is superseded by another regulation or otherwise
       invalidated by external laws, directives, or standards, the remaining provisions will not
       be invalidated.

  d.   The term “agency” or phrase “agency and staff office,” unless otherwise noted in this
       directive, will be considered to encompass the Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices
       of USDA.


5. POLICY

  a.   The USDA acquires software licenses and must only use the software and
       documentation in accordance with applicable license agreements. USDA does not own
       such software or its related documentation. Except as specifically authorized by a
       software licenser in an agreement, USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices,


                                               2
     employees, appointees, contractors, volunteers, and others working for, or on behalf of,
     USDA who are authorized to use USDA-supplied licensed software in performing their
     functions are prohibited from reproducing licensed software or related documentation.

b.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are responsible for the distribution and
     maintenance of the software license agreement reflecting their purchased, installed
     software licenses which should be available for easy reference to determine if copies can
     be made for backup or archival purposes, and assure compliance with all provisions of
     the software agreement.

c.   USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices, employees, appointees, contractors,
     volunteers, and others who are working for, or on behalf of, USDA and are authorized to
     purchases software outside of the standard acquisition procedures for USDA, are
     responsible for licensing, compliance, maintenance, service, and the annual “true-up” for
     the software. The annual “true-up” is a reconciliation process of licenses purchased by
     USDA verses those that are installed on USDA computer systems.

d.   The downloading and/or installation and activation of any software not properly licensed
     to USDA without the written approval of the USDA CIO or Mission Area Assistant
     CIOs is prohibited. This also refers to “free” software.

e.   Use of software not properly licensed to USDA without the written approval of the
     USDA CIO or Mission Area Assistant CIOs is prohibited.

f.   Employees, appointees, contractors, volunteers, and others working for, or on behalf of,
     USDA who are authorized to use USDA-supplied licensed software in performing their
     functions working for, or on behalf of, USDA who duplicate copyrighted material
     without authorization may be subject to disciplinary action and/or civil liability.

g.   The Department or employing Mission Areas, agencies, or staff offices will not defend
     or indemnify employees, appointees, contractors, volunteers, or others working for, or
     on behalf of, USDA involved in copyright violation lawsuits if the violation resulted
     from willful negligence or culpability.

h.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs and Agency and Staff Office Heads, as part of their annual
     third quarter FISMA computer security program review, will submit copies of related
     policies, procedures, and Information Technology Asset Management (ITAM) results
     pursuant to this DR to the USDA CIO.

i.   Nothing in this DR will be construed to require the disclosure of law enforcement
     investigative sources or methods, or to prohibit or otherwise impair a lawful
     investigative or protective activity undertaken by, or on behalf of, USDA.




                                            3
6. PROCEDURES

  Procedures in support of this DR will be delineated in the companion Departmental Manual
  (DM) 3160-001, Licensed Information Technology (IT) Software Procedures, which includes
  related Departmental process and procedure requirements.


7. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA CIO will:

       (1) Maintain oversight and final approval authority of all monitoring and review
           activities;

       (2) Support the Department’s IT strategic planning/performance measurement process
           by developing and codifying in a software license policy performance measures
           related to the effectiveness of controls to prevent the use and removal of unlicensed
           software;

       (3) Annually review policies, procedures, and ITAM results provided by Mission
           Areas, agencies, and staff offices;

       (4) Enforce the use of shared internal and interdepartmental procedures, practices,
           products, and services to maintain USDA software license policy;

       (5) Expand computer security training to include information on USDA software
           license policies guidance for employees, appointees, contractors, volunteers, and
           others working for, or on behalf of, USDA; and

       (6) Review and approve all software IT expenditures, as required, to include the USDA
           CIO’s FITARA mandated review and approval responsibility for all IT
           expenditures.

  b.   The Client Experience Center (CEC) Associate Chief Information Officer (ACIO) will:

       (1) Review and provide a decision on any submitted and completed waivers to the
           primary requesting office for any requirement that is not in compliance with this
           policy; and

       (2) Implement and execute the necessary internal controls to proactively and regularly
           monitor, measure, audit, report, and enforce compliance with the provisions of the
           directive.

  c.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs, and Agency and Staff Office Heads and IT Directors will:




                                               4
       (1) Establish and coordinate controls to ensure that their organization complies with
           Section 5 of this DR;

       (2) Ensure that software users are aware of limitations on use and reproduction
           described in the license agreement related to specific software and to use licensed
           software strictly in accordance with such limitations;

       (3) Review FISMA requirements as part of their annual third quarter computer security
           program, and submit copies of policies, procedures, and ITAM results to the USDA
           CIO pursuant to this DR;

       (4) Issue the following ITAM procedures and practices to:

           (a) Establish and enforce Mission Area, agency, and staff offices’ software license
               standards;

           (b) Establish centralized software acquisition whenever possible, ensuring that all
               software is purchased with IT funds;

           (c) Establish a software controller point-of-contact function;

           (d) Establish and maintain accurate supported software inventories;

           (e) Establish and enforce software disposal procedures whenever possible; and

           (f) Perform spot audits of installed software base.

  d.   USDA end users of software will comply with software product license agreements of
       computer software including for but not limited to use, reproduction, and distribution.


8. PENALTIES AND DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS FOR NON-COMPLIANCE

  The reporting USDA Mission Area, agency, or staff office shall make clear its policy and
  penalties for installing and using free and/or unauthorized software and management
  oversight failures.

  DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, Section 16, sets forth USDA
  developed policies, procedures, and standards on employee responsibilities and conduct
  regarding the use of computers and telecommunications equipment. In addition, DR 4070-
  735-001, Section 21, Disciplinary or Adverse Action, states:

  a.   A violation of any of the responsibilities and conduct standards contained in this DR
       may be cause for disciplinary or adverse action; and


                                               5
   b.   Disciplinary or adverse action will be affected in accordance with applicable law and
        regulations.

   Such disciplinary or adverse action will be consistent with applicable law and regulations
   such as the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) regulations, OMB regulations, and
   Standards of Ethical Conduct for Federal Employees of the Executive Branch.


9. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

   a.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are required to conform to this
        policy; however, if a specific policy requirement cannot be met as explicitly stated,
        Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may submit a waiver request. The waiver
        request must explain the reason for the request, identify compensating controls/actions
        that meet the intent of the policy, and identify how the compensating controls/actions
        provide a similar or greater level of defense or compliance than the policy requirement.
        Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will address all policy waiver request
        memoranda to the Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO)-CEC-Category
        Management Office (CMO), at ITCategoryManagement@ocio.usda.gov for review and
        decision.

   b.   Unless otherwise specified, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must submit
        policy waiver requests for approval or renewal annually. Approved waivers must be
        tracked as a Plan of Actions and Milestones (POA&M) item in the Department’s
        FISMA data management and reporting tool.


10. INQUIRIES

   Questions and comments concerning the requirements of this regulation should be directed to
   OCIO-CEC-CMO, at ITCategoryManagement@ocio.usda.gov.


                                             -END-




                                               6
                                 APPENDIX A

                     ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ACIO     Associate Chief Information Officer
CEC      Client Experience Center
CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
CIO      Chief Information Officer
CMO      Category Management Office
DM       Departmental Manual
DR       Departmental Regulation
FISMA    Federal Information Security Modernization Act
FITARA   Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
IT       Information Technology
ITAM     Information Technology Asset Management
OCIO     Office of the Chief Information Officer
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
OPM      Office of Personnel Management
P.L.     Public Law
POA&M    Plan of Actions and Milestones
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                                      A-1
                                       APPENDIX B

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Executive Order 13103, Computer Software Piracy, September 30, 1998

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014, FISMA, 44 United States Code
(U.S.C.) Section 3551, et seq., December 18, 2014 (2017)

Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), Public Law 113-291, Title
VIII, Subtitle D, § 831-837, December 19, 2014

Office of Management and Budget (OMB), Circular A-130, Appendix III, Responsibilities for
Protecting Federal Information Resources, July 28, 2016

OMB, Memorandum M-16-12, Category Management Policy 16-1: Improving the Acquisition
and Management of Common Information Technology: Software Licensing, June 2, 2016

Standards of Ethical Conduct for Federal Employees of the Executive Branch, 5 Code of Federal
Regulations Part (CFR) 2635 (2018)

USDA, DM 3160-001, Licensed Information Technology (IT) Software, forthcoming

USDA, DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007




                                            B-1
