                              U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                   WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250



                                                                                   NUMBER:

     DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                       3150-001

    SUBJECT:                                                   DATE:
    Internet Domain Name Policy                                December 5, 2006
                                                               OPI:
                                                               Office of the Chief Information
                                                               Officer (OCIO)



1         PURPOSE

          This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the policy for the management and use of
          Internet Domain Names within the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA).


2         BACKGROUND

          This directive augments the USDA Internet Protocol (IP) Addressing Plan and other
          internal and external regulations that establish general policies governing the issuance of
          Internet Domain Names. Domain Names are a Departmental resource that must be
          managed to ensure that USDA exercises appropriate control and implementation of
          website content standards and applications.


3         CANCELLATION

          This DR cancels portions of DR 3300-1-M, Appendix M, Internet Protocol (IP)
          Addresses, March 23, 1999, that relate to the Domain Name Approval process.


4         DEFINITIONS

          .gov           A first level internet domain name controlled by the General Services
                         Administration (GSA).

          usda.gov       A second level internet domain name for which control has been delegated
                         by GSA to the Department of Agriculture.

          Commercial Domain Name A domain name that is not maintained by USDA or GSA.
DR 3150-001                                                                     December 5, 2006


       FISMA         Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002. This Act
                     addresses the development of a comprehensive framework to protect the
                     government’s information, operations, and assets.


5      POLICY

       a      The use of the second level domain name, usda.gov, has been officially registered
              with the InterNIC (Internet Network Information Center). Official agency
              domain names must use the following format: domain-name.agency-
              abbreviation.usda.gov. Exceptions to this policy must be approved by OCIO.

       b      There is no registration fee for a usda.gov domain name.

       c      All domain names approved prior to this policy are granted an exemption.

       d      Only the agency/staff office CIO may request a .gov or a usda.gov domain name.

       e      The use of commercial domain names is prohibited.

       f.     The activation or use of any domain name is prohibited without the approval of
              the USDA CIO and if warranted, the GSA registrar.

       g      Agencies/staff offices must use the shared components of USDA’s infrastructure
              to deploy internet/intranet applications as a condition of the domain name
              approval process. Consequently, the domain name approval request must include
              the agency’s commitment to use the shared services and products defined in
              USDA’s Enterprise Architecture. These include, but are not limited to, USDA’s
              eAuthentication Service, AgLearn, Web Style Standards, and other common
              USDA or interdepartmental products and services.



6      RESPONSIBILITIES

       a      Office of the Chief Information Officer.

              (1)   Manage the approval process for internet domain names.

              (2)   Enforce the use of shared internal and interdepartmental products and
                    services.

              (3)   Recommend approval to GSA of an agency request for a .gov domain
                    name.

              (4)   Maintain the USDA domain name server.



                                               2
December 5, 2006                                                                     DR 3150-001


               (5)   Check requests for availability of requested domain name(s). If available,
                     the domain name will be reserved until the request is approved or denied.

               (6)   Ensure that names are not activated until approved by the USDA CIO or
                     the GSA registrar.

       b       Agencies/Staff Offices.

               (1)    Request approval from OCIO for a usda.gov domain name. Change
                      requests are handled in the same manner.

               (2)    Request approval from OCIO for a .gov domain name. The agency/staff
                      office is responsible for the annual registration fee.

               (3)    Ensure that the use of the website conforms to all Departmental policies,
                      regulations, and guidelines.


7      PROCESS

       a       To request approval of a usda.gov domain name.

               (1)    Submit a domain name request letter from the agency CIO to OCIO.
                      (See Appendix A for the required letter and approval criteria.)

               (2)    OCIO will approve/disapprove an agency request for a usda.gov domain
                      name.

               (3)    If disapproved, OCIO will explain to the requestor why it was disapproved
                      and allow the requestor to change the request to gain approval.

               (4)    OCIO will send a copy of the domain name approval letter to the requestor
                      and to the OCIO domain name server office for activation.

       b       To request approval of a .gov domain name.

               (1)    Reserve the .gov domain name and provide contact information at the
                      GSA registration website (www.dotgov.gov).

               (2)    Submit a domain name request letter from the agency CIO to the USDA
                      CIO. (See Appendix B for the required letter.)

               (3)    The USDA CIO will prepare a recommendation letter to the GSA registrar
                      requesting activation of the agency .gov domain name. (See Appendix C
                      for the required letter.)



                                               3
DR 3150-001                                                                 December 5, 2006




              (4)   OCIO will electronically forward the recommendation letter to the GSA
                    registrar, the OCIO domain name server office, and to the agency
                    requestor.



                                         -END-




                                            4
April 15, 2009                                                                DR 3150-001
                                                                              Appendix A

                                         APPENDIX A

                         DOMAIN NAME REQUEST INSTRUCTIONS

Only the Chief Information Officer for the Agency/Staff Office may request a usda.gov domain
name.

Instructions
Complete this request for a new or changed USDA domain name. All of the questions must be
answered completely. Incomplete responses will result in disapproval of the request.

PLEASE NOTE: All requests for domain names will be evaluated for compliance with USDA's
Enterprise Architecture. Applications that duplicate the capabilities of existing Enterprise
Initiatives will be required to use those capabilities. For example, using userid/passwords falls
within the application of USDA’s eAuthentication service.

Request Date: mm/dd/yyyy

Requested Domain Name(s) and Associated IP Address(es)

Domain Name:                                        IP Address
domain-name.agency-abbreviation.usda.gov            nnn.nnn.nnn.nn

Host Site (geographic location):

Agency Information:

Agency Name:
Unit(s):
Location:

Administrative Authority             Technical Contact
Information                          Information

Name:                                Name:
Title:                               Title:
Email:                               Email:
Voice:                               Voice:

This request is for:

( ) a server
( ) an Intranet site
( ) an Internet site
( ) other. Please explain.




                                              A-1
DR 3150-001                                                                    April 15, 2009


Please answer the following questions:

A)     Please describe the functions that this domain will support, such as business processes,
       information delivery or related activities.

B)     Who are the target users (for example: citizens, business partners, other Government
       entities, or employees)?

C)     Does this domain require a userid/password? (Y/N) If so, are you using the USDA
       eAuthentication service for this purpose?

D)     Is this domain name part of an IT System? (Y/N) If so,
       (1)      Is the system in the final stages of Development? Y/N
       (2)      Has the system been entered in the Enterprise Architecture Repository (EAR)?
                Y/N
       (3)      C&A completion date.
                (a)     If C&A is not completed, will the C&A will be completed (including
                        concurrency review) prior to system implementation? Y/N
       (4)      Has the system been entered into the Cyber Security Assessment and
                Management system? (CSAM) Y/N
       (5)      Has the system been categorized for the FIPS 199 security categorization? Y/N
       (6)      Has the security plan been completed? Y/N
       (7)      Identify the IT investment associated with the system:
                a)      Name (as it appears in Worklenz)
                b)      Worklenz Investment/System ID Number (see your capital planning
                        officer)
       (8)      Identify the IT acquisition approval (if applicable): Number & Date [contact
                Leslie Nanney (OCIO)]

E)     Has the Privacy Threshold Analysis been completed? Y/N
       Does the associated system contain personally identifiable information? (Y/N) If so,
       (1)    Has a privacy assessment been performed?
       (2)    Privacy assessment completion date.

F)     Does this domain comply with all of the USDA Architectural policies and standards
       defined in the Directives in the 3600 series? (Y/N)

Review by Agency/Staff Office Chief Information Officer (or designee):
I certify that the answers to the above questions are accurate and complete.
(Signature not required)

Name of Certifying Official:
Title:
Date:

Send domain name requests via e-mail to domain.names@usda.gov.



                                              A-2
December 5, 2006                                                          DR 3150-001
                                                                           Appendix B

             APPENDIX B - GOVERNMENT DOMAIN NAME REQUEST


TO:            David M. Combs
               Chief Information Officer

From:          Name of Agency CIO
               Agency Name

SUBJECT:       Request for .gov domain name


As the CIO for the (agency name), I formally request that authority over the (domain
name) second-level domain name be delegated to the (agency name). By requesting this
domain name, I acknowledge that I will be responsible for payment of the annual $125
.GOV domain name fee. In addition, I will ensure the website content of the requested
domain name conforms to the USDA and .GOV website content policies.

(Explanation of how this website will be used and by whom. Explain why a .gov website
name is needed as opposed to a usda.gov domain name.)

The use of this domain is consistent with the USDA Internet policy.

(Contact name) will be the Administrative Point of Contact (POC) for (domain name).
If there are any questions, please contact her/him at (phone number) or via email at
(email address).

Thank you for your assistance in this matter.


[Signature of Agency CIO]




                                           B-1
December 5, 2006                                                             DR 3150-001
                                                                              Appendix C

              APPENDIX C - USDA CIO RECOMMENDATION LETTER



[USDA Letterhead]

[Date]

.gov Domain Registration
10304 Eaton Place
FTS/TOI
Fairfax, VA 22030

Dear Domain Manager:

As Chief Information Officer, the cabinet-level CIO for the Department of Agriculture
(USDA), I formally request that authority over the [xxxxx.gov] second-level domain
name be delegated to the [Agency Name]. By requesting this domain name, I
acknowledge that I will be responsible for payment of the annual $125 .GOV domain
name fee. In addition, I will ensure the website content of the requested domain name
conforms with the .GOV website content policy.

This domain name will be used for [purpose].

The use of this domain is consistent with the USDA Internet policy.

[Mr./Ms. first name, last name] will be the Administrative Point of Contact (POC) for
[xxxxxx.gov]. If there are any questions, please contact [him/her] at [phone number] or
via email at [email address].

Thank you for your assistance in this matter.

Sincerely,

[Signature]


[Name]
Chief Information Officer
Office of the Chief Information Officer




                                           C-1
