                              U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                    WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                DEPARTMENTAL                                   Number:
                                                               DR 3107-001
                 REGULATION
                                                               DATE:
                                                               May 12, 2016
  SUBJECT: Management of USDA IT Enterprise                    OPI:
           Initiatives                                         Office of the Chief Information
                                                               Officer, Enterprise Management



Section                                                                                  Page

1. Purpose                                                                               1
2. Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                    1
3. Authority                                                                             2
4. Background                                                                            2
5. Definitions                                                                           2
6. Policy                                                                                3
7. Roles and Responsibilities                                                            5
8. Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                            6
9. References                                                                            7
10. Inquiries                                                                            8



1. PURPOSE

   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of Agriculture
   (USDA) policy for identifying, evaluating, and designating information technology (IT)
   related enterprise initiatives in the form of a recommendation to the USDA Chief
   Information Officer (CIO). The intent of this DR is to promote the effective and efficient
   sharing of IT resources across the entire organization to drive down costs and improve
   customer service. The goal is to create a structured process to address an agency’s or
   multiple agencies’ desire to have a shared business approach based on a single or multiple
   business requirements.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

   a.     This DR applies to all agencies and staff offices.
  b.   Nothing in this DR is intended to supplant the delegation of authorities and
       responsibilities of the USDA CIO, USDA Chief Financial Officer (CFO), the Assistant
       Secretary for Civil Rights, and/or the Assistant Secretary for Administration under 7
       Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 2 or any other authorities otherwise provided
       by law, Federal regulation, or USDA Departmental Regulation.


3. AUTHORITY

  The authority for this DR is derived from 7 CFR 2.89(a)(11)(x), which authorizes the USDA
  CIO to improve the management and operational effectiveness of information resources.


4. BACKGROUND

  Enterprise-wide IT initiatives present special opportunities and management challenges for
  USDA, given its diverse set of missions and component agencies and offices. For example,
  the pooling of USDA’s purchasing power across the entire enterprise to purchase a
  commonly needed product can reduce the total cost of acquisition, but a shared investment in
  a one-dimensional service may not deliver a useful solution for all agencies and staff offices
  because of their mission diversity. The CIO Council (CIOC), established by the USDA CIO
  and comprised of senior IT representatives from the Office of the Chief Information Officer
  (OCIO) and agencies and staff offices, is uniquely positioned to evaluate potential IT
  initiatives and designate those with the highest value as enterprise-level initiatives. The
  guidance in this DR is established to ensure that IT enterprise initiatives are effectively
  identified, evaluated, and implemented to accomplish the best possible value for USDA
  agencies, staff offices, and their customers.


5. DEFINITIONS

  a.   Executive Sponsor: The executive sponsor is a CIOC voting member from one USDA
       agency or staff office involved in establishing or to benefit from the enterprise initiative.
       The executive sponsor shall oversee the analysis and documentation process required for
       the CIOC evaluation of an enterprise initiative.

  b.   Initiative Owner: The initiative owner is an official from one USDA agency or staff
       office involved in establishing an enterprise initiative and shall be accountable for the
       establishment and management of an approved enterprise initiative, reporting initiative
       status and measureable outcomes to the CIOC, and for reporting changes that affect the
       viability and continued suitability of an initiative.


  c.   IT Enterprise Initiative: Typically a methodology, product or service shared across
       multiple agencies and/or staff offices.



                                                2
  d.   Examples of an IT enterprise initiative are:

       (1) A common approach or set of technologies across the Department or across one or
           more lines of business;

       (2) An acquisition vehicle for use across the Department; or

       (3) An application or service used across the Department or across one or more lines of
           business.


6. POLICY

  IT enterprise initiatives in the USDA shall be managed in accordance with the guidance
  stated in this section and in Departmental Manual (DM) 3107-001, Management of USDA
  Enterprise Initiatives Procedures, as well as the USDA Enterprise IT Governance Process.
  All existing IT enterprise initiatives that lack an official designation at the time this DR is
  published will be grandfathered by CIOC vote onto the approved IT Enterprise Initiatives
  Reference List.

  a.   Scope of an Enterprise Initiative:

       Enterprise Scope: Whenever the CIOC designates an initiative as an enterprise
       initiative, it shall also designate the scope of the initiative to indicate the extent of the
       enterprise use intended. The following scope determinations shall be considered:

       (1) Mandatory Enterprise-wide: All organizational units of the enterprise must use the
           enterprise initiative for the functionality that it provides, unless an exemption is
           requested in writing and approved by the USDA CIO.

       (2) Optional Enterprise-wide: All organizational units of the enterprise shall consider
           and may use the enterprise initiative for the functionality that it provides.

            (a) Consistent with USDA’s Agriculture Acquisition Regulation (AGAR)
                Advisory No. 101, Shared First Policy in USDA Contracts, all optional
                enterprise-wide initiatives should be supported by a contract that is open to all
                USDA agencies, staff offices, and programs and provides competitive pricing
                for products or services.

            (b) USDA agencies and staff offices that offer services to other USDA agencies,
                staff offices, and/or programs can use the CIOC’s optional enterprise-wide
                designation to promote the service’s value and increase enterprise awareness
                and use of the service.

  b.   Criteria for a mandatory or optional IT Enterprise Initiative:



                                                  3
     An IT enterprise initiative must demonstrate that its use:

     (a) Meets a Common Need – the initiative must demonstrate that more than one USDA
         agency or staff office, or USDA as a whole, has a need for the product or service;

     (b) Is Self-Sustaining – the initiative must be able to be maintained, as an action or
         process, within available resources and be economical when compared to
         alternative solutions;

     (c) Creates Real Benefit – the initiative must demonstrate that it will achieve
         documented cost savings or cost avoidance for the agencies or staff offices
         involved; and

     (d) Offers an Effective and Efficient Approach – the initiative must demonstrate that a
         shared approach is better than a fragmented approach.

c.   Enterprise Budgetary Planning: If the CIOC designates an initiative as Mandatory
     Enterprise-wide, it shall provide guidance to implementing organizations on the
     expected budgetary impact of planned costs by fiscal year. Whenever possible,
     significant expenses should be timed to begin no sooner than the budget-year-plus-one
     year so that programs can anticipate and plan for the cost of enterprise initiatives.
     Additionally, approved initiatives should be implemented using a timeline that provides
     agencies and staff offices sufficient time to recoup return on existing investments and
     plan an orderly transition to the enterprise solution in a cost-effective manner.

d.   Contract Preparation and Management: Program officials and/or Contracting Officer
     Representatives for enterprise mandatory contract vehicles shall ensure that appropriate
     language, such as that below, is included in acquisition requirements packages to the
     contracting office:

     (1) Ability for a “technology refresh” and annual review procedures (i.e., option
         years/periods) to ensure that the Government can take advantage when lower cost
         or better options become available;

     (2) Exclusivity language stating that the same vendor, reseller, or manufacturer cannot
         renew existing contracts or create new contracts with USDA agencies and staff
         offices at a higher cost for the same products and services than that offered by the
         enterprise contract; and

     (3) Additionally, for Mandatory Enterprise-wide initiatives the Department may declare
         a restriction for products/solutions under negotiation for an enterprise mandatory
         contract. Agencies and staff offices shall ensure that if the
         product/maintenance/support for that product/solution expires prior to the award of
         the enterprise mandatory contract vehicle, the term for the length of the renewal
         award is sufficient to meet agency or office mission requirements, but short enough
         to take advantage of the enterprise agreement as soon as practical. This is required

                                             4
           to ensure agencies and staff offices do not enter into arrangements for a product or
           service at a higher cost or with less favorable terms than that to be established by
           the enterprise initiative.


7. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA CIO shall:

       (1) Approve the acquisition and management of IT resources on behalf of any agency
           or staff office in the event that consensus within the CIOC cannot be reached on the
           initiation or continuation of a Mandatory Enterprise-wide Initiative; and

       (2) Override, when necessary, the CIOC’s designations regarding mandatory and
           optional enterprise-wide initiatives.

  b.   The USDA, OCIO, Executive Officer for Enterprise Management shall:

       (1) Maintain an IT Enterprise Initiative Reference List on a USDA corporate portal that
           provides a document library of all supporting artifacts related to IT Enterprise
           initiatives.

       (2) Provide assistance to Executive Sponsors and Initiative Owners; and

       (3) Provide assistance with data and analysis, market research, strategic sourcing, and
           other technical support upon request.

  c.   The CIOC shall:

       (1) Establish and oversee the process for fairly and transparently identifying,
           reviewing, and designating candidate initiatives as IT enterprise initiatives; and

       (2) Designate the Initiative Owner at the time of initiative approval.

  d.   The CIOC Advisory Board Chair shall receive form AD-3107, Request for USDA CIO
       Council Action, submittals for review by the CIOC Advisory Board.

  e.   The CIOC Advisory Board shall:

       (1) Maintain the Request for USDA CIO Council Action Form; and

       (2) Refer complete IT enterprise initiative proposals to the CIOC.

  f.   Agency and staff office CIOs shall:




                                               5
       (1) Participate actively as members of the CIOC in proposing and evaluating candidate
           initiatives for enterprise designation; and

       (2) Consult the IT Enterprise Initiative Reference List in advance of requesting
           acquisition approval for agency or staff office-specific investments.

  g.   Executive Sponsors shall be responsible for the preparation of the documentation
       required to support the evaluation of an enterprise initiative.

  h.   Enterprise Initiative Evaluation Working Group members shall:

       (1) Assist in the preparation of the documentation required to support the evaluation of
           an enterprise initiative; and

       (2) Make recommendations to the CIOC.

  i.   Initiative Owners shall:

       (1) Be accountable for the overall management of an approved enterprise initiative;

       (2) Report initiative status and measureable outcomes to the CIOC;

       (3) Report changes that affect the viability and continued suitability of an initiative; and

       (4) Ensure that any IT investments follow the USDA Enterprise IT Governance Process
           as well as all other applicable review processes.

  j.   The Office of Procurement and Property Management (OPPM) shall maintain the
       overall responsibility for procurement policy, advice, and coordination in acquisitions,
       procurement, and property management for the Department of Agriculture.

  k.   Program officials and/or Contracting Officer Representatives for enterprise mandatory
       contract vehicles shall ensure that appropriate language is included in acquisition
       requirements packages as noted in 6d.


8. ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

  AGAR       Agriculture Acquisition Regulation
  CFO        Chief Financial Officer
  CIO        Chief Information Officer
  CIOC       Chief Information Officer Council
  CFR        Code of Federal Regulations
  DM         Departmental Manual
  DR         Departmental Regulation
  FITARA     Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act

                                                6
  IT            Information Technology
  OCIO          Office of the Chief Information Officer
  OMB           Office of Management and Budget
  OPPM          Office of Procurement and Property Management
  P.L.          Public Law
  U.S.C.        United States Code
  USDA          United States Department of Agriculture


9. REFERENCES

  Authorities

     Title 7 CFR 2.89, Delegations of Authority from the Secretary to the Chief Information
     Officer

     Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), Public Law (P.L.)
     113-291, Title VIII, Subtitle D, Sections 831-837

     The Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, 40 U.S.C. §11312 et seq.

     The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, 44 U.S.C. §3501 et seq.

  References

     Federal CIO, 25 Point Implementation Plan to Reform Federal Information Technology
     Management, December 9, 2010

     Office of Management and Budget (OMB), Circular A-130, Management of Federal
     Information Resources, November 28, 2000, including policy regarding Information
     Management and Information Systems and Information Technology Management -
     Capital Planning, Enterprise Architecture, Security, Performance, and Acquisition

     OMB, Federal Information Technology Shared Services Strategy, May 2, 2012

     OMB Memorandum M-11-29, Chief Information Officer Authorities, August 8, 2011

     OMB Memorandum M-13-08, Improving Financial Systems Through Shared Services,
     March 25, 2013

     OMB Memorandum M-13-09, Memorandum for the Heads of Executive Departments
     and Agencies, Fiscal Year 2013 PortfolioStat Guidance: Strengthening Federal IT
     Portfolio Management, March 27, 2013

     USDA DM 3107-001, Management of USDA IT Enterprise Initiatives Procedures, month
     dd, 2016

                                              7
      USDA DR 3600-000, USDA Information and Technology Transformation, November 2,
      2004

      USDA DR 3600-001, USDA Enterprise Shared Services (ESS), June 1, 2005

   Other Guidance

      USDA, CIOC, Form AD-3107, Request for USDA CIO Council Action, May, 2016

      USDA, CIOC, USDA CIO Council Advisory Board, Operations Manual, Version 1.0,
      November 26, 2014

      USDA, OCIO, Integrated Information Technology Governance Framework: Guidebook,
      version 3.2, April 1, 2014

      USDA, OCIO, USDA Information Technology Capital Planning and Investment Control
      Guide, May 5, 2013

      USDA, OPPM, AGAR Advisory No. 101, Shared First Policy in USDA Contracts,
      September 26, 2012


10. INQUIRIES

   Inquiries regarding this DM should be directed to the USDA, OCIO, Executive Officer for
   Enterprise Management.


                                          -END-




                                             8
