                          U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                             NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                     DR 3130-013
SUBJECT: Information Technology Capital Planning and         DATE:
Investment Control                                           May 24, 2021
OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer – Information   EXPIRATION DATE:
Resource Management Center                                   May 24, 2026



Section                                                                               Page

1. Purpose                                                                               1
2. Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                    2
3. Scope                                                                                 2
4. Background                                                                            2
5. Policy                                                                                5
6. Roles and Responsibilities                                                            7
7. Procedures                                                                           12
8. Policy Exceptions                                                                    12
9. Compliance                                                                           13
10. Inquiries                                                                           13

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                               B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                C-1



1. PURPOSE

   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of Agriculture
   (USDA) policy, roles and responsibilities, and authorities for implementing the Information
   Technology (IT) Capital Planning and Investment Control (CPIC) program and associated
   supporting guidance. Additionally, this DR establishes USDA policy for complying with the
   statutory requirements to ensure IT investments are adequately implementing incremental
   development, and for the USDA Chief Information Officer’s (CIO) approval of the use of
   funds before awarding orders, renewals, modification of contracts and agreements for IT
   equipment, supplies, software, and support services.
2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This DR supersedes DR 3130-013, Information Technology Capital Planning, and
       Investment Control, dated July 8, 2016.

  b.   This DR supersedes DR 3130-006, USDA Earned Value Management, dated June 10,
       2015.

  c.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must align their policies and procedures to
       comply with this DR within 6 months of the date of publication.


3. SCOPE

  a.   This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, employees, and
       contractors conducting business for and on behalf of the USDA through contractual
       relationships when using USDA IT resources.

  b.   All content in this DR must be incorporated and compliance enforced in IT procurement
       contracts for IT goods and services associated with USDA IT investments, as
       appropriate.

  c.   This DR applies to all USDA IT investments throughout their entire life cycle,
       regardless of funding source, whether owned and operated by USDA or operated on
       behalf of USDA.

  d.   USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may use this DR as their internal CPIC
       and acquisition policy or may create a more restrictive policy, but may not create a
       policy that is less restrictive or less comprehensive than, or not compliant with, this DR.


4. BACKGROUND

  a.   The USDA manages hundreds of IT investments across the Department and its agencies
       and staff offices to support and enable the execution of the various business missions,
       spending over $2B a year on IT initiatives. CPIC is a structured and integrated approach
       to managing IT investments. CPIC ensures that IT investments align with the USDA
       mission, strategic goals, and objectives, and support business needs, while reducing risks
       and maximizing returns throughout the investment’s life cycle. Because information
       technology services account for significant capital and operational expenses in USDA,
       aligning and adhering to the USDA formal IT governance processes and related policies
       is essential to ensure that proper oversight and accountability is given to business, IT
       acquisitions and IT requirements which ultimately drive planning and execution
       decisions for the development and management of information technology resources.
       Formalizing governance processes also helps ensure that technology and business
       leaders agree on what is an appropriate level of risk in the information technology that



                                               2
     powers day-to-day operations. IT governance exists to inform and align decision
     making for information technology planning and execution, align policy and operations
     to meet business objectives, ascertain that risks are managed appropriately, improve
     transparency of shared data, and verify that resources are being used responsibly and
     strategically.

b.   The Clinger-Cohen Act (CCA) of 1996, Public Law (P.L.) 104-106, Division D, created
     the Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) in Federal agencies. The Act
     established CPIC and mandated significant improvements in how Federal agencies plan,
     select, fund, control, and evaluate IT investments.

     The Act also requires Federal agencies to undertake Enterprise Architectures (EA)
     designed to guide the IT investment decision process. Office of Management and
     Budget's (OMB) Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource,
     provides general guidance for the CCA and related Acts. The Circular includes a focus
     on linking budget formulation and execution and achieving Federal agency missions and
     specific program outcomes.

     The CCA makes the heads of executive agencies responsible for the management of IT
     investments. Affirming that management must:

     (1) Design and implement a process to maximize value and assess and manage the risks
         of the IT acquisitions of the Federal agency;

     (2) Provide for the selection of IT investments, the management of those investments,
         and the evaluation of the results of those IT investments;

     (3) Use a process that will be integrated with the processes for making budget,
         financial, and program management decisions;

     (4) Establish goals for improving the efficiency and effectiveness of Federal agency
         operations and, as appropriate, the delivery of services to the public through the
         effective use of IT; and

     (5) Establish a process to analyze, track and evaluate the risks and results of all major
         capital investments for information systems for the life of the system.

c.   The CCA further mandates that CPIC processes must:

     (1) Provide for the selection, control, and evaluation of Federal agency IT investments;

     (2) Be integrated with the processes for budget, financial, and programmatic decision-
         making;

     (3) Include minimum criteria for considering whether to undertake an IT investment;




                                             3
     (4) Identify IT investments that would result in shared benefits or costs for other
         Federal agencies or State or local governments;

     (5) Provide for identifying quantifiable measurements for IT investment net benefits
         and risks; and

     (6) Provide the means for senior management to obtain timely information regarding an
         investment's progress.

d.   The annually updated OMB Circular A-11, Preparation, Submission, and Execution of
     the Budget, provides specific guidance for content and presentation of the IT Portfolio
     Summary Details (formerly the IT Capital Asset Plan and Business Cases-Exhibit
     300(s)), the IT Portfolio Summary (formerly the Exhibit 53) and how Federal agencies
     are to use, analyze, and report performance-based acquisition management per the
     Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR).

e.   Under provisions included in the Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform
     Act (FITARA), P.L. 113-291, Title VIII, Subtitle D, §§ 831-837, the USDA CIO must:

     (1) Advise and assist the Secretary and other USDA senior executives in managing IT
         resources effectively, efficiently, and consistently with USDA priorities;

     (2) Use performance measures to monitor and evaluate USDA IT investments;

     (3) Advise senior management on whether to continue, modify, or dispose of an IT
         investment;

     (4) Promote effective and efficient development and operation of all major IT business
         processes within USDA; and

     (5) Review and approve all IT contracts or other agreements for IT investments before
         such agreements are completed or IT contracts are awarded.

     To support these FITARA requirements, the USDA CIO must use the IT governance
     process and the acquisition approval request (AAR) process to review and approve IT
     contracts and other formal agreements. The USDA CIO will also work with the
     Director, Office of Contracting and Procurement (OCP) and the Chief Financial Officer
     (CFO) to determine if any new contract clauses need to be developed, as well as what is
     the most effective method of communicating this new requirement to USDA contracting
     officers throughout the Department. The USDA CIO will work with the USDA CFO
     and the Director, Office of Budget and Program Analysis (OBPA), to prepare the annual
     appropriated budget request.

f.   As also referenced in FITARA, the USDA CIO may use the IT governance process to
     review IT contracts and other agreements. The USDA CIO may delegate review and




                                             4
       approval of IT contracts, and other agreements for IT investments, to a direct report or to
       a USDA CIO officially appointed designee.

  g.   Additionally, OMB is aligning categorization of costs with policies around CIO
       authorities, commodity IT management, category management, and data center
       optimization among others. Taking a Category Management approach to buying smarter
       and more like a single enterprise and utilize Category Management strategies,
       procurement platforms (i.e., enterprise contracts, blanket procurement agreements, etc.),
       and practices to eliminate redundancies, increase efficiency, and deliver more value and
       savings from the Government's acquisition programs.

  h.   Acquisition strategies, plans, and approvals must be conducted in accordance with the
       USDA Contracting Desk Book (specifically Part 407, Acquisition Planning, and Subpart
       407.1 Acquisition Plans). Acquisition strategies and plans must be collaboratively
       drafted to facilitate the attainment of the acquisition objectives as required by FAR
       Subpart 7.105, Contents of written acquisition plans, and the Federal CIO Council
       TechFAR Handbook for Procuring Digital Services (“TechFAR Handbook").

  i.   By law USDA is required to establish policy that incorporates CPIC oversight controls
       consistent with the CCA, as well as language and provisions outlined in the annual
       USDA appropriations act, and FITARA.

  j.   Title V of the Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act of 1994 (FASA) (41 U.S.C. § 3103),
       requires Federal agency heads to approve or define the cost, performance, and schedule
       goals for major acquisitions and aim to achieve, on average, 90% of the cost,
       performance and schedule goals established.

  k.   The Technology Business Management (TBM) Taxonomy is the cornerstone of the
       OMB CPIC Budget Guidance. This taxonomy provides a common language across IT,
       Budget, Acquisitions, and Business stakeholders.


5. POLICY

  a.   USDA will establish, maintain, and continuously update the CPIC program by
       implementing legislative regulations, OMB guidelines, and USDA guidance for all
       USDA IT major and non-major investments, as defined in DR 3130-008, Definition of
       Major Information Technology Investments, and DR 3130-009, Non-Major Information
       Technology (IT) Investments, respectively. CPIC processes must be fully aligned with
       DR 3130-010, United States Department of Agriculture Enterprise Information
       Technology Governance, and integrated into the USDA's Integrated IT Governance
       Framework: Guidebook (“IITGF Guidebook”). Departmental Manual (DM) 3560-001,
       Security Requirements for CPIC further strengthen IT cybersecurity requirements
       associated with this DR and the CPIC program.




                                               5
b.   The USDA CIO reviews and approves the acquisition strategy, acquisition plan, and
     acquisition request (as described in FAR Subpart 7.105, Contents of written acquisition
     plans) or interagency agreement (such as those used to support purchases through
     another Mission Area, agency, or staff office) that includes IT as required by the OMB
     Memorandum M-15-14, Management and Oversight of Federal Information
     Technology.

c.   It is a policy that the USDA CPIC program will:

     (1) Demonstrate and document alignment of the IT Portfolio to USDA's mission and
         business objectives, and with the strategic and tactical goals identified in the current
         editions of the USDA Information Technology Strategic Plan FY2019-FY2022 and
         the USDA Strategic Plan FY2018-FY2022, or subsequently published strategic
         plans;

     (2) Ensure adequate business planning and justification in the selection and control of
         USDA IT investments;

     (3) Implement EA transition plans by selecting IT investments that will move towards
         the achieving the target EA;

     (4) Ensure an integrated management system that coordinates the work scope,
         schedule, and cost goals of a program or contract, and objectively measures
         progress toward these goals;

     (5) Implement a decision-making process by approved governance policies that
         appropriately balances investment benefits, costs, risks, and business priorities;

     (6) Monitor and report performance by measuring the actual achievement of cost,
         schedule, and performance milestones against approved performance measurement
         baselines for IT investments;

     (7) Support timely and effective monitoring and reporting of initiatives performance to
         established management and governance bodies as presented in DR 3130-010;

     (8) Ensure that IT acquisitions, as referenced in FITARA, are approved by the USDA
         CIO or delegated approval authority before fund obligation;

     (9) Implement a scoring process to monitor and evaluate the performance of all IT
         investments based on the data and supporting documentation provided and on
         established IT investment scoring criteria;

     (10) Support the process to review the IT portfolios of all Mission Areas, agencies, and
          staff offices;




                                              6
       (11) Ensure Program and Project Managers involved in CPIC activities are provided
            adequate training; and

       (12) Assess the current maturity of the USDA IT Portfolio, so that sound decisions can
            be made concerning the potential elimination of duplicate investments and propose
            solutions to move towards a shared solution environment across the IT portfolio.

  d.   The USDA CPIC program will leverage and integrate with any existing USDA policies,
       processes, procedures, and best practices surrounding EA, AARs, IT security, financial
       management, budget formulation and execution, risk management framework (RMF), IT
       governance, category management, and performance planning.

       Specifically for USDA IT investments, the CPIC program will:

       (1) Reduce risk by avoiding or isolating custom-designed components;

       (2) Structure IT investment acquisitions into modular development with a narrow scope
           and brief duration;

       (3) Require IT investments be consistent with the principles of the USDA EA;

       (4) Employ the Agriculture System Development Life Cycle (AgSDLC) discipline, as
           presented in the IITGF Guidebook, to plan and execute investments (projects);

       (5) Align with the USDA strategic and annual performance plans; and

       (6) Adhere to USDA cybersecurity standards and policies.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA CIO, or designee, will:

       (1) Serve, or designate a representative to serve, as the principal liaison to OMB
           regarding USDA CPIC functions and outputs;

       (2) Approve new or existing IT initiatives that utilize incremental development
           methodology for their implementations;

       (3) Certify incremental development of IT Investments;

       (4) Establish, implement, and maintain an effective USDA CPIC and TBM program;

       (5) Establish new or maintain existing IT investment and acquisition review thresholds,
           based on criteria to include, but not limited to the initial, annual, total life cycle,
           risk, and performance cost metrics;



                                               7
(6) Serve as the signatory for all official CPIC-related correspondences with OMB;

(7) Integrate the CPIC framework and data into the USDA IT governance processes to
    the greatest extent possible;

(8) Provide online tools to support CPIC reporting activities;

(9) Per DR 3130-011, Information Technology Program and Project Manager
    Certification Requirements ensure that individuals assigned to manage USDA IT
    investments are trained, qualified, and, as appropriate, certified as IT Project
    Managers;

(10) Periodically review the health of USDA IT portfolio;

(11) Assist program, Mission Area, agency, and staff office representatives with meeting
     OMB reporting requirements on behalf of the Department;

(12) Incorporate Mission Areas, agency, and staff office CPIC-related program
     deliverables into the USDA IT governance process for further deliberation by the
     Integrated Advisory Board (IAB) and the Executive Information Technology
     Investment Review Board (E-Board) as detailed in DR 3130-010;

(13) In coordination with the Director of the Office of Congressional Relations, consult
     with House and Senate Agriculture Committees to align provisions of the USDA
     Farm Bill legislation to promote opportunities for shared services among USDA
     programs;

(14) Collaborate with the USDA CFO and OBPA Director in preparing the annual
     appropriated budget request;

(15) The USDA CIO will review and make signed decisions on all IT AARs in
     accordance with Agriculture Appropriation Act;

(16) Ensure that the following factors are a part of the Acquisition Strategies and Plans,
     in accordance with OMB Memorandum M-15-14, Management and Oversight of
     Federal Information Technology (Section K1, CIO Roles and Responsibilities):

    (a) Appropriateness of contract type;

    (b) Appropriateness of IT-related portions of the statement of needs, Statement of
        Work (SOW), Performance Work Statement (PWS), or Statement of
        Objectives (SOO);

    (c) Appropriateness of the above concerning the mission and business objectives
        supported by the IT strategic plan;



                                        8
         (d) Alignment with mission and program objectives in consultation with program
             leadership; and

         (e) Approve the use of all IT funds before awarding orders or contracts for IT
             equipment, supplies, software, or services.

b.   The USDA Deputy CIO will have the authority to act on behalf of the USDA CIO
     during the absence or unavailability of the CIO, including the authority to sign AARs
     $50M or higher.

c.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs, or their designated representatives, will:

     (1) Monitor the progress of each IT investment under their purview and provide
         direction as needed;

     (2) Identify and recruit employees with the knowledge, experience, and skill sets
         needed to support an IT investment (i.e., Investment, Program and Project
         Managers);

     (3) Certify incremental development of IT Investments on behalf of the USDA CIO;

     (4) Consult with the USDA OCIO about opportunities for shared services among
         internal programs or with Mission Area, agency, and staff office partners;

     (5) Engage USDA agency and staff office IT Directors in identifying short-term IT
         solutions that can be delivered to customers on an incremental and modular basis;

     (6) Assess whether IT investments and programs implementing IT solutions are aligned
         with mission requirements, and develop plans in consultation with their agency and
         staff office IT Directors to take corrective actions where misalignments may occur;

     (7) Adhere to the USDA CPIC and TBM program, structure, and framework for all
         USDA IT investments;

     (8) Approve the use of all IT funds before awarding orders or contracts for technology
         (IT) equipment, supplies, software, and services;

     (9) Act on behalf of the USDA CIO to approve acquisitions under $25K;

     (10) Report all acquisitions under $25K to the USDA CIO;

     (11) Work with the USDA CIO to align their agency and staff office CPIC processes and
          procedures with Departmental policies and Federal regulations and guidelines;




                                            9
     (12) Identify opportunities to utilize shared IT services, including the sharing of IT
          assets across Mission Area, agency, and staff office lines;

     (13) Work with Program Managers to identify short-term IT solutions that can be
          delivered to customers on an incremental and modular basis;

     (14) Establish a process to improve or terminate poorly performing IT investments;

     (15) Develop plans of action and milestones that clearly describe corrective actions that
          can be taken to revitalize poorly performing projects;

     (16) Provide IT discipline expertise such as cybersecurity oversight throughout the
          program;

     (17) Help Program and Project Managers identify and recruit employees with the
          knowledge, experience, and skill sets needed to successfully manage IT
          investments;

     (18) Serve as the agency and staff office decision authority and signatory for CPIC
          packages submitted to the Department;

     (19) Monitor and report performance by measuring the actual achievement of cost,
          schedule, and performance milestones against approved performance measurement
          baselines for IT investments;

     (20) Serve as the primary point of contact with the Department regarding the planning
          and execution of CPIC functions; and

     (21) Report all cost savings and avoidance and reinvestment plans to the Department for
          IT initiatives.

d.   The USDA OCIO Information Resource Management Center (IRMC) Associate Chief
     Information Officer (ACIO) will:

     (1) Ensure that Mission Ares, agencies, and staff offices have training opportunities and
         assistance in capturing the IT investment data needed for discussion in the portfolio
         reviews;

     (2) Lead an effective USDA CPIC and TBM program;

     (3) Support the process and coordinate with the OBPA Director to capture IT
         investment data that comprise the annual appropriated IT budget request to be
         approved by the USDA CIO for the USDA response to OMB Circular A-11;

     (4) Ensure OCIO IRMC ACIO staff is available to assist Mission Areas, agencies, and
         staff offices in preparing the IT investment business cases; and



                                             10
     (5) Approve the use of funds before awarding orders or contracts for IT equipment,
         supplies, software, or services in the $25K to the less than $50M range.

e.   The OCIO IRMC Deputy Associate Chief Information Officer (DACIO) will have the
     authority to act on behalf of the OCIO IRMC ACIO during the absence or unavailability
     of the ACIO and will be authorized to sign AARs in the $25K to the less than $50M
     range.

f.   The OCIO IRMC Director, Capital Planning, and IT Governance Division (CPITGD),
     will:

     (1) Serve as the principal liaison to OMB regarding USDA CPIC functions and
         outputs;

     (2) Lead and maintain an effective USDA CPIC and TBM program;

     (3) Implement and assist in conducting IT Portfolio reviews with Mission Areas,
         agencies, and staff offices;

     (4) Ensure compliance with the latest OMB IT Budget Capital Planning Guidance;

     (5) Manage a team of CPIC liaisons that are aligned to specific Mission Areas,
         agencies, and staff offices to lend support and assistance as needed;

     (6) Provide training and assistance to Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices in
         capturing the IT investment data needed for presentation and discussion at IT
         portfolio reviews;

     (7) Receive, review, and provide an initial approval determination to any waiver
         request memoranda submitted by a Mission Area, agency, or staff office;

     (8) Support tools used to capture IT investment data that will be presented in the USDA
         response to OMB Circular A-11;

     (9) Assist and guide Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices with preparing the IT
         investment business cases; and

     (10) Utilize the Integrated IT Governance Framework, IT Investment Rating Criteria,
          AAR, and other CPIC processes as an opportunity for evaluating and determining
          acceptable IT Acquisition Plans and Strategies.

g.   USDA Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Investment Managers will:

     (1) Possess the requisite certifications required to manage IT investments;




                                            11
       (2) Comply with all Federal and USDA CPIC and TBM guidelines;

       (3) Comply with the latest OMB IT Budget Capital Programming Guidance;

       (4) Plan, execute, monitor and report the IT investment to achieve approved cost,
           schedule, and scope baselines;

       (5) Manage IT investment risk and alert the CPITGD CPIC liaisons of significant
           issues and planned corrective action;

       (6) Ensure that IT investment project teams comply with CPIC legislation, regulations,
           and other USDA guidance;

       (7) Adhere to and execute CPIC procedures detailed in the USDA Information
           Technology Capital Planning and Investment Control Guide (the “AgITCPIC
           Guide”) to ensure that CPIC milestones are met;

       (8) Support the established USDA IT governance framework, processes, and structure,
           for USDA IT investments;

       (9) Share information with Mission Area, agency, or staff office budget offices to
           ensure that project resources are appropriately reflected in budget materials; and

       (10) Report all cost savings and avoidance and reinvestment plans to the Department for
            IT initiatives.


7. PROCEDURES

  A forthcoming Information Technology Capital Planning and Investment Control procedural
  DM will address CPIC and AAR requirements, standards, procedures, and processes.


8. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  a.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are required to conform to this
       policy. If a specific policy requirement cannot be met, the Mission Area, agency, or
       staff office may submit a waiver request memorandum. Waiver requests must explain
       the reason for the request, identify compensating controls and actions that meet the
       intent of the policy, and identify how the compensating controls and actions provide a
       similar or greater level of compliance than the policy requirement. The waiver request is
       to be submitted before the Mission Area, agency, or staff office undertaking the IT
       action, and the Mission Area, agency, or staff office must not move forward with the IT
       action until it receives a response on the waiver request.




                                              12
   b.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must address all policy waiver request
        memoranda to the Director, CPITGD at capitalplanningdivision@usda.gov.

   c.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will receive an initial determination in writing
        from OCIO IRMC.


9. COMPLIANCE

   On an ongoing basis, the OCIO IRMC ACIO, or designee, will monitor, measure, audit,
   report, and enforce compliance with provisions of this DR. Specific performance measures
   collected by the OCIO IRMC ACIO, or designee, will monitor how provisions in this DR
   have:

   a.   Increased transparency of the USDA IT investment decisions;

   b.   Demonstrated an increase in IT development, modernization, and enhancement
        investments with a decrease in IT investment operations and maintenance spending; and

   c.   Reduced the number of IT investment corrective action plans and associated investment
        risks.


10. INQUIRIES

   Direct all questions concerning this DR to the USDA OCIO IRMC ACIO at
   capitalplanningdivision@usda.gov.


                                             -END-




                                                13
                                APPENDIX A

                   ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AAR        Acquisition Approval Request
ACIO       Associate Chief Information Officer
AGAR       Agriculture Acquisition Regulation
AgITCPIC   Agriculture Information Technology Capital Planning and Investment Control
AgSDLC     Agriculture System Development Life Cycle
CCA        Clinger-Cohen Act
CFO        Chief Financial Officer
CIO        Chief Information Officer
CPIC       Capital Planning and Investment Control
CPITGD     Capital Planning and Information Technology Governance Division
DACIO      Deputy Associate Chief Information Officer
DM         Departmental Manual
DME        Development, Modernization and Enhancement
DR         Departmental Regulation
EA         Enterprise Architecture
E-Board    Executive Information Technology Investment Review Board
FAR        Federal Acquisition Regulation
FASA       Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act
FITARA     Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
FTE        Full Time Equivalent
FY         Fiscal Year
GAO        Government Accountability Office
IAB        Integrated Advisory Board
IITGF      Integrated Information Technology Governance Framework
IRMC       Information Resource Management Center
IT         Information Technology
OBPA       Office of Budget and Program Analysis
OCFO       Office of the Chief Financial Officer
OCIO       Office of the Chief Information Officer
OCP        Office of Contracting and Procurement
O&M        Operations and Maintenance
OMB        Office of Management and Budget
P.L.       Public Law
PWS        Performance Work Statement
RMF        Risk Management Framework
RMO        Risk Management Office
SOW        Statement of Work
SOO        Statement of Objectives
TBM        Technology Business Management
TechFAR    Technical Federal Acquisition Regulation
U.S.C.     United States Code



                                     A-1
USDA   United States Department of Agriculture




                                 A-2
                                          APPENDIX B

                                          DEFINITIONS


Acquisition Approval Request (AAR). The IT AAR Process is the mechanism by which the
USDA OCIO monitors and reviews Mission Area, agency, and staff office-level IT spending.
The IT AAR Process establishes USDA procedures for complying with the statutory requirement
for approval of the use of funds prior to awarding orders or contracts for IT equipment, supplies,
software, or services. This review process applies to all types of IT acquisitions, contracts, and
agreements over $25,000. (Source: USDA, OCIO, IRMC, CPITGD, Acquisition Approval
Request (AAR) Guidance for AAR Managers, October 2020)

Capital Planning and Investment Control (CPIC). This term refers to a decision-making process
that ensures IT Investments integrate strategic planning, budgeting, procurement, and
management of IT in support of Agency missions and business needs. The CPIC process has
three distinct phases: Select, Control, and Evaluate. (Source: The Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996,
40 United States Code (U.S.C.) 11101, et seq., February 10, 1996, as amended)

CIO Evaluation. Refers to the CIO’s best judgment of the current level of risk for an Investment
in terms of its ability to accomplish its goals. The evaluation should be informed by the
following factors, including, but not limited to risk management, requirements management,
contractor oversight, historical performance, human capital and other factors that the CIO deems
important to the forecasting future success. Each evaluation should include narrative to address
and explain the rating. This is particularly important whenever the rating has changed since the
last evaluation. (Source: OMB, FY 2021 IT Budget – Capital Planning Guidance)

Information Technology (IT). This term refers to any equipment or interconnected system or
subsystem of equipment that is used in the automatic acquisition, storage, manipulation,
management, movement, control, display, switching, interchange, transmission, or reception of
data or information by an executive Agency. IT is related to the terms capital asset, IT
Investment, program, project, sub-project, service, and system. It also includes computers,
ancillary equipment (including imaging peripherals, input, output, and storage devices necessary
for security and surveillance), peripheral equipment designed to be controlled by the central
processing unit of a computer, software, firmware and similar procedures, services (including
support services), and related resources; but does not include any equipment acquired by a
Federal contractor incidental to a Federal contract (40 U.S.C. § 11101, Definitions); however
OMB policy includes this: "supercomputers, software for mission systems, telecommunications,
and satellite signal processing.” (Source: USDA, OCIO, IRMC, CPITGD, USDA DME and
O&M Definitions (and Additional IT-Related Definitions), October 2017)

IT Investment. Refers to the expenditure of IT resources to address mission delivery and
management support. An IT Investment may include a project or enhancement, or maintenance
of a single IT asset or group of IT assets with related functionality, and the subsequent operation
of those assets in a production environment. All IT Investments should have a defined life cycle
with start and end dates, with the end date representing the end of the currently estimated useful



                                                B-1
life of the Investment, consistent with the Investment’s most current alternatives analysis if
applicable. When the asset(s) is essentially replaced by a new system or technology, the
replacement should be reported as a new, distinct Investment, with its own defined life cycle
information.

Lifecycle Costs. Refers to all Investment costs (including Government Full Time Equivalents
(FTE)) from the commencement of the Investment through its estimated useful life (or the
composite estimated useful life of the assets within the Investment), independent of the funding
source (e.g., revolving fund, appropriated fund, working capital fund, trust fund). (Source:
OMB, Circular A-131, Value Engineering, December 26, 2013)

Major IT Investment. An IT Investment in Part 1 and Part 2 of the IT Portfolio requiring special
management attention because of its importance to the mission or function to the government;
significant program or policy implications; high executive visibility; high development,
operating, or maintenance costs; unusual funding mechanism; or definition as major by the
Agency’s CPIC process. OMB may work with the Agency to declare IT Investments as major
IT Investments. Agencies must consult with assigned OMB desk officers and Resource
Management Offices (RMO) regarding which Investments are considered “major.” Investments
not considered “major” are “non-major.” (Source: OMB, FY 2021 IT Budget – Capital
Planning Guidance; see also DR 3130-008, Definition of Major Information Technology
Investments)

Non-Major IT Investment. This term refers to any IT Investment in the Agency's IT Portfolio
that does not meet the definition of “major IT Investment” (01), "Funding Transfer Investment"
(04) or "IT Migration Investment" (03). All non-major IT Investments must be reported in the
Agency IT Investment Portfolio. For more details see section 10 of CPIC IT Portfolio Guidance.
(Source: OMB, FY 2021 IT Budget – Capital Planning Guidance; see also DR 3130-009, Non-
Major Information Technology (IT) Investments)

Portfolio. A collection of IT Investments, which consist of related programs and/or projects that
are grouped together to facilitate effective management of that work to meet strategic business
objectives. (Source: USDA, OCIO, IRMC, CPITGD, USDA DME and O&M Definitions (and
Additional IT-Related Definitions), October 2017)

Program. A program is a group of related projects managed in a coordinated manner to obtain
benefits not available from managing them individually. (Source: USDA, OCIO, IRMC,
CPITGD, USDA DME and O&M Definitions (and Additional IT-Related Definitions), October
2017)

Project. A project can be defined as a temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product
or service. Projects are different from other ongoing operations in an organization, because
unlike operations, projects have a definite beginning and an end – they have a limited duration.
(Source: OMB, FY 2021 IT Budget – Capital Planning Guidance)




                                               B-2
                                        APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018 (also known as the “2018 Farm Bill”), P.L. 115–334,
December 20, 2018

“Farm Bill," Current Year

Agriculture, Rural Development, Food, and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies
Appropriations Act, 2015, P.L. 113-235, Division A, December 16, 2014

“Agriculture, Rural Development, Food, and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies
Appropriations Act,” Current Year

The Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, 40 United States Code (U.S.C.) 11101, et seq., February 10,
1996, as amended

Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR), Part 7 – Acquisition Planning

Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act of 1994 (FASA), P.L. 103-355, October 13, 1994

Federal CIO Council (CIO.gov), TechFAR Handbook for Procuring Digital Services (“TechFAR
Handbook”)

Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), P.L. 113-291, Title VIII,
Subtitle D, §§ 831-837, December 19, 2014

Government Accountability Office (GAO), GAO-04-394G, Information Technology Investment
Management: A Framework for Assessing and Improving Process Maturity, Version 1.1, March
1, 2004

GAO, GAO-09-3SP, GAO Cost Estimating and Assessment Guide – Best Practices for
Developing and Managing Capital Program Costs, March 2009

GAO, GAO/NSIAD-97-22BR, Acquisition Reform: Implementation of Title V of the Federal
Acquisition Streamlining Act of 1994, October 31, 1996

OMB, Circular A-11, Preparation, Submission, and Execution of the Budget, December 2020

OMB, Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource, July 28, 2016

OMB, Circular A-131, Value Engineering, December 26, 2013

OMB, FY 2021 IT Budget – Capital Planning Guidance



                                             C-1
OMB, Memorandum M-10-27, Information Technology Investment Baseline Management
Policy, June 28, 2010

OMB, Memorandum M-11-29, Chief Information Officer Authorities, August 8, 2011

OMB, Memorandum M-13-09, Fiscal Year 2013 PortfolioStat Guidance: Strengthening
Federal IT Portfolio Management, March 27, 2013

OMB, Memorandum M-15-14, Management and Oversight of Federal Information Technology,
June 10, 2015

OMB, Memorandum M-16-02, Category Management Policy 15-1: Improving the Acquisition
and Management of Common Information Technology: Laptops and Desktops, October 16, 2015

OMB, Memorandum M-16-12, Category Management Policy 16-1: Improving the Acquisition
and Management of Common Information Technology: Software Licensing, June 02, 2016

OMB, Memorandum M-16-20, Category Management Policy 16-3: Improving the Acquisition
and Management of Common Information Technology: Mobile Devices and Services, August
04, 2016

USDA, Agriculture Acquisition Regulation (AGAR), Section 407.103, Agency-head
responsibilities, November 14, 1996

USDA, DM 3130-xxx, Information Technology Capital Planning and Investment Control
Procedures, forthcoming

USDA, DM 3560-001, Security Requirements for CPIC, February 17, 2005

USDA, DR 3130-008, Definition of Major Information Technology Investments, August 3, 2020

USDA, DR 3130-009, Non-Major Information Technology (IT) Investments, September 28, 2020

USDA, DR 3130-010, United States Department of Agriculture Enterprise Information
Technology Governance, April 20, 2021

USDA, DR 3130-011, Information Technology Program and Project Manager Certification
Requirements, February 4, 2016

USDA, Information Technology Capital Planning and Investment Control (AgITCPIC), March
1, 2019, updated as Version 2.1, September 1, 2019

USDA, Information Technology Strategic Plan FY2019-FY2022, Version 1.0, October 2019




                                           C-2
USDA, Integrated IT Governance Framework: Guidebook ("IITGF Guidebook"), Version 3.3,
June 2018

USDA, OCIO, USDA Strategic Plan FY2018-FY2022, 2018

USDA, OCIO, IRMC, CPITGD, Acquisition Approval Request (AAR) Guidance for AAR
Managers, Version 2.4, October 2020

USDA, OCIO, IRMC, CPITGD, USDA DME and O&M Definitions (and Additional IT-Related
Definitions), October 2017

USDA, OCP, USDA Contracting Desk Book, Version 2.10, March 1, 2021




                                          C-3
