                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                 NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                         DR 3170-001
                                                                 DATE:
 SUBJECT: End User Workstation Configurations                    October 13, 2022
 OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer, Client            EXPIRATION DATE:
 Experience Center                                               October 13, 2027



Section                                                                                    Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                   1
2.   Scope                                                                                     2
3.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                        2
4.   Background                                                                                2
5.   Policy                                                                                    3
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                                4
7.   Policy Exceptions                                                                         6
8.   Inquiries                                                                                 7

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                     A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                    B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                     C-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes approved workstations and associated
          peripheral configurations for all users within the United States Department of
          Agriculture (USDA). Using permitted workstation configurations ensures and promotes
          greater cyber protection, compatibility, and interoperability for hardware and software
          and provides consistency and standardization for the acquisition, configuration, and
          administration of information technology (IT).

     b.   Using acceptable workstation configurations supports and implements guidance issued
          by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), National Institute of Standards and
          Technology (NIST), and other Federal oversight entities. Doing so facilitates the
          uniform application of engineering, technical criteria, methods, processes, and practices
          when evaluating and procuring new technologies; ensures that technologies align with
          USDA enterprise architecture business goals and processes; and meets the requirements
          of:
       (1) OMB, Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource; and

       (2) DR 3180-001, Information Technology Standards.


2. SCOPE

  a.   This policy applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, employees, and
       contractors working for, or on behalf of, USDA.

  b.   This DR does not apply to lab workstations or lab equipment.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This regulation supersedes DR 3170-001, End User Workstation Configurations, dated
       January 11, 2021.

  b.   In this document, workstations are defined as desktop computers, mobile devices (laptop
       computers, mobile phones or tablets), and other computers and devices accessing the
       USDA network.


4. BACKGROUND

  a.   Congressional mandates for IT architecture are contained in the Clinger-Cohen Act of
       1996, 40 United States Code (U.S.C.) § 11101 et seq., updated and revised by the E-
       Government Act of 2002, 44 U.S.C. § 3601, to help each Government agency build
       enterprise architecture.

  b.   OMB, Circular A-119, Federal Participation in the Development and Use of Voluntary
       Consensus Standards and in Conformity Assessment Activities, requires that Federal
       agencies use voluntary consensus standards to reduce the reliance of Federal agencies’
       use of unique Government standards. Refer to DR 3180-001 for the definition of
       standards.

  c.   The Common Approach to Federal Enterprise Architecture presents an overall approach
       to developing and using enterprise architecture in the Federal Government by promoting
       increased mission effectiveness through the standardization of the development and use
       of architectures within, and between, Federal agencies. Related implementation
       guidance from OMB is contained in various documents, including:

       (1) OMB, Circular A-11, Preparation, Submission, and Execution of the Budget;

       (2) OMB, Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource;




                                              2
       (3) OMB, M-00-10, OMB Procedures and Guidance on Implementing the Government
           Paperwork Elimination Act;

       (4) OMB, M-05-22, Transition Planning for Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6);

       (5) OMB, M-11-29, Chief Information Officer Authorities;

       (6) OMB, M-12-10, Implementing PortfolioStat;

       (7) OMB, Memorandum M-17-26, Reducing Burden for Federal Agencies by
           Rescinding and Modifying OMB Memoranda; and

       (8) Digital Government: Building a 21st Century Platform to Better Serve the
           American People.

  d.   The Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework, Version 2 (FEAF v2), is a suite of
       tools to help Government planners implement The Common Approach to Federal
       Enterprise Architecture. Workstation requirements will help users identify IT standards
       based on rules or specifications designed to simplify, unify, or rationalize the design,
       interoperability, portability, and scalability of IT infrastructure components (e.g.,
       network, hardware, systems, and application software).


5. POLICY

  All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will comply with the latest version of
  NIST, Special Publication (SP) 800-53 r5, Security and Privacy Controls for Information
  Systems and Organizations; the E-Government Act; Circular A-130; Circular A-119; and the
  FEAF v2 artifacts specifically associated with the Application Reference Model (ARM) and
  Infrastructure Reference Model (IRM), ensuring that configuration of workstations and
  peripherals are maintained in accordance with these mandates.

  Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will comply with this DR by using Departmental,
  Mission Area, agency, or staff office blanket purchase agreements (BPA) consistent with
  Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) § 13.303 that fulfill Common Criteria mandates and
  are current with voluntary consensus standards. Software and hardware can be authorized for
  use unless the software developer or hardware developer is prohibited by the law.

  a.   When complying with Departmental or agency BPAs, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
       offices will:

       (1) Establish and maintain uniform engineering and technical criteria;

       (2) Establish and maintain methods, practices, and processes;




                                              3
       (3) Align with SP 800-53 r5 and Federal Information Security Modernization Act of
           2014 (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. § 3551 et seq., security requirements;

       (4) Establish and maintain net-centric and enhanced interoperable shared services;

       (5) Develop and establish technical maturity among systems and applications within
           budgeted limitations;

       (6) Ensure alignment of investments, systems, and applications to include
           infrastructure;

       (7) Manage the replacement of workstations and associated peripherals that are aligned
           with the current, in-force standards; and

       (8) Promote best practices in alignment with business, performance, application,
           infrastructure, data, and security configurations.

  b.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will manage end user (e.g., employees,
       contractors, USDA partners) computing device allotment and limit the issuance of
       mobile devices to those with an official business need:

       (1) End users are limited to one Government-furnished device (workstation or laptop)
           per individual.

       (2) End users are allowed only one mobile device, if supported by a business need. An
           end user cannot have both a mobile phone and a tablet. An exception can be
           requested for an end user or a group of end users with a demonstrated need, whose
           position requires both a mobile phone and a tablet.

       (3) To have a mobile phone or tablet requires the supervisor’s approval before either
           can be issued.

  c.   The point of contact for this policy is the Office of the Chief Information Officer
       (OCIO), Client Experience Center (CEC) Governance Director, at
       CEC.InternalComms@usda.gov.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO), or delegated responsible staff, will:

       (1) Be the final approving authority on the adoption of IT requirements and standards
           for the Department; and

       (2) Serve as the final approving authority for policy waivers and exceptions to the
           workstation requirements as requested by Mission Areas, agencies, or staff offices.



                                               4
b.   The CEC Associate Chief Information Officer (ACIO) will:

     (1) Develop policies, regulations, and compliance requirements for the IT environment
         and provide channels for Mission Area, agency, and staff office input to, and
         approval of, those policies, regulations, and compliance requirements;

     (2) Monitor and provide recommendations for waivers to this policy to the CIO; and

     (3) Provide management and oversight activities related to business, performance,
         application, data, infrastructure, and security configurations, including but not
         limited to:

         (a) Reviewing and monitoring compliance with established policy requirements
             and standards without interfering with or impairing business functions or
             mission requirements; and

         (b) Reporting compliance and deviations to OMB.

c.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs and Agency and Staff Office IT Directors will:

     (1) Implement the policies, requirements, and standards for the IT environment by:

         (a) Reviewing existing internal procedures and controls and developing internal
             procedures and controls in support of this policy;

         (b) Establishing effective communication between internal stakeholders and an
             identified point of contact in OCIO; and

         (c) Incorporating the policies, requirements, and standards into Mission Area,
             agency, and staff office capital planning and investment control (CPIC)
             processes.

     (2) Implement and maintain business, performance, application, data, infrastructure,
         and security configuration settings by:

         (a) Documenting all deviations from standard configurations with a detailed
             rationale for the deviations and request for a waiver from the CEC ACIO;

         (b) Requesting waivers from the CEC ACIO that substantiate all policy exception
             requirements;

         (c) Providing corrective action plans for the timely remediation of issues not
             authorized as an approved deviation;




                                             5
           (d) Ensuring that all end user peripherals (e.g., storage, network, printers,
               workstations, mobile devices) necessary for the mission of the user’s work pass
               a comprehensive security scan. Lab workstations are out of scope for this
               directive. If a peripheral fails a scan and cannot be updated to pass, it is
               prohibited from being connected to USDA infrastructure, or a waiver must be
               requested and approved, permitting the scan-failing peripheral to be used in the
               end user’s environment;

           (e) Procuring hardware and software from enterprisewide BPAs (this does not
               apply to lab equipment); and

           (f) Ensuring that Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices support and participate
               in the enterprise configuration and change management (ENTCCM) change
               advisory boards (CAB).

  d.   The ENTCCM CAB will:

       (1) Focus on the change and configuration management for USDA enterprisewide end
           user management. Assist in the maintenance, stability, reliability, and performance
           of the infrastructure and applications; and

       (2) Carefully identify, analyze, plan, manage, test, and document ongoing changes at
           the USDA enterprise and Mission Area, agency, or staff office levels to minimize
           the possibility of any changes negatively impacting the performance or availability
           of the enterprise system.


7. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  a.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are required to conform to this
       policy; however, if a specific policy requirement cannot be met as explicitly stated,
       Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may submit a waiver request by an individual
       or for a functional group, such as Meat Inspector. Submit waiver requests by email to
       the Category Management Team (SM.OCIO.CIO.Category.Management@usda.gov)
       with “DR 3170” in the subject line. In the body of the email, present a brief explanation
       of the violation and explain how a waiver will help business continue.

  b.   All appropriate OCIO offices will have the opportunity to comment and provide
       recommendations prior to the CIO’s final decision.

  c.   Unless otherwise specified, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will review and
       renew approved policy waivers every fiscal year. Approved waivers for specialized
       equipment with a continuing need will be tracked on an approved list. The CEC ACIO
       will monitor waivers and provide recommendations for waivers to this policy to the
       CIO.




                                              6
8. INQUIRIES

  Direct all questions concerning this DR by email to the Category Management Team
  (SM.OCIO.CIO.Category.Management@usda.gov) with “DR 3170” in the subject line.


                                       -END-




                                          7
                               APPENDIX A

                   ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ACIO      Associate Chief Information Officer
ARM       Application Reference Model
BPA       Blanket Purchase Agreement
CAB       Change Advisory Board
CEC       Client Experience Center (OCIO component)
CIO       Chief Information Officer
CPIC      Capital Planning and Investment Control
DR        Departmental Regulation
ENTCCM    Enterprise Configuration and Change Management
FAR       Federal Acquisition Regulation
FEAF v2   Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework, Version 2
FISMA     Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014
ICS       Industrial Control Systems
IPv6      Internet Protocol Version 6
IRM       Infrastructure Reference Model
IT        Information Technology
NIST      National Institute of Standards and Technology
OCIO      Office of the Chief Information Officer
OMB       Office of Management and Budget
SP        Special Publication
U.S.C.    United States Code
USDA      United States Department of Agriculture




                                    A-1
                                           APPENDIX B

                                          DEFINITIONS


Application Reference Model (ARM). A categorization of different types of software,
components, and interfaces. It includes software that supports or may be customized to support
business. It does not include operating systems or software used to operate hardware (e.g.,
firmware) because these are contained in the IRM. (Source: FEAF v2)

Common Criteria. This governing document provides a comprehensive, rigorous method for
specifying security function and assurance requirements for products and systems. (Source:
NIST, SP 800-53 r5)

Infrastructure Reference Model (IRM). The framework and taxonomy-based reference model
for categorizing IT infrastructure and the facilities that host and contain the IT infrastructure.
(Source: FEAF v2)

Workstation. A desktop computer, a mobile device—such as a laptop computer, mobile phone,
or tablet—or another computer or device that accesses the USDA network. (Source: NIST, SP
800-82 r2, Guide to Industrial Control Systems (ICS) Security)




                                                B-1
                                       APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, 40 U.S.C. § 11101 et seq., February 10, 1996

The Common Approach to Federal Enterprise Architecture, May 2, 2012

Digital Government: Building a 21st Century Platform to Better Serve the American People,
May 23, 2012

E-Government Act of 2002, 44 U.S.C § 3601, December 17, 2002

Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) § 13.303, Blanket purchase agreements (BPAs)

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. § 3551 et seq.,
December 18, 2014

NIST, SP 800-53 r5, Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations,
Revision 5, September 2020, includes updates as of December 10, 2020

NIST, SP 800-82 r2, Guide to Industrial Control Systems (ICS) Security, Revision 2, May 2015

OMB, Circular A-11, Preparation, Submission, and Execution of the Budget, August 2022

OMB, Circular A-119, Federal Participation in the Development and Use of Voluntary
Consensus Standards and in Conformity Assessment Activities, Revised, January 27, 2016

OMB, Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource, Revised, July 28, 2016

OMB, Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework, Version 2 (FEAF v2), January 29, 2013

OMB, M-00-10, OMB Procedures and Guidance on Implementing the Government Paperwork
Elimination Act, April 25, 2000

OMB, M-05-22, Transition Planning for Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6), August 2, 2005

OMB, M-11-29, Chief Information Officer Authorities, August 8, 2011

OMB, M-12-10, Implementing PortfolioStat, March 30, 2012

OMB, M-17-26, Reducing Burden for Federal Agencies by Rescinding and Modifying OMB
Memoranda, June 15, 2017

USDA, DR 3180-001, Information Technology Standards, January 5, 2021



                                             C-1
