                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                 NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                         DR 3300-001-E
                                                        DATE:
 SUBJECT: Video Teleconferencing Facilities and Systems January 4, 2023
 OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer, Client   EXPIRATION DATE:
 Experience Center                                      January 4, 2028



Section                                                                                     Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                   1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                        1
3.   Scope                                                                                     2
4.   Background                                                                                2
5.   Policy                                                                                    2
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                                4
7.   Confidentiality and Security                                                              5
8.   Inquiries                                                                                 5

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                      A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                     B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                      C-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of Agriculture
     (USDA) policy for the acquisition, management, and use of unclassified video teleconference
     (VTC) facilities and systems.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATONS

     a.   This DR supersedes DR 3300-001-E, Video Teleconferencing, dated March 23, 1999.

     b.   This DR is effective as of the publication date and will remain in effect until superseded
          or expiration.
3. SCOPE

  a.   This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, contractors, data
       centers, cooperative partners, employees, and others working for, or on behalf of,
       USDA.

  b.   This DR applies to unclassified VTC (e.g., VTC devices and VTC infrastructure).

  c.   This DR excludes USDA devices signage, Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP),
       Desktop, and Mobile devices.

  d.   This DR does not apply to web conferencing and software applications such as Cisco
       Bridging, Microsoft Teams, Zoom, and Cisco Webex.

  e.   This DR does not apply to the transmission of classified national security information
       and related VTC capabilities.


4. BACKGROUND

  The procurement and management of USDA telecommunications devices and services
  depends on and is derived from the rules and regulations promulgated by Congress and the
  Executive Office of the President. VTC permits USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
  offices to have live exchanges of information without the lost time and high cost of traveling
  to attend a face-to-face meeting in a distant city. VTC offers many beneficial applications
  including training and distance learning, data collaboration, telecommuting, large and small
  meetings, and informational broadcasts. In our current environment where teleworking is a
  regular occurrence, VTC provides real-time collaboration.


5. POLICY

  a.   The General Services Administration (GSA) provides the contracting vehicles that
       support VTC. The Mandatory Enterprise Infrastructure Solutions (EIS) Long Distance
       Network requires the use of the GSA mandatory Enterprise Infrastructure Solutions
       contract by Federal agencies for long-distance telecommunications services. These
       services include inbound and outbound VTC, which USDA Mission Areas, agencies, or
       staff offices must continue to use. All unclassified VTC systems must use EIS long-
       distance network services for inbound and outbound transmission unless the Mission
       Area, agency, or staff office has been granted an exception by the GSA and the Chief
       Information Officer (CIO).

  b.   USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will ensure that new or existing
       telecommunications devices and services are aligned in accordance with DR 3130-010,
       USDA Enterprise Information Technology Governance, and the USDA Integrated
       Information Technology Governance Framework (IITGF).



                                               2
c.   Unclassified VTC systems being considered for acquisition must comply with the
     standards requirements of DR 4030-001, Section 508 Program, and DR 3520-002,
     Configuration Management.

d.   USDA requires consideration of the shared use of existing USDA or other Federal
     Government agency VTC facilities as an economic alternative for meeting Mission
     Area, agency, or staff office requirements (see DR 3300-001-G, Sharing of
     Telecommunications Resources).

e.   USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will maintain a comprehensive
     inventory of telecommunications devices and services, which is reviewed and
     revalidated quarterly (see DR 3300-001, Telecommunications & Internet Services and
     Use, and DR 3300-020, Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer [TMACO]
     Roles and Responsibilities, Section 6d). When devices and services are determined to
     no longer be needed in current configurations, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices
     will reallocate them for other approved uses, discontinue services, or dispose of devices
     through established procedures.

f.   Where shared facilities exist and Mission Area, agency, or staff office requirements are
     such that interagency sharing of these facilities is not feasible, the Mission Area, agency,
     or staff office may seek a waiver in order to acquire new equipment and facilities by
     submitting a proposal to the CIO. The proposal must:

     (1) Specify the Mission Area’s, agency’s, or staff office’s requirements;

     (2) Describe security measures;

     (3) Describe the proposed system and ensure compliance with current USDA platform
         standards and policies;

     (4) Provide a benefit and cost analysis to demonstrate the cost effectiveness of the
         proposed facility arrangement; and

     (5) Identify how the equipment and system will be procured and managed.

     Approval for acquisition of new facilities or equipment by Office of the Chief
     Information Officer (OCIO) customers will be granted by submitting request to the
     Client Experience Center (CEC) via email at OCIO-CEC-VTC-PD@usda.gov.




                                              3
6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA CIO will:

       (1) Review Mission Area, agency, or staff office proposals and requests and issue
           waivers, if justified, to acquire video teleconferencing facilities where shared
           facilities exist and Mission Area, agency, or staff office requirements are such that
           interagency sharing of these facilities is not feasible or proposed new facilities do
           not meet the basic standards and requirements of this policy;

       (2) Represent the USDA to the Federal CIO Council, GSA, and OMB regarding
           requests for exceptions to mandatory telecommunications services contracts; and

       (3) Represent the USDA to oversight agencies, such as Office of Management and
           Budget (OMB), Government Accountability Office (GAO), Department of
           Homeland Security (DHS), Department of Commerce (DOC), and Federal
           Communications Commission (FCC) on telecommunications-related issues.

  b.   The Associate Chief Information Officer, CEC, will:

       (1) Review Mission Area, agency, and staff office proposals and requests and provide
           recommendations to the CIO;

       (2) Develop, maintain a USDA VTC Facility Directory of location addresses and
           contacts for all business video conference studio and portable facilities; and

       (3) Implement and execute the necessary internal controls to proactively and regularly
           monitor, measure, audit, report, and enforce compliance with the provisions of this
           directive.

  c.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Heads will:

       (1) Coordinate the use of existing USDA or other Federal agency video
           teleconferencing facilities listed in the USDA VTC Facility Directory; and

       (2) Conform to USDA VTC policies as found in this DR.

  d.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office TMACOs will maintain a comprehensive
       inventory of telecommunications devices and services.




                                               4
7. CONFIDENTIALITY AND SECURITY

  a.   Adequate security must be provided by the Mission Areas, agencies, or staff offices or
       all sensitive information (as defined in DR 3140-001, USDA Information Systems
       Security Policy).

  b.   VTC users will conform to the call recording, monitoring, and consent requirements and
       restrictions of DR 1710-001, Interception and Monitoring of Telephone and Non-
       telephone Conversation, and applicable Federal and state laws.

  c.   The requirements for the transmission of classified national security information and
       related VTC capabilities are provided in DR 3300-015, Secure Communication Systems,
       and Departmental Manual (DM) 3300-015, Secure Communication Systems.


8. INQUIRIES

  USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should direct questions and inquiries
  regarding this DR via email at OCIO-CEC-VTC-PD@usda.gov.


                                           -END-




                                              5
                                APPENDIX A

                    ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


CEC         Client Experience Center (an OCIO component)
CIO         Chief Information Officer
DHS         Department of Homeland Security
DM          Departmental Manual
DOC         Department of Commerce
DR          Departmental Regulation
EIS         Enterprise Infrastructure Solutions
FCC         Federal Communications Commission
GAO         Government Accountability Office
GSA         General Services Administration
IITGF       Integrated Information Technology Governance Framework
InterLATA   Inter-Local Access and Transport Area
LATA        Local Access and Transport Area
OCIO        Office of the Chief Information Officer
OMB         Office of Management and Budget
TMACO       Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer
USDA        United States Department of Agriculture
VoIP        Voice over Internet Protocol
VTC         Video Teleconference




                                     A-1
                                         APPENDIX B

                                        DEFINITIONS


Enterprise Infrastructure Solutions (EIS). The GSA contracted the Governmentwide InterLATA
telecommunications network for long-distance services. Its use is mandatory for all Federal
agencies, unless an exception to use services from another network is granted by GSA and
OCIO. The services provided by the contract include voice, data, and video to all 50 states, the
District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, Midway, Guam, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.

Inter-Local Access and Transport Area (InterLATA). As applied to EIS network services, a
telecommunications transmission between two or more locations that are in different Local
Access and Transport Areas (LATA).

Video Teleconference (VTC). A video communication session among three or more participants
that are geographically separated. This form of conferencing started with room systems where
groups of people meet in a room with a wide-angle camera and large monitors and conference
with other groups at remote locations. Federal, state, and local governments are making major
investments in group video conferencing for distance learning and telemedicine.




                                              B-1
                                        APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


GSA, EIS, Enterprise Infrastructure Solutions website, The Mandatory Enterprise Infrastructure
Contract, September 12, 2022

USDA, DM 3300-015, Secure Communication Systems, November 15, 2021

USDA, DR 1710-001, Interception and Monitoring of Telephone and Non-telephone
Conversations, February 6, 1984

USDA, DR 3130-010, United States Department of Agriculture Enterprise Information
Technology Governance, April 20, 2021

USDA, DR 3140-001, USDA Information Systems Security Policy, May 15, 1996

USDA, DR 3300-001, Telecommunications & Internet Services and Use, March 18, 2016

USDA, DR 3300-001-G, Sharing of Telecommunications Resources, September 12, 2019

USDA, DR 3300-015, Secure Communication Systems, March 22, 2022

USDA, DR 3300-020, Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer Roles and
Responsibilities, July 12, 2019

USDA, DR 3520-002, Configuration Management, July 17, 2019

USDA, DR 4030-001, Section 508 Program, September 8, 2014

USDA, Integrated Information Technology Governance Framework (IITGF) web page

USDA, OCIO, CEC, USDA VTC Facility Directory, unpublished, maintained by OCIO-CEC




                                             C-1
