                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                      NUMBER:
       DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                        DR 3300-001-A
     SUBJECT: Procuring and Managing Telecommunications               DATE:
     Devices and Services                                             August 25, 2020
     OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer, Digital            EXPIRATION DATE:
     Infrastructure Services Center, Enterprise Network Services      August 25, 2025



Section                                                                                      Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                 1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                      1
3.   Scope                                                                                   2
4.   Background                                                                              2
5.   Policy                                                                                  3
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                              3
7.   Compliance                                                                              6
8.   Policy Exceptions                                                                       6
9.   Inquiries                                                                               6

APPENDIX A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                      A-1
APPENDIX B – Definitions                                                                     B-1
APPENDIX C – Authorities and References                                                      C-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes United States Department of Agriculture
     (USDA) policy for the procurement and management of USDA telecommunications devices
     and services.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     a.   This DR replaces DR 3300-1-A, Long Distance and International Telephone Service,
          dated March 23, 1999, and DR 3300-001-L, Local Telecommunications Services, dated
          March 23, 1999.

     b.   This DR will be in effect until superseded or the expiration date.

     c.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their policies and procedures
       with this DR within 6 months of the publication date.

  d.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may supplement this DR when developing
       their internal guidance. Modifications to the intent or purpose of this DR are not
       allowed. If Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices publish internal guidance that
       supplements this DR, one copy of each supplement will be forwarded to the Office of
       the Chief Information Officer (OCIO), Digital Infrastructure Services Center (DISC),
       Enterprise Network Services (ENS), Organizational Compliance & Controls Branch
       (OCCB) at SM.OCIO.ENS.Policy@usda.gov.


3. SCOPE

  a.   This DR applies to telecommunications devices (e.g., cellular phones, landline phones)
       that are provisioned for use on a third-party network and any associated
       telecommunications services.

  b.   This DR excludes USDA wireless devices (e.g., laptops) that use USDA wireless
       networks.

  c.   This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, contractors, data
       centers, cooperative partners, employees, and others working for, or on behalf of,
       USDA.


4. BACKGROUND

  a.   The procurement and management of USDA telecommunications devices and services
       depends on and is derived from the rules and regulations promulgated by Congress and
       the Executive Office of the President.

  b.   The Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, 40 United States Code (U.S.C.) §§11101 et seq.,
       transferred the authority for the procurement and management of information
       technology (IT) from the General Services Administration (GSA) to the Office of
       Management and Budget (OMB). While no longer having authority for procurement
       and management of IT, GSA retained responsibility for negotiating telecommunications
       devices and services contracts on behalf of the Federal Government. Through this
       authority, and directed by OMB, GSA provides cost-effective solutions to Federal
       Agencies for procuring telecommunications devices and services from GSA contracts.

  c.   OMB directs all Federal Agency Chief Information Officers (CIO) to review cost-
       benefit analyses, National Security System (NSS) requirements, and other substantive
       data when considering agency requests to use a vehicle other than the enterprise
       contracts for telecommunications devices and services.




                                              2
5. POLICY

  a.   GSA provides the contracting vehicles that support the landline and cellular
       telecommunications requirements of the Federal Government. Mission Areas, agencies,
       and staff offices are directed to purchase telecommunications devices and services
       through the GSA enterprise and regional contracting vehicles unless the USDA CIO
       approves the use of an alternative telecommunications contract.

  b.   USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will determine their
       telecommunications requirements prior to procuring telecommunications devices and
       services to ensure the purchase of the appropriate number and types of
       telecommunications resources.

  c.   USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will ensure that new or existing
       telecommunications devices and services are aligned in accordance with the USDA
       Integrated Information Technology Governance Framework (IITGF).

  d.   USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will maintain a comprehensive
       inventory of telecommunications devices and services, which is reviewed and
       revalidated at least every 6 months. When devices and services are determined to no
       longer be needed in current configurations, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices
       will reallocate them for other approved uses, discontinue services, or dispose of devices
       through established procedures.

  e.   USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will ensure that telecommunications
       devices, services, and facilities are fully compliant with DR 4030-001, Section 508
       Program, and accessible to hearing-, speech-, and physically-impaired individuals.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA CIO will:

       (1) Represent the USDA to the Federal CIO Council, GSA, and OMB regarding
           requests for exceptions to mandatory telecommunications services contracts;

       (2) Represent the USDA to oversight agencies, such as OMB, Government
           Accountability Office (GAO), Department of Homeland Security (DHS),
           Department of Commerce (DOC), and Federal Communications Commission
           (FCC) on telecommunications-related issues;

       (3) Respond to oversight agencies with timely and accurate USDA telecommunications
           program and cost information;

       (4) Serve as the USDA liaison with international, inter- and intra-Local Access and
           Transport Area (interLATA and intraLATA) telecommunications service providers;


                                               3
     (5) Serve as the USDA representative to the Diplomatic Telecommunications Service
         Program Office (DTSPO); and

     (6) Perform management and oversight responsibilities in accordance with the Federal
         Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), Public Law (P.L.) 113-
         291, as applicable to this directive.

b.   The ENS Director will:

     (1) Establish procedures for monitoring, measuring, and enforcing compliance with this
         DR;

     (2) Oversee Mission Area, agency, and staff office compliance with USDA
         telecommunications policies and procedures;

     (3) Manage USDA telecommunications services, devices, and facilities in accordance
         with prescribed laws, regulations, standards, and related USDA 3300 Series
         telecommunications management directives;

     (4) Review and render decisions for Mission Area, agency, and staff office policy
         waiver requests;

     (5) Maintain an electronic file of approved waivers;

     (6) Work with Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to eliminate redundant or
         unused services and devices;

     (7) Include telecommunications requirements and initiatives as part of the
         telecommunications planning process;

     (8) Use GSA- and USDA-mandated programs when Mission Area, agency, and staff
         office requirements can be met cost-effectively; and

     (9) Maintain inventories of USDA telecommunications resources to the extent
         necessary to:

         (a) Ensure adequate and appropriate telecommunications resources to support
             Mission Area, agency, and staff office missions;

         (b) Ensure accountability for USDA telecommunications property; and

         (c) Meet Departmental and governmental requests for periodic or special inventory
             reports.

c.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs and Agency and Staff Office IT Directors will:



                                            4
     (1) Ensure Mission Area, agency, and staff office personnel comply with this directive;

     (2) Ensure Mission Area, agency, and staff office internal directives conform to this
         DR’s stated requirements;

     (3) Provide guidance to end users on the appropriate and secure use of Government
         systems-interfacing telecommunications devices;

     (4) Determine their telecommunications requirements prior to procuring
         telecommunications devices and services to ensure the purchase of the appropriate
         number and types of telecommunications resources;

     (5) Ensure that new or existing telecommunications devices and services are aligned in
         accordance with the USDA IITGF;

     (6) Use enterprise telecommunications contracts for Continental United States
         (CONUS) and Outside the Continental United States (OCONUS)
         telecommunications services;

     (7) Establish controls for the strict management and oversight of all non-standard
         options in telecommunications services contracts for which the Government will be
         billed to avoid potential telecommunications fraud and abuse;

     (8) Appoint a Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer (TMACO) to select
         required telecommunications services from GSA program contracts for the agency
         or staff office. More information on this topic can be found in DR 3300-020,
         Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer Roles and Responsibilities;

     (9) Obtain waivers and approvals from the ENS Director when Mission Area, agency,
         and staff office telecommunications requirements cannot be met through mandated
         programs; and

     (10) Maintain inventories of USDA telecommunications resources to the extent
          necessary to:

         (a) Ensure adequate and appropriate telecommunications resources to support the
             agency and staff office mission;

         (b) Ensure accountability for USDA telecommunications property; and

         (c) Meet Departmental and governmental requests for periodic or special inventory
             reports.

d.   The roles and responsibilities for TMACOs are provided in DR 3300-020.




                                            5
7. COMPLIANCE

  a.   DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, Section 16, sets forth
       USDA’s policies, procedures, and standards on employee responsibilities and conduct
       relative to the use of computers and telecommunications equipment. DR 4070-735-001,
       Section 21, states that a violation of any of the responsibilities and conduct standards
       contained in this directive may be cause for disciplinary or adverse action; and

  b.   Such disciplinary or adverse action will be effected in accordance with applicable law
       and regulations such as the Code of Ethics for Government Employees, Office of
       Personnel Management (OPM) regulations, OMB regulations, and Standards of Conduct
       for Federal employees.


8. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  a.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are required to conform to this
       policy. If a specific policy requirement cannot be met as explicitly stated, Mission
       Areas, agencies, and staff offices may submit a waiver request to the ENS Director for
       review and determination. Submit the waiver request to
       SM.OCIO.ENS.Policy@usda.gov. The waiver request will explain the reason for the
       request, identify compensating controls and actions that meet the intent of the policy,
       and identify how the compensating controls and actions provide a similar or greater
       level of defense or compliance than the policy requirement.

  b.   Waivers to stipulations of this directive that have been granted approval by the ENS
       Director and that are associated with a control identified in National Institute of
       Standards and Technology (NIST) Special Publication (SP) 800-53 Revision 4, Security
       and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations, will be
       recorded and tracked as a Plan of Action and Milestones (POA&M) item in the USDA
       Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. §§3551 et
       seq., data management and reporting tool.

  c.   Waivers will expire at the end of the fiscal year or 6 months from the date of approval,
       whichever is longer. Unless otherwise specified, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
       offices will review and renew approved policy waivers every fiscal year.


9. INQUIRIES

  Questions and comments concerning the requirements of this regulation should be
  directed to OCIO, DISC, ENS, OCCB at SM.OCIO.ENS.Policy@usda.gov.


                                            -END-



                                               6
                               APPENDIX A

                   ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


CFR         Code of Federal Regulations
CIO         Chief Information Officer
CONUS       Continental United States
DHS         Department of Homeland Security
DISC        Digital Infrastructure Services Center
DOC         Department of Commerce
DR          Departmental Regulation
DTSPO       Diplomatic Telecommunications Service Program Office
EA          Enterprise Architecture
ENS         Enterprise Network Services
FCC         Federal Communications Commission
FISMA       Federal Information Security Modernization Act
FITARA      Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
GAO         Government Accountability Office
GSA         General Services Administration
IITGF       Integrated Information Technology Governance Framework
InterLATA   Inter-Local Access and Transport
IntraLATA   Intra-Local Access and Transport
IT          Information Technology
NIST        National Institute of Standards and Technology
NSS         National Security System
OCCB        Organizational Compliance & Controls Branch
OCIO        Office of Chief Information Officer
OCONUS      Outside the Continental United States
OMB         Office of Management and Budget
OPM         Office of Personnel Management
P.L.        Public Law
POA&M       Plan of Action and Milestones
SP          Special Publication
TMACO       Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer
U.S.C.      United States Code
USDA        United States Department of Agriculture




                                    A-1
                                      APPENDIX B

                                      DEFINITIONS


a.   Continental United States (CONUS). The 48 contiguous United States and the District
     of Columbia. (Source: Federal Travel Regulation, Glossary of Terms, 41 Code of
     Federal Regulations (CFR) § 300-3.1)

b.   Enterprise Architecture (EA). The description of an enterprise’s entire set of
     information systems: how they are configured, how they are integrated, how they
     interface to the external environment at the enterprise’s boundary, how they are operated
     to support the enterprise mission, and how they contribute to the enterprise’s overall
     security posture. (Source: NIST, Computer Security Resource Center Glossary, August
     14, 2020)

c.   Information Technology (IT). Any services or equipment, or interconnected system(s)
     or subsystem(s) of equipment, that are used in the automatic acquisition, storage,
     analysis, evaluation, manipulation, management, movement, control, display, switching,
     interchange, transmission, or reception of data or information by the agency where such
     services or equipment are “used by an agency” if used by the agency directly or if used
     by a contractor under a contract with the agency that requires either use of the services
     or equipment or requires use of the services or equipment to a significant extent in the
     performance of a service or the furnishing of a product. The term “information
     technology” includes computers, ancillary equipment, peripheral equipment designed to
     be controlled by the central processing unit of a computer, software, firmware, and
     similar procedures, services, and related resources. (Source: OMB M-15-14,
     Management and Oversight of Federal Information Technology, June 10, 2015)

d.   Inter-Local Access and Transport (InterLATA). A telecommunications transmission
     between two or more locations that are in different Local Access and Transport Areas.

e.   Intra-Local Access and Transport (IntraLATA). A telecommunications transmission
     between two or more locations that are in the same Local Access and Transport Areas.

f.   Non-Foreign Area. The states of Alaska and Hawaii, the Commonwealths of Puerto
     Rico and the Northern Mariana Islands, Guam, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and the
     territories and possessions of the United States (excludes the former Trust Territories of
     the Pacific Islands, which are considered foreign areas for the purposes of the Federal
     Travel Regulation). (Source: Federal Travel Regulation, Glossary of Terms, 41 CFR
     §300-3.1)

g.   Outside the Continental United States (OCONUS). See Non-Foreign Area.

h.   Telecommunications. Preparation, transmission, communication, or related processing
     of information (writing, images, sounds, or other data) by electrical, electromagnetic,



                                            B-1
     electromechanical, electro-optical, or electronic means. (Source: NIST, Computer
     Security Resource Center Glossary, August 14, 2020)

i.   Telecommunications Services. The services and solutions that deliver or augment
     communications between users up to and including interstate and international
     communications. Telecommunications services refer to communications services or
     solutions specified as a discrete offering or set of capabilities.




                                          B-2
                                       APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, 40 U.S.C. §§11101 et seq., February 10, 1996

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. §§3551 et seq.,
December 18, 2014

Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), P.L. 113-291, 128 Stat.
3292, Title VIII, Subtitle D, §§831-837, December 19, 2014

Federal Travel Regulation, Glossary of Terms, 41 CFR § 300-3.1

NIST, Computer Security Resource Center Glossary

NIST, SP 800-53 Revision 4, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems
and Organizations, April 2013

OMB, M-15-14, Management and Oversight of Federal Information Technology, June 10, 2015

USDA, DR 3300-020, Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer Roles and
Responsibilities, July 12, 2019

USDA, DR 4030-001, Section 508 Program, September 8, 2014

USDA, DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007

USDA, Integrated Information Technology Governance Framework (IITGF)

USDA, 3300 Series Telecommunications Management Directives




                                            C-1
