                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                             NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                     DR 3300-001-J
                                                             DATE:
 SUBJECT: Emergency Communications Programs                  March 17, 2021
                                                             EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of Homeland Security
                                                             March 17, 2026



Section                                                                               Page

1.   Purpose                                                                             1
2.   Scope                                                                               2
3.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                  2
4.   Policy                                                                              2
5.   Communications Systems and Services                                                 3
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                          4
7.   Penalties and Disciplinary Actions for Non-Compliance                               8
8.   Policy Exceptions                                                                   8
9.   Inquiries                                                                           8

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                               B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                C-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.   This Departmental Regulation (DR) defines the requirements for the management and
          use of Emergency Communications Systems within the United States Department of
          Agriculture (USDA).

     b.   This policy ensures that USDA’s emergency responders and key officials can continue
          to communicate in the event of natural disasters, acts of terrorism, and man-made
          disasters by maintaining interoperable emergency communication systems. USDA will
          leverage Federally-managed enterprise capabilities to assist in meeting emergency
          communications.
2. SCOPE

  a.   This DR applies to all USDA Federal employees, and any category of non-Federal
       person who performs duties in partnership with or on behalf of USDA, such as a
       consultant, contractor, advisor, volunteer, student, or intern.

  b.   This policy applies to all communications systems used to support critical functions
       performed by the Department.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This policy supersedes DR 3300-001-J, National Security and Emergency Preparedness
       Telecommunications, dated March 23, 1999, in its entirety.

  b.   This policy is effective immediately when published and will remain in effect until it is
       superseded or expires.

  c.   All USDA agencies will align processes, procedures, and any applicable policies with
       this DR within 6 months of the publication date, reviewing and updating them as needed
       annually thereafter.

  d.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must align their policies and procedures
       with this DR within 6 months of the publication date. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
       offices that are in an agreement or contract that goes beyond 6 months may request a
       waiver from the Director, Office of Homeland Security (OHS) to delay compliance until
       the existing agreement ends.


4. POLICY

  a.   The OHS is the primary office within USDA assigned to manage access to Interagency
       Enterprise Level Emergency Communications Programs.

  b.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices that need access to emergency
       communications platforms and/or services must request support through the OHS
       National Security Systems Program (NSSP).

  c.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will utilize Federal partner or Departmental
       Enterprise Emergency Communications Systems prior to subscribing to or developing
       another service. Approval by the Chief Security Director, Office of Safety, Security and
       Protection (OSSP) and the USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO), Office of the Chief
       Information Office (OCIO) is required prior to the acquisition of any new system.

  d.   Personnel who support essential activities, emergency response, and continuity
       operations will be provided Government Emergency Telecommunications Service



                                                 2
       (GETS), Wireless Priority Service (WPS), and/or FirstNet service as required to
       complete their assigned duties.

  e.   Personnel provided emergency communications devices or capabilities must participate
       in routine and emergency testing of services. Failure to comply with testing programs
       for two or more consecutive testing periods may result in cancellation of services.

  f.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices who operate communications systems utilized
       for essential activities or emergency response must order Telecommunications Service
       Priority (TSP) for critical circuits supporting the system.

  g.   Departmental level continuity facilities will employ all required communications
       capabilities prescribed in accordance with White House Office of Science and
       Technology (OSTP)/Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Directive 16-1,
       Minimum Communications Requirements for Federal Executive Branch Continuity
       Communications Capabilities (OSTP/OMB D 16-1) and participate in all required
       interagency testing programs.

  h.   The alternate and devolution sites for Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must
       have, at a minimum, the following capabilities:

       (1) Satellite telephone with a fixed external antenna;

       (2) Fax machine, utilizing an analog telephone line;

       (3) Secure telephone, keyed at the appropriate classification level to support their
           operations and reporting status, but minimally keyed for unclassified
           communications;

       (4) Alternate power supply/generator that provides backup power for critical facility
           infrastructure (lights, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning) and communication
           systems; and;

       (5) Active TSP codes assigned for all mission critical data and voice communication
           circuits.


5. COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS AND SERVICES

  a.   OHS is the primary office within USDA assigned to manage access to interagency
       enterprise level emergency communications programs.

       (1) TSP is available on telecommunications circuits used to support any Primary
           Mission Essential Function (PMEF), Mission Essential Function (MEF), Essential
           Supporting Activity (ESA), and other functions that have been determined critical
           to USDA’s ability to effectively perform its mission;



                                                 3
       (2) GETS and WPS services are available for personnel who support USDA critical
           and emergency functions who require priority services during periods with
           degraded or saturated telecommunications services;

       (3) FirstNet communications are employed as appropriate to assist first responders, key
           Departmental continuity personnel, and others supporting critical and emergency
           functions; and

       (4) Shared Resources (SHARES) High Frequency (HF) Radio Program, is a
           communications system that supports national security and emergency preparedness
           operations when traditional landline and cellular communications are unavailable.

  b.   OSSP is the primary office within USDA assigned to manage Departmental Enterprise
       Level Emergency Notification Systems.

       (1) One or more Emergency Notification systems processes are available to provide
           urgent notifications to Departmental personnel at the USDA Headquarters level in
           the National Capital Region.

       (2) Regional and local field offices are encouraged to leverage the enterprise system or
           utilize a comparable process/system to ensure that all staff can receive urgent
           notifications for their area.

  c.   OHS and OCIO are responsible for ensuring that the minimum continuity
       communications requirements for Federal Executive Departments and Agencies outlined
       in OSTP/OMB D 16-1 are met.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Director of OHS will:

       (1) Ensure that emergency communication guidance is available to Departmental
           Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices;

       (2) Coordinate with OCIO and OSSP to provide a Departmental Enterprise Emergency
           Notification System; and

       (3) Provide guidance, direction, and oversight for USDA’s participation with Federal
           partner-provided emergency communications systems and services.

  b.   The USDA CIO will:

       (1) Assist OHS with the management and validation of communication circuits
           enrolled in the TSP program;



                                                4
     (2) Coordinate with OHS on enterprise level communications support contracts to
         ensure that emergency support capabilities are evaluated;

     (3) Assist the OHS with the operation, maintenance, and testing of all of the
         Department’s primary alternate location and devolution site’s Memorandum of
         Understanding; and

     (4) Coordinate with system owners to ensure that the communication systems approved
         to operate within the Department have adequate disaster recovery plans

     (5) Ensure Departmental communications portfolio management implementation of all
         emergency communications systems;

     (6) Assist Mission Area Assistant CIOs and agency site support personnel with
         implementation of emergency communication requirements.

c.   The Director of OSSP will:

     (1) Serve as the Office of Primary Responsibility for the Departmental enterprise level
         Emergency Notification System;

     (2) Manage the selection and implementation of a Departmental Emergency
         Notification System;

     (3) Coordinate with the OCIO to determine an appropriate information technology
         infrastructure that provides an acceptable level of resiliency for the Departmental
         Emergency Notification System; and

     (4) Coordinate with agencies and staff office to ensure that they have the capability to
         develop and implement procedures to meet their respective notification
         requirements.

d.   The OHS NSSP Manager will:

     (1) Manage USDA’s GETS/WPS Program;

         (a) Serve as the USDA office approving, denying, and managing subscriptions;

         (b) Train USDA personnel on the GETS/WPS program, including official use
             policy;

         (c) Represent USDA at interagency meetings/discussions; and

         (d) Track the USDA official’s conduct of quarterly GETS/WPS testing.




                                               5
(2) Manage USDA’s TSP Program;

    (a) Serve as the focal point for managing TSP codes;

    (b) Advise Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officers of TSP code
        assignment by DHS; and

    (c) Coordinate with validation with DHS for TSP code validations assignments
        accordance with OSTP/OMB D 16-1.

(3) Serve as the Agency Point of Contact (POC) for the FirstNet Program;

    (a) Define personnel eligibility requirements for the following two service
        categories:

        1    Primary Users

             a    Sworn law enforcement officials.

             b    Fire fighting officials.

             c    Departmental level continuity officials.

        2    Support Users

             a    Public health officials.

             b    Select agency and staff office continuity officials.

             c    Designated on-call personnel that support “Primary Users” when
                  activated.

             d    Other personnel and/or devices that support USDAs critical response
                  efforts during an emergency.

    (b) Manage the process to elevate “Support Users” to “Primary Users” when
        operations dictate.

    (c) Establish procedures to request support from the FirstNet service provider for
        service. Process should include instructions for both preplanned events and
        emergency events that require additional communication support.

    (d) Coordinate with OCIO, users, and application providers to ensure that
        applications used on FirstNet have an authority to operate and an assigned
        application manager if required.




                                             6
              Note: Several applications have been developed, reviewed, and certified to
              operate on the FirstNet infrastructure. Most of these applications are not
              FirstNet applications but are approved to operate on FirstNet devices. Many of
              these applications have restrictions based on multiple factors as to who can
              access the application. Users must request access to restricted applications
              from the application manager.

         (e) Coordinate with OCIO and the Procurement Operations Division to maintain a
             contract to procure FirstNet.

     (4) Manage USDA’s compliance with OSTP/OMB Directive 16-1;

         (a) Represent USDA at Continuity Communications Manager Group meetings;

         (b) Ensure that USDA maintains required systems and user proficiency;

         (c) Manage USDA’s compliance with Interagency Testing Programs;

              1    Coordinate testing for Departmental level continuity sites.

              2    Respond to testing results.

     (5) Manage the receipt and internal handling and distribution of the interagency
         Continuity Communications Plan.

e.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Heads will:

     (1) Coordinate emergency communications needs with OHS;

     (2) Identify an appropriate number of POCs to manage their organization’s GETS/WPS
         subscriptions;

     (3) Coordinate with OHS to manage their TSP codes for telecommunications circuits
         requiring priority restoration services; and

     (4) Designate an appropriate number of POCs to manage their organization’s FirstNet
         subscriptions and any USDA developed application(s).

f.   Authorized users will:

     (1) Order and cancel service for emergency communications as changes occur;

     (2) Report the loss, theft, or damage to any emergency communications equipment;

     (3) Participate in testing as requested; and




                                                 7
       (4) Utilize priority services only when operationally necessary, for training or testing
           purposes.


7. PENALTIES AND DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS FOR NON-COMPLIANCE

  DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, Section 16, sets forth the
  USDA’s policies, procedures, and standards on employee responsibilities and conduct
  relative to the use of computers and telecommunications equipment. In addition, DR 4070-
  735-001, Section 21, Disciplinary or Adverse Action, states:

  a.   A violation of any of the responsibilities and conduct standards contained in this
       directive may be cause for disciplinary or adverse action; and

  b.   Disciplinary or adverse action will be effective in accordance with applicable laws and
       regulations.


8. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  a.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are required to conform to this
       policy. However, in the event that a specific policy requirement cannot be met as
       explicitly stated, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may submit a waiver request.

  b.    The waiver request must explain the reason for the request, identify compensating
       security controls and actions that meet the intent of the policy, and identify how the
       compensating controls and actions provide a similar or greater level of defense or
       compliance than the policy requirement.

  c.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will address all policy waiver request
       memoranda to the OHS Director and submit the request to OHSEC-NSSP-
       SupportTeam@usda.gov for review and determination.


9. INQUIRIES

  All questions regarding this DR should be directed to the USDA NSSP Support Team at
  OHSEC-NSSP-SupportTeam@usda.gov.


                                            -END-




                                                 8
                         APPENDIX A

              ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


CIO     Chief Information Officer
DR      Departmental Regulation
ESA     Essential Supporting Activity
GETS    Government Emergency Telecommunications Service
HF      High Frequency
MEF     Mission Essential Function
NEF     National Essential Function
NS/EP   National Security/Emergency Preparedness
NSSP    National Security Systems Program
OCIO    Office of the Chief Information Officer
OHS     Office of Homeland Security
OMB     Office of Management and Budget
OSSP    Office of Safety, Security and Protection
OSTP    Office of Science and Technology
PMEF    Primary Mission Essential Function
POC     Point of Contact
TSP     Telecommunications Service Priority
WPS     Wireless Priority Service
USDA    United States Department of Agriculture




                              A-1
                                          APPENDIX B

                                          DEFINITIONS


Alternate Locations: Fixed, mobile, or transportable locations, other than the headquarters
facility, where D/A leadership and continuity personnel relocate in order to perform essential
functions following activation of the continuity plan. These include locations to which agency
leadership may devolve. These locations refer to not only locations sites but also work
arrangements such as telework and mobile work. (Source: FCD-1)

Communications: Voice, video, and data capabilities that enable organizational leadership and
staff to assure performance of essential functions. Robust communications enable leadership to
receive coordinated and integrated policy and operational advice and recommendations. This
provides government organizations and the private sector the ability to communicate internally
and with other entities (including with other Federal organizations, SLTT governments, and the
private sector) as necessary to perform essential functions. (Source: FCD-1)

Continuity: The ability to provide uninterrupted services and support, while maintaining
organizational viability, before, during, and after an event that disrupts normal operations.
(Source: FCD-1)

Critical Functions: A function that is necessary to the agency being able to effectively perform
and maintain control of its mission and operations.

Devolution: The transfer of statutory authority and responsibility from an organization’s primary
operating staff and facilities to other staff and alternate locations to sustain essential functions
when necessary. (Source: FCD-1)

Emergency Functions: is the grouping of governmental and certain private sector capabilities
into an organizational structure to provide support, resources, program implementation, and
services that are most likely needed to save lives, protect property and the environment, restore
essential services and critical infrastructure, and help victims and communities return to normal
following incidents

Essential Functions: A subset of government functions that are determined to be critical
activities. These essential functions are then used to identify supporting tasks and resources that
must be included in the organization’s continuity planning process. In this FCD, the term
“essential functions” refers to those functions an organization must continue in a continuity
situation, whether the functions are MEFs, PMEFs, or ESAs. (Source: FCD-1)

FirstNet: FirstNet is an independent authority within the U.S. Department of Commerce.
Authorized by Congress in 2012, its mission is to develop, build and operate the nationwide,
broadband network that equips first responders to save lives and protect U.S. communities.




                                                  B-1
Government Emergency Telecommunications Service (GETS): The Government Emergency
Telecommunications Service (GETS) supports national leadership; federal, state, local, tribal,
and territorial governments; first responders; and other authorized national security and
emergency preparedness (NS/EP) users. It is intended to be used in an emergency or crisis when
the landline network is congested and the probability of completing a normal call is reduced.
(Source: www.cisa.gov)

Mission Essential Functions (MEFs): The essential functions directly related to accomplishing
an organization’s mission as set forth in statutory or executive charter. Generally, MEFs are
unique to each organization. (Source: FCD-1)

Primary Mission Essential Functions (PMEFs): Those mission essential functions
that must be continuously performed to support or implement the uninterrupted
performance of NEFs. (Source: OSTP/OMD D16-1)

Telecommunications Service Priority (TSP): TSP is a program that authorizes national security
and emergency preparedness (NS/EP) organizations to receive priority treatment for vital voice
and data circuits or other telecommunications services. (Source: www.cisa.gov)

Wireless Priority Service (WPS): WPS supports national leadership; federal, state, local, tribal,
and territorial governments; and other authorized national security and emergency preparedness
(NS/EP) users. It is intended to be used in an emergency or crisis when the wireless network is
congested and the probability of completing a normal call is reduced. (Source: www.cisa.gov)




                                                 B-2
                                       APPENDIX C

                           AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007

Federal Continuity Directive 1, Federal Executive Branch National Continuity Program and
Requirements, January 17, 2017

OSTP/OMB D-16-1, Minimum Requirements for Federal Executive Branch Continuity
Communications Capabilities, Dec 15, 2016
(This document is FOUO and personnel wishing to review it should contact OHS NSSP at
OHSEC-NSSP-SupportTeam@usda.gov or CPD Office cpd@usda.gov)

United States Code, Title 6, Subchapter XIII Part 571-576 Emergency Communications,
November 16, 2018




                                              C-1
