                             U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                   WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                              Number:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION 3300-025
                                                              DATE:
                                                              March 18, 2016
      SUBJECT: Secure Domain Name System                      OPI:
                                                              Office of the Chief Information
                                                              Officer, Enterprise Network
                                                              Services



Section                                                                                  Page

1.   Purpose                                                                             1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                  1
3.   Policy                                                                              2
4.   Compliance and Internal Controls                                                    5
5.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                          7
6.   Policy Exceptions                                                                   8
7.   Inquiries                                                                           8

APPENDIX A Definitions                                                                   A-1
APPENDIX B Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                    B-1
APPENDIX C Authorities and References                                                    C-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the minimum requirements for implementing
     Domain Name System (DNS) and Domain Name System Security Extensions (DNSSEC)
     services across all United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) networks.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     a.   This DR applies to USDA agencies, staff offices, employees, and contractors
          responsible for operating and managing DNS equipment and services.

     b.   For any DNS standards not addressed in this policy, refer to the following guidance
          documents for additional direction and information: Domain Name System (DNS)
          Security Reference Architecture, Version 1.0; National Institute of Standards and
          Technology (NIST) Special Publication (SP) 800-81-2, Secure Domain Name System
       (DNS) Deployment Guide; NIST SP 800-57 Revision 1, Recommendation for Key
       Management, Part 3: Application-Specific Key Management Guidance; Federal
       Information Processing Standards (FIPS) Publication (PUB) 140-2, Security
       Requirements for Cryptographic Modules; and FIPS PUB 186-4, Digital
       Signature Standard (DSS).

  c.   This policy complies with the statuatory responsibilities identified in the Federal
       Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. § 3541, et seq.

  d.   This policy adheres to the requirements established in the Office of Management and
       Budget (OMB) Circular A-130, Appendix III, Security of Federal Automated
       Information Resources and Appendix IV, Analysis of Key Sections.


3. POLICY

  a.   General Guidance

       The following guidance applies to all DNS servers, including USDA enterprise DNS
       servers and agency and staff office administered DNS servers:

       (1) DNS servers shall meet all criteria defined in this policy and must be registered
           with the USDA Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO), Enterprise
           Network Services (ENS) Directorate and the Agriculture Security Operations
           Center (ASOC) in order to operate as a public facing name server.

       (2) The DNS roles of authoritative name server and recursive caching name server shall
           be separate. If these roles cannot be separate, an additional statement describing the
           configuration must be included with the information submitted for registration and
           USDA Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) authorization.

       (3) In order to comply with OMB, Department of Homeland Security (DHS), and NIST
           guidance, the USDA enterprise DNS solution shall:

            (a) Conform with DHS’s Trusted Internet Connections Reference Architecture
                Document, Version 2.0 for DNS solutions;

            (b) Provide a DNS service that can be offered to USDA agencies and staff offices;
                and

            (c) Comply with relevant NIST, OMB, FIPS, and DHS standards, guidelines, and
                other processes and controls identified in this policy.




                                                 2
b.   USDA Enterprise DNS Services

     ENS shall implement, operate, and manage the USDA enterprise DNS solution. This
     solution shall fully interoperate (without errors) with the Trusted Internet Connections
     (TICs) and the USDA enterprise network.

c.   Public Facing Authoritative Name Servers

     Public facing authoritative name servers shall:

     (1) Prohibit recursive queries from external clients;

     (2) Implement DNSSEC signatures for authentication of zone data as mandated in
         OMB Memorandum M-08-23, Securing the Federal Government’s Domain Name
         System Infrastructure, and in accordance with NIST SP 800-81-2 and NIST SP 800-
         57 Revision 1 for zones classified as external in the context of NIST SP 800-53
         Revision 4, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and
         Organizations;

     (3) Provide DNS services via both Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) and Internet
         Protocol version 6 (IPv6);

     (4) Log queries, access attempts, and provide appropriate audit information to ASOC
         Security Information and Event Management (SIEM) devices, as directed by the
         USDA CISO. These logs shall be transmitted using the system log (syslog)
         protocol, and as official records, be managed in accordance with Information
         Technology and Operations Management (ITOM)-11, ITOM-13, and ITOM-23 of
         the United States Department of Agriculture Record Group 16 File Plan;

     (5) Secure any zone data transferred between name servers using a secure method such
         as Transaction Signatures (TSIG), as discussed in NIST SP 800-81-2, or methods
         providing an equivalent or greater level of data security;

     (6) Use appropriate address match lists for split DNS views, if defined, to properly
         segment queries and zone definitions by relevant security contexts;

     (7) Be configured using the NIST SP 800-81-2 recommended configuration checklist
         as a guideline; and

     (8) Be registered with ENS and ASOC as an authorized USDA public facing
         authoritative server.

d.   Public Facing Recursive Caching Servers

     Public facing recursive caching servers shall:



                                               3
     (1) Restrict recursive queries to internal clients only;

     (2) Attempt DNSSEC validation for all queried names;

     (3) Provide DNS services via both IPv4 and IPv6;

     (4) Log queries, access attempts, and provide appropriate audit information to ASOC
         SIEM devices, as directed by the USDA CISO. The logs should be transmitted in
         syslog format and be retained by the owner of the system for a minimum of 30
         days;

     (5) Provide DNS filtering or security controls such as DNS blackholing, DNS
         blacklisting, DNS firewall services, or other controls as deemed appropriate by the
         USDA CISO;

     (6) Be configured using the NIST SP 800-81-2 recommended configuration checklist
         as a guideline;

     (7) Be registered with ENS and ASOC as authorized USDA public facing recursive
         caching resolvers; and

     (8) Not host authoritative zones, except for the following:

         (a) Locally hosted zones as recommended in the Internet Engineering Task Force
             (IETF) Locally Served DNS Zones, or when necessary to achieve the goals or
             objectives defined in the IETF Special-Use Domain Names;

         (b) Zones hosted in a split view configuration if required by multiple security
             contexts; and

         (c) Zones necessary to implement a security control as required in section 3d(5).

e.   Internal or Private Servers

     Internal or private servers shall:

     (1) Restrict access to internal queries only;

     (2) Forward all unresolvable queries to an authorized public facing recursive caching
         resolver or to an enterprise internal authoritative server;

     (3) Attempt DNSSEC validation for external names and for internal names where
         appropriate;

     (4) Provide DNS services on both IPv4 and IPv6 where possible, as directed by OMB
         mandates and other USDA directives;

                                                4
       (5) Electronically log queries to create an audit trail between the original client query
           and the resolved DNS response, as directed by the agency or staff office Chief
           Information Officers (CIOs) or the USDA CISO; and

       (6) Be configured using the NIST SP 800-81-2 recommended configuration checklist
           as a guideline.

  f.   External or Commercial DNS Servers

       DNS services provided to USDA by external, commercial, or other non-USDA sources
       shall meet the requirements of this policy. External servers hosting public facing USDA
       zones must be approved by the USDA CISO as authorized USDA public facing servers
       and must be included on the authorized USDA DNS server list maintained by ENS.

  g.   External or Public Facing Domains

       DNS domains or zones that are external or public facing only shall be hosted on DNS
       servers that are policy compliant and are authorized USDA public facing servers that
       meet the requirements identified in section 3c.


4. COMPLIANCE AND INTERNAL CONTROLS

  In order to ensure that the requirements of policy statements defined in section 3 are met, the
  following internal controls shall be used:

  a.   Measures to Ensure DNSSEC Compliance

       (1) The ENS Director shall review the weekly DHS National Cybersecurity
           Assessment and Technical Services (NCATS) report detailing issues found with
           USDA second level non-DNSSEC compliant domains.

       (2) Upon determining that a DNS domain is noncompliant through a review of the
           weekly NCATS report or by other means, ENS shall correct all subdomains hosted
           on the enterprise DNS. Agencies and staff offices shall correct any noncompliant
           domains that they host. ENS shall advise and assist agencies and staff offices in
           correcting their noncompliant domains.

       (3) Agency or staff office domains that remain noncompliant after 45 days following
           notification shall require the domain owner to either move the domain to a server
           where it can become DNSSEC compliant, or pursue steps in section 6 to obtain a
           temporary policy exception waiver until the issue can be corrected.




                                                 5
b.   Measures to Track USDA Public Facing Servers

     (1) The ENS Director shall compile and maintain a list of DNS servers that are
         authorized by the USDA CISO as policy compliant USDA public facing DNS
         servers. The data collected to populate the DNS server list not only serves as an
         indicator of the level of compliance, but also provides valuable operational data for
         interactions between the enterprise DNS servers and other authorized DNS servers.

     (2) In order to ensure continued validity of the authorized server list, the ENS Director
         shall coordinate, quarterly, with the ENS or agency technical point of contact
         (POC) or administrative POC, as appropriate, to verify the information is correct for
         a random sample of servers from the list.

     (3) ASOC shall continuously monitor inbound and outbound DNS traffic at the USDA
         network perimeter and identify servers that are sending or receiving DNS queries or
         answers to or from external destinations.

     (4) At the discretion of the USDA CISO, DNS servers not present on the authorized
         public facing server list may be blocked at the USDA perimeter firewall and be
         prevented from sending or receiving DNS messages.

c.   Delegations for Public Facing Zones

     (1) Section 3g specifies that all public facing or “external” zones be hosted on an
         authorized public facing server. All public facing zones or subdomains delegated
         from the enterprise USDA DNS servers to another DNS server shall be hosted on
         an authorized USDA public facing server.

     (2) The ENS Director shall validate annually or at the Key Signing Key (KSK) update
         interval, whichever is more frequent, that public facing subdomains are delegated to
         servers that are on the authorized USDA public facing server list.

     (3) Zones delegated to servers not present on the authorized USDA public facing server
         list shall either be moved to an authorized server or agencies shall pursue steps
         identified in section 6 to obtain a temporary policy exception waiver until the
         identified issue can be corrected.

d.   Other Controls

     The ENS Director and USDA CISO may implement additional monitoring tools or
     controls, or conduct network access tests, to further validate compliance with elements
     in this policy. Continued failure to meet the requirements of this policy may result in
     affected servers being removed from the authorized server list or loss of access through
     the USDA perimeter firewall.




                                               6
5. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA CIO shall provide oversight to promote and ensure agency and staff office
       compliance with this policy.

  b.   The USDA CISO shall:

       (1) Issue access control policy for data and system access, and ensure compliance
           through assessment and authorization concurrency reviews;

       (2) Define audit log and security control specifications as referenced in sections 3c(4),
           3d(4), 3d(5), and 3e(5), and coordinate such guidance with agency and staff offices;

       (3) Enforce DNS policy for the USDA through the use of compliance reviews,
           automated tools, or other appropriate methodologies;

       (4) Review and respond to requests for waivers to this policy;

       (5) Authorize use of USDA public facing name servers; and

       (6) Determine whether DNS servers not on the authorized server list shall be allowed
           through the USDA perimeter firewall.

  c. The ENS Director shall:

       (1) Provide oversight for the implementation and operation of the USDA enterprise
           DNS;

       (2) Work with agencies and staff offices to provide support, guidance, and delegated
           DNS services on the enterprise platform;

       (3) Develop and provide a DNS service to and for the agencies and staff offices in
           order to facilitate consolidation of agency and staff office DNS services on the
           enterprise DNS;

       (4) Compile and maintain a current list of authorized public facing name servers. This
           list shall be reviewed and updated quarterly or at DNSSEC KSK rollover periods,
           whichever is more frequent;

       (5) Ensure any DNS server hosting a public facing zone delegated from the USDA
           enterprise DNS is a public facing server authorized by the USDA CISO;

       (6) Review the weekly DHS NCATS report, which details issues found with USDA
           second level non-DNSSEC compliant domains;

       (7) Issue guidance for DNS access control and configuration;

                                                7
           (8) Provide technical assistance and support on DNS and DNSSEC configurations to
               the agency or staff office POC implementing this policy;

           (9) Maintain a current copy of the DNS authorized server list; and

           (10) Maintain all necessary documentation provided by agency and staff offices for
                public facing server registration.

      d.   Agency and Staff Office CIOs shall:

           (1) Implement, comply with, and maintain this policy within their respective agency or
               staff office; and

           (2) Provide all necessary documentation to the ENS Director and USDA CISO for
               public facing server registration.


    6. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

      a.   All USDA agencies and staff offices are required to conform to this policy. In the event
           that a policy requirement cannot be met as explicitly stated, the agency or staff office
           CIO must submit a waiver request to the USDA CISO.

      b.   The waiver request shall explain the reason for the request, identify compensating
           controls/actions that meet the intent of the policy, and identify how the compensating
           controls/actions provide a comparable or greater level of defense or compliance than
           required by the policy. Agency and staff office CIOs will submit all policy waiver
           requests to the USDA CISO for review and decision.

      c.   Approved waivers from the USDA CISO must be associated with a NIST control that is
           recorded and tracked as a Plan of Action and Milestones (POA&M) item in the USDA’s
           FISMA data management and reporting tool. Waivers will expire at the end of the fiscal
           year or six months from the date of approval, whichever is longer. Unless otherwise
           specified, agencies and staff offices shall review and renew approved policy waivers
           every fiscal year.


    7. INQUIRIES

      Questions and comments concerning the requirements of this regulation should be directed to
      OCIO-ENS, Telecommunications Management & Governance (TMG) at
      ens.policy@ocio.usda.gov.


                                                  -END-
1

                                                    8
                                      APPENDIX A

                                     DEFINITIONS


a.   Authoritative Name Server. An authoritative name server defines and originates DNS
     resource records and is considered public facing if it responds to DNS queries from an
     external network.

b.   DNS Blackholing. An anti-spam technique in which an Internet service provider blocks
     packets coming from a certain domain or address. Blackholing of specific domains can
     prevent certain types of malware and denial of service attacks.

c.   DNS Blacklisting. A security practice or procedure in which DNS requests for
     malicious DNS names can be blocked, redirected, or dedicated to a security logging
     device.

d.   DNS Server. Any computer registered to join the DNS. A DNS server runs special-
     purpose networking software, features an Internet Protocol (IP) address, and contains a
     database of network names and addresses for other Internet hosts. DNS servers can be
     configured to perform as an authoritative name server, a recursive caching server, or
     both.

e.   DNS Zone. A DNS zone is the contiguous portion of the DNS domain name space over
     which a DNS server has authority. A zone is a portion of a namespace and not a
     domain. A DNS zone can contain one or more contiguous domains. A DNS server can
     be authoritative for multiple DNS zones. A non-contiguous namespace cannot be a
     DNS zone.

f.   DNS Zone Data. The zone file contains information about various resources in that
     zone. The information about each resource is represented in a record called a Resource
     Record (RR). Because a zone may contain several domains and several types of
     resources within each domain, the format of each RR contains fields for making this
     identification. The RR consists of the following major fields: domain or resource name,
     time to live in seconds, class, type of resource, and information about the resource.

g.   Internal or Private Server. A name server that does not respond to DNS queries from the
     external network. Private name servers are positioned inside firewalls as close to
     internal users as is practical.

h.   Recursive Caching Server. A recursive caching name server is a server that does not
     originate or host any authoritative zones, but is dedicated to issuing queries to other
     name servers in order to resolve mappings defined by other name servers. A recursive
     caching server is considered public facing if it generates DNS queries to and receives
     responses from an external network.



                                             A-1
i.   Systems Log (Syslog) Protocol. Syslog protocol is used to convey event notification
     messages. This protocol utilizes a layered architecture, which allows the use of any
     number of transport protocols for transmission of syslog messages. It also provides a
     message format that allows vendor-specific extensions to be provided in a structured
     way.

Further definitions regarding roles of servers and their related functions can be found in the
DHS publication, Domain Name System (DNS) Security Reference Architecture.




                                              A-2
                             APPENDIX B

                    ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ASOC     Agriculture Security Operations Center
CIO      Chief Information Officer
CISO     Chief Information Security Officer
DHS      Department of Homeland Security
DNS      Domain Name System
DNSSEC   Domain Name System Security Extensions
DR       Departmental Regulation
DSS      Digital Signature Standard
ENS      Enterprise Network Services
FIPS     Federal Information Processing Standards
FISMA    Federal Information Security Modernization Act
IETF     Internet Engineering Task Force
IP       Internet Protocol
IPv4     Internet Protocol version 4
IPv6     Internet Protocol version 6
ITOM     Information Technology and Operations Management
KSK      Key Signing Key
NCATS    National Cybersecurity Assessment and Technical Services
NIST     National Institute of Standards and Technology
OCIO     Office of the Chief Information Officer
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
POA&M    Plan of Action & Milestones
POC      Point of Contact
PUB      Publication
RR       Resource Record
SIEM     Security Information and Event Management
SP       Special Publication
Syslog   System Log
TIC      Trusted Internet Connection
TMG      Telecommunications Management & Governance
TSIG     Transaction Signature
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                                    B-1
                                    APPENDIX C

                        AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


DHS, Domain Name System (DNS) Security Reference Architecture, Version 1.0, June 21,
2011

DHS, Trusted Internet Connections Reference Architecture Document, Version 2.0, October
1, 2013

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. § 3541, et seq.

FIPS PUB 140-2, Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules, May 25, 2001

FIPS PUB 186-4, Digital Signature Standard (DSS), June 2013

IETF Request for Comments 6303, Locally Served DNS Zones, July 2011

IETF Request for Comments 6761, Special-Use Domain Names, February 2013

NIST SP 800-53 Revision 4, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems
and Organizations, April 2013

NIST SP 800-57 Revision 1, Recommendation for Key Management, Part 3: Application-
Specific Key Management Guidance, January 2015

NIST SP 800-81-2, Secure Domain Name System (DNS) Deployment Guide, September
2013

OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III, Security of Federal Automated Information Resources,
November 2000

OMB Circular A-130, Appendix IV, Analysis of Key Sections, November 2000

OMB Memorandum M-08-23, Securing the Federal Government’s Domain Name System
Infrastructure, August 22, 2008

United States Department of Agriculture Record Group 16 File Plan, April 7, 2014




                                           C-1
