                               U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                     WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                   NUMBER:
     DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION DR 3300-001-K
     SUBJECT: Installation of Telecommunications Cables in         DATE:
     Federal Buildings                                             November 13, 2019
     OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer, Digital         EXPIRATION DATE:
     Infrastructure Services Center, Enterprise Network            November 13, 2024
     Services



Section                                                                               Page

1.    Purpose                                                                         1
2.    Special Instructions/Cancellations                                              1
3.    Background                                                                      2
4.    Scope                                                                           2
5.    Policy                                                                          2
6.    Roles and Responsibilities                                                      5
7.    Compliance                                                                      7
8.    Policy Exceptions                                                               7
9.    Inquiries                                                                       7

APPENDIX A Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                 A-1
APPENDIX B Definitions                                                                B-1
APPENDIX C Authorities and References                                                 C-1



1. PURPOSE

      This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of Agriculture
      (USDA) policy for installing telecommunications cables in Federal buildings.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

      a.   This DR supersedes DR 3300-001-K, Building Telecommunications Cabling and
           Infrastructure, dated March 23, 1999.

      b.   This DR will be in effect until superseded or the expiration date.

      c.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their policies and procedures
           with this DR within 6 months of the publication date.
  d.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may supplement this DR when developing
       their internal guidance. Modifications to the intent or purpose of this DR are not
       allowed. If Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices publish internal guidance that
       supplements this DR, one copy of each supplement will be forwarded to the Office of
       the Chief Information Officer (OCIO), Digital Infrastructure Services Center (DISC),
       Enterprise Network Services (ENS), Telecommunications Infrastructure Management
       and Governance (TIMG) at ens.policy@ocio.usda.gov.


3. BACKGROUND

  Before the 1950s, planning for telecommunications facilities was not perceived as a
  significant factor in the design and construction of a building. However, the economic
  penalties of this perception became clear in the 1950s, and the building and
  telecommunications industries determined that they had to work more closely as a team.
  Progressive technological advances have continued to reinforce this requirement, and it has
  become imperative that telecommunications managers be aware of building codes and
  standards governing the installation practices and materials used in the construction of
  telecommunications facilities. The purpose of building codes and standards is to ensure the
  quality of construction and to protect life, health, and property.


4. SCOPE

  This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, employees, contractors,
  data centers, cooperative partners, and others working for, or on behalf of, the USDA.


5. POLICY

  a.   Federal Agencies and departments are directed by the National Technology Transfer and
       Advancement Act of 1995, Public Law (P.L.) 104-113, to use industry standards that are
       developed in voluntary consensus standards bodies. For cable installation, the standards
       are the following:

       (1) American National Standards Institute (ANSI)/Building Industry Consulting
           Service International (BICSI) 002-2019, Data Center Design and Implementation
           Best Practices;

       (2) ANSI/BICSI 003-2014, Building Information Modeling (BIM) Practices for
           Information Technology System;

       (3) ANSI/BICSI 005-2016, Electronic Safety and Security (ESS) System Design and
           Implementation Best Practice;




                                                2
     (4) ANSI/BICSI 006-2015, Distributed Antenna System (DAS) Design and
         Implementation Best Practices;

     (5) ANSI/BICSI 007-2017, Information Communication Technology Design and
         Implementation Practices for Intelligent Buildings and Premises;

     (6) ANSI/BICSI 008-2018, Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) Systems Design and
         Implementation Best Practices;

     (7) ANSI/BICSI 009-2019, Data Center Operations and Maintenance Best Practices;

     (8) ANSI/BICSI N1-2019, Installation Practices for Telecommunications and ICT
         [Information Communication Technology] Cabling and Related Cabling
         Infrastructure;

     (9) ANSI/BICSI N2-17, Practices for the Installation of Telecommunications and ICT
         Cabling Intended to Support Remote Power Applications;

     (10) ANSI/BICSI G1-17, ICT Outside Plant Construction and Installation: General
          Practices;

     (11) ANSI/National Electrical Contractors Association (NECA)/BICSI 607-2011,
          Standard for Telecommunications Bonding and Grounding Planning and
          Installation Methods for Commercial Buildings;

     (12) ANSI/Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA)-568.0-D: Generic
          Telecommunications Cabling for Customer Premises;

     (13) ANSI/TIA-568.1-D: Commercial Building Telecommunications Infrastructure
          Standard;

     (14) ANSI/TIA-568.3-D: Optical Fiber Cabling and Components Standard;

     (15) ANSI/TIA-568.4-D: Broadband Coaxial Cabling and Components Standard; and

     (16) ANSI/TIA-568.2-C: Balanced Twisted-Pair Telecommunications Cabling and
          Components Standards.

b.   Installation of telecommunications cables must comply with all National Fire Protection
     Association (NFPA) Codes and Standards. These requirements include, but are not
     limited to, the following:

     (1) For buildings that contain hazardous materials requiring proper abatement of
         asbestos and lead paint, conduct environmental testing at Mission Area, agency or
         staff office expense prior to the routing of cable. Any existing Asbestos Containing




                                               3
         Building Materials (ACBM) within the areas that are marked as such cannot be
         disturbed;

     (2) For buildings that are included in the National Register of Historic Places, install
         cables sensitively to preserve the structure’s architectural significance;

     (3) Install proper fire stopping between floors and differing multiple occupancy
         classification areas for each building;

     (4) Protect adjacent surfaces from damage during cable installations;

     (5) Repair or replace damaged ceiling tiles resulting from cable installations;

     (6) Repair damaged wall surfaces resulting from cable installations;

     (7) Avoid a surface mounted conduit by channeling plaster walls and fishing lines
         through drywall construction; and

     (8) Install labels or tags to all cables, every 25 feet, to indicate the origin and destination
         point of each cable.

c.    Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will specify in solicitations or contracts that
      all wiring comply with the cabling standards and codes specified in Sections 5a and 5b.
      These standards and codes will be used by all Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices
      in the planning and design of all office buildings, including both the wiring of new
      buildings and the upgrading of existing plants in both Federal and leased non-Federal
      buildings.

d.    Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices responsible for the architectural design of new
      Federal buildings will comply with the provisions of the cabling standards and codes
      specified in Sections 5a and 5b.

e.    Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices responsible for wiring small Federal buildings
      will comply with the cabling standards and codes specified in Sections 5a and 5b.

f.    Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices responsible for the administration of the
      telecommunications infrastructure (telecommunications equipment spaces, cable
      pathways, bonding and grounding, wiring, and termination hardware) will comply with
      the provisions of the cabling standards and codes specified in Sections 5a and 5b.

g.    Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices responsible for the design, maintenance,
      renovation, or retrofit of telecommunications grounding systems within new or existing
      Federal buildings will comply with the provisions of the cabling standards and codes
      specified in Sections 5a and 5b.




                                                  4
  h.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must coordinate the installation of
       telecommunications cables through the Facility Manager who must be aware of general
       conditions and life safety code requirements.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO) will:

       (1) Represent USDA in the Federal, national, and industry standards development
           process;

       (2) Manage and oversee the implementation of the standards and codes specified in
           Sections 5a and 5b at USDA locations; and

       (3) Perform management and/or oversight responsibilities in accordance with the
           Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), P.L. 113-291,
           as applicable to this directive.

  b.   The ENS Director will:

       (1) Establish procedures for monitoring, measuring, and enforcing compliance with this
           DR;

       (2) Oversee Mission Area, agency, and staff office compliance with USDA
           telecommunications policies and procedures;

       (3) Review and render a decision for Mission Area, agency, and staff office policy
           waiver requests;

       (4) Maintain an electronic file of approved waivers;

       (5) Work with Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to eliminate redundant or
           unused services and equipment;

       (6) Include telecommunications requirements and initiatives as part of the
           telecommunications planning process;

       (7) Use General Services Administration (GSA) and USDA mandated programs when
           Mission Area, agency, and staff office requirements can be met cost-effectively
           through those programs; and

       (8) Maintain inventories of USDA telecommunications resources to the extent
           necessary to:

           (a) Ensure adequate and appropriate telecommunications resources to support the



                                                5
              Mission Area, agency, and staff office mission;

         (b) Ensure accountability for USDA telecommunications property; and

         (c) Meet Departmental and governmental requests for periodic or special inventory
             reports.

c.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs, and Agency and Staff Office Information Technology (IT)
     Directors will:

     (1) Ensure their respective Mission Area, agency, and staff office personnel comply
         with this directive;

     (2) Ensure their respective Mission Area, agency, and staff office internal directives
         conform to this DR’s stated requirements;

     (3) Develop telecommunications cost estimates for lease renewals or building moves to
         determine the cost of applying the standards. Where cost savings can be achieved
         and improvements in service and safety are realized, they will be included;

     (4) Survey the existing building telecommunications infrastructure to ensure that it
         supports advanced technology and is compatible with modern telecommunications
         equipment;

     (5) Include environmental ACBM and lead paint assessment, review, testing, and
         abatement costs in their Mission Area, agency, or staff office cabling installation
         project budgets;

     (6) Review the available GSA Governmentwide Acquisition Contract (GWAC) for
         wiring and cabling to determine if it is a cost-effective solution; and

     (7) Obtain approval for new wiring from the USDA CIO prior to making changes to the
         building wiring infrastructure.

d. Facility Managers will:

     (1) Be aware of building conditions and life safety code requirements;

     (2) Comply with the cabling standards and codes specified in Sections 5a and 5b; and

     (3) Coordinate building assessments and reviews, environmental testing and abatement,
         and telecommunications cabling installations for Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
         offices.




                                               6
7. COMPLIANCE

  Federal Agencies are directed by the National Technology Transfer and Advancement Act of
  1995 to use industry technical standards that are developed in voluntary consensus standards
  bodies.

  a.   A violation of any of the aforementioned standards may be cause for disciplinary or
       adverse action.

  b.   Disciplinary or adverse action will be put into effect in accordance with applicable law
       and regulations.


8. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  a.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are required to conform to this
       policy. In the event that a specific policy requirement cannot be met as explicitly stated,
       Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may submit a waiver request. The waiver
       request will explain the reason for the request, identify compensating controls and
       actions that meet the intent of the policy, and identify how the compensating controls
       and actions provide a similar or greater level of defense or compliance than the policy
       requirement.

  b.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs, and Agency and Staff Office IT Directors will address all
       policy waiver request memoranda to the ENS Director and submit the waiver request to
       ens.policy@ocio.usda.gov for review and determination.

  c.   Waivers to stipulations of this directive that have been granted approval by the ENS
       Director and that are associated with a National Institute of Standards and Technology
       (NIST) Special Publication (SP) 800-53 Revision 4, Security and Privacy Controls for
       Federal Information Systems and Organizations, control will be recorded and tracked as
       a Plan of Action and Milestones (POA&M) item in the USDA Federal Information
       Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 United States Code (U.S.C.) Section
       3551, data management and reporting tool.

  d.   Waivers will expire at the end of the fiscal year or 6 months from the date of approval,
       whichever is longer. Unless otherwise specified, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
       offices will review and renew previously approved policy waivers every fiscal year.


9. INQUIRIES

  Questions and comments concerning the requirements of this regulation should be
  directed to OCIO, DISC, ENS, TIMG at ens.policy@ocio.usda.gov.




                                                 7
- END -




  8
                              APPENDIX A

                   ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ACBM     Asbestos Containing Building Materials
ANSI     American National Standards Institute
BICSI    Building Industry Consulting Service International
BIM      Building Information Modeling
CIO      Chief Information Officer
DAS      Distributed Antenna System
DISC     Digital Infrastructure Services Center
DR       Departmental Regulation
ENS      Enterprise Network Services
ESS      Electronic Safety and Security
FISMA    Federal Information Security Modernization Act
FITARA   Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
GSA      General Services Administration
GWAC     Governmentwide Acquisition Contract
ICT      Information Communication Technology
IT       Information Technology
NECA     National Electrical Contractors Association
NFPA     National Fire Protection Association
NIST     National Institute of Standards and Technology
OCIO     Office of the Chief Information Officer
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
P.L.     Public Law
POA&M    Plan of Action and Milestones
SP       Special Publication
TIA      Telecommunications Industry Association
TIMG     Telecommunications Infrastructure Management and Governance
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture
WLAN     Wireless Local Area Network




                                     A-1
                                      APPENDIX B

                                      DEFINITIONS


a. Bonding. The permanent joining of metallic parts to form an electrically conductive path
   that will assure electrical continuity and the capacity to conduct safely any electrical
   current likely to be imposed.

b. Building Telecommunications Infrastructure. A collection of those telecommunications
   components, excluding equipment that together provides the basic support for the
   distribution of all information within a building or campus.

c. Grounding. A conducting connection, whether intentional or accidental, between an
   electrical circuit or equipment and the earth, or to some conducting body that serves in
   place of the earth.

d. Information Technology (IT). (1) Any services or equipment, or interconnected
   system(s) or subsystem(s) of equipment, that are used in the automatic acquisition,
   storage, analysis, evaluation, manipulation, management, movement, control, display,
   switching, interchange, transmission, or reception of data or information by the agency;
   where (2) such services or equipment are ‘used by an agency’ if used by the agency
   directly or if used by a contractor under a contract with the agency that requires either use
   of the services or equipment or requires use of the services or equipment to a significant
   extent in the performance of a service or the furnishing of a product. (3) The term
   “information technology” includes computers, ancillary equipment (including imaging
   peripherals, input, output, and storage devices necessary for security and surveillance),
   peripheral equipment designed to be controlled by the central processing unit of a
   computer, software, firmware and similar procedures, services (including provisioned
   services such as cloud computing and support services that support any point of the
   lifecycle of the equipment or service), and related resources. (4) The term “information
   technology” does not include any equipment that is acquired by a contractor incidental to
   a contract that does not require use of the equipment. (Source: Office of Management
   and Budget (OMB), Memorandum M-15-14, Management and Oversight of Federal
   Information Technology, June 10, 2015)

e. Pathway. A facility for the placement of telecommunications cable.




                                              B-1
1
                                       APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


    BICSI, ANSI/BICSI 002-2019, Data Center Design and Implementation

    BICSI, ANSI/BICSI 003-2014, Building Information Modeling (BIM) Practices for
    Information Technology System

    BICSI, ANSI/BICSI 005-2016, Electronic Safety and Security (ESS) System Design and
    Implementation Best Practice

    BICSI, ANSI/BICSI 006-2015, Distributed Antenna System (DAS) Design and
    Implementation Best Practices

    BISCI, ANSI/BICSI 007-2017, Information Communication Technology Design and
    Implementation Practices for Intelligent Buildings and Premises

    BISCI, ANSI/BICSI 008-2018, Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) Systems Design and
    Implementation Best Practices

    BISCI, ANSI/BICSI 009-2019, Data Center Operations and Maintenance Best Practices

    BISCI, ANSI/BICSI N1-2019, Installation Practices for Telecommunications and ICT
    Cabling and Related Cabling Infrastructure

    BISCI, ANSI/BICSI N2-17, Practices for the Installation of Telecommunications and ICT
    Cabling Intended to Support Remote Power Applications

    BISCI, ANSI/BICSI G1-17, ICT Outside Plant Construction and Installation: General
    Practices

    BISCI, ANSI/National Electrical Contractors Association (NECA)/BICSI 607-2011,
    Standard for Telecommunications Bonding and Grounding Planning and Installation
    Methods for Commercial Buildings

    Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. Section 3551,
    December 18, 2014

    Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), P.L. 113-291, 128 Stat.
    3292, Title VIII, Subtitle D, §831-837, December 19, 2014

    National Technology Transfer and Advancement Act of 1995, P.L. 104-113, March 7, 1996




                                              C-1
NFPA, NFPA Codes and Standards

NIST, SP 800-53 Revision 4, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems
and Organizations, April 2013, includes updates as of January 22, 2015

OMB, M-15-14, Management and Oversight of Federal Information Technology, June 10,
2015

TIA, ANSI/TIA-568.0-D: Generic Telecommunications Cabling for Customer Premises,
December 15, 2015, as amended July 26, 2017

TIA, ANSI/TIA-568.1-D: Commercial Building Telecommunications Infrastructure
Standard, September 9, 2015

TIA, ANSI/TIA-568.3-D: Optical Fiber Cabling and Components Standard, October 25,
2016

TIA, ANSI/TIA-568.4-D: Broadband Coaxial Cabling and Components Standard, June 27,
2017

TIA, ANSI/TIA-568.2-C: Balanced Twisted-Pair Telecommunications Cabling and
Components Standards, August 2009, as amended June 30, 2016




                                          C-2
