                             U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                   WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                 NUMBER:
     DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                     DR 3300-020
     SUBJECT: Telecommunications Mission Area Control            DATE:
     Officer Roles and Responsibilities                          July 12, 2019
     OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer, Digital       EXPIRATION DATE:
     Infrastructure Services Center, Enterprise Network          July 12, 2024
     Services



Section                                                                                   Page

1.    Purpose                                                                             1
2.    Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                  2
3.    Background                                                                          2
4.    Scope                                                                               2
5.    Policy                                                                              2
6.    Roles and Responsibilities                                                          3
7.    Compliance                                                                          6
8.    Inquiries                                                                           6

Appendix A - Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                   A-1
Appendix B - Definitions                                                                  B-1
Appendix C - Authorities and References                                                   C-1



1. PURPOSE

      a.   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of
           Agriculture (USDA) policy that defines the roles and responsibilities of the
           Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officers (TMACO). This DR also
           delineates the level of collaboration and involvement of the TMACOs in the planning,
           acquisition, deployment, management, and disposition of information technology (IT)
           investments for telecommunications services, equipment, facilities, and resources.

      b.   This DR updates and revises TMACO roles and responsibilities related to management
           of all data, voice, wireless, and other telecommunication products and services.
2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This regulation supersedes DR 3300-020, Telecommunications Mission Area Control
       Officer (TMACO) - Roles and Responsibilities, dated October 13, 2016.

  b.   This DR will be in effect until superseded or the expiration date.

  c.   The term “agency” or phrase “agency and staff office,” unless otherwise noted in this
       directive, will be considered to encompass the Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices
       of USDA.

  d.   All agencies and staff offices will align their policies and procedures with this DR
       within 6 months of the publication date.

  e.   All agencies and staff offices may supplement this DR when developing their internal
       guidance. Modifications to the intent or purpose of this DR are not allowed. If agencies
       and staff offices publish internal guidance that supplements this DR, one copy of each
       supplement will be forwarded to the Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO),
       Digital Infrastructure Services Center (DISC), Enterprise Network Services (ENS),
       Telecommunications Infrastructure Management and Governance (TIMG) at
       ens.policy@ocio.usda.gov.


3. BACKGROUND

  In June 1998, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) issued an audit report,
  GAO/AIMD-98-131, USDA Telecommunications: Strong Leadership Needed to Resolve
  Management Weaknesses, Achieve Savings, that reiterated the need for USDA to address its
  telecommunications management practices. The USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO)
  directed the agencies and staff offices to establish the TMACO role in response to this audit.
  The TMACOs serve as the agency or staff office single point of contact (POC) for
  telecommunications services to ensure compliance with Departmental telecommunications
  requirements and guidance.


4. SCOPE

  This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices.


5. POLICY

  a.   USDA agencies and staff offices will support all Departmental and Federal laws,
       regulations, policies, and initiatives for streamlining, consolidating, and achieving cost
       savings related to the planning, acquisition, deployment, management, and disposition
       of IT investments for telecommunications services, equipment, facilities, and resources
       in accordance with DR-3300-001, Telecommunications & Internet Services and Use.


                                               2
  b.   TMACOs will have demonstrated knowledge and experience with telecommunications
       and IT for acquisition development and management, policies, practices, services and
       technologies, financial and inventory management processes, ordering and billing
       methodologies, and automated telecommunication enterprise management tools.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA CIO will:

       (1) Work with Mission Area Assistant CIOs and agency and staff office IT Directors to
           formulate and communicate vision, business values, goals, and objectives for
           telecommunications management in USDA; and

       (2) Ensure the overall TMACO program objectives are aligned and integrated with the
           General Services Administration (GSA) Federal Strategic Sourcing Initiative
           (FSSI), direction from the Federal CIO, and the current USDA Information
           Technology Strategic Plan.

       (3) Perform management and/or oversight responsibilities in accordance with the
           Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), Public Law
           (P.L.) 113-291, as applicable to this directive.

  b.   The ENS Director will:

       (1) Develop policy guidance to formally establish the TMACO Program and define the
           roles and responsibilities for agency and staff office TMACOs;

       (2) Ensure that a formal organization structure and resources are in place to support
           the TMACO Program goals and objectives;

       (3) Ensure that a governance program is in place that measures agency and staff office
           compliance against stated goals, objectives, and key performance indicators;

       (4) Ensure agency and staff office compliance with all applicable Federal mandates
           and related Departmental regulations and guidance;

       (5) Establish the roles and responsibilities for the TMACO position;

       (6) Ensure that all agency and staff office TMACOs attain certification as a
           Contracting Officer’s Representative (COR) representative through the Federal
           Acquisition Certification Contracting Officer's Representative (FAC-COR)
           training program, if not already certified. TMACOs must take the FAC-COR
           training every 2 years to maintain their certification;

       (7) Provide agency and staff office personnel responsible for telecommunications


                                              3
         services with access to the USDA enterprise telecommunications expense
         management tool and vendor portals;

     (8) Develop enterprise tools and processes for reviewing agency and staff office
         ordering, usage, and billing of telecommunications services to ensure compliance
         with Departmental policies and guidelines to avoid fraud, waste, and abuse;

     (9) Develop and maintain the TMACOs quarterly savings reports. Combine agency
         and staff office savings reports to create a USDA total savings report;

     (10) Coordinate with agencies and staff offices to compile submissions for
          Departmental and Federal data calls within the specified timeframes; and

     (11) Provide a TMACO Program report that consists of cost savings and optimization
          services to Mission Area Assistant CIOs, agency and staff office IT Directors, and
          TMACOs twice a year.

c.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs, and Agency and Staff Office IT Directors will:

     (1) Ensure agency and staff office employees comply with this directive;

     (2) Ensure agency and staff office internal directives conform to this DR’s stated
         requirements;

     (3) Engage TMACOs in the formulation of goals and objectives for the TMACO
         program;

     (4) Appoint personnel to serve in the agency and staff office TMACO role;

     (5) Establish communication channels with the agency or staff office TMACO and
         designated budget personnel;

     (6) Ensure that TMACOs perform required telecommunications expense management
         activities such as billing and inventory validation and cost savings tracking, using
         telecommunications management tools; and

     (7) Ensure that agency and staff office TMACOs compile submissions for
         Departmental and Federal data calls within the specified timeframes.

d.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office TMACOs will:

     (1) Serve as the agency or staff office single POC for telecommunications services to
         ensure compliance with Departmental telecommunications requirements and
         guidance;

     (2) Use enterprise tools and processes to order, maintain, and manage a comprehensive
         inventory of telecommunication devices, equipment, services, costs, trending, and


                                             4
    forecasting;

(3) Use tools and enterprise processes to validate telecommunications billing,
    inventory, and services. On a quarterly basis, submit acknowledgement of
    validation and a report of any cost savings resulting from clean-up or optimization
    efforts to OCIO, DISC, ENS, TIMG.

(4) Manage access to all telecommunications vendor business support systems for
    delegated staff within their agency or staff office;

(5) Provide agency and staff office personnel responsible for telecommunications
    services with enterprise management tool and vendor portal training;

(6) Participate regularly in TMACO meetings and working groups;

(7) Coordinate with appropriate agency and staff office personnel at least annually to
    obligate funds for telecommunications charges within the specified timeframe;

(8) Use tools and enterprise processes for reviewing agency and staff office ordering,
    usage, and billing of telecommunications services to ensure compliance with
    Departmental policies and guidelines to avoid fraud, waste, and abuse;

(9) Communicate and disseminate Federal and Departmental information to agencies or
    staff offices regarding planning, acquisition, management, and disposition of
    investments for IT and telecommunications services, equipment, and resources
    within USDA;

(10) Provide guidance to agencies and staff offices for the development of
     telecommunications and IT acquisitions;

(11) Participate in Departmental IT and telecommunications projects to implement cost
     effective and streamlined enterprise solutions;

(12) Coordinate with telecommunications vendors (e.g., data, voice, and wireless) or
     telecommunications equipment manufacturers to obtain technology solutions for
     agencies and staff offices;

(13) Coordinate with OCIO ENS to compile submissions for Departmental and Federal
     data calls within the specified timeframes; and

(14) Attain certification as a COR through the FAC-COR program, if not already
     certified.




                                       5
7. COMPLIANCE

  a.   DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, Section 16 sets forth
       USDA’s policies, procedures, and standards on employee responsibilities and conduct
       relative to the use of computers and telecommunications equipment. DR 4070-735-001,
       Section 21, states:

       (1) A violation of any of the responsibilities and conduct standards contained in this
           directive may be cause for disciplinary or adverse action; and

       (2) Disciplinary or adverse action will be effected in accordance with applicable laws
           and regulations.

  b.   Such disciplinary or adverse action will be effected in accordance with applicable laws
       and regulations such as Office of Personnel Management (OPM) regulations, Office of
       Management and Budget (OMB) regulations, and the Standards of Ethical Conduct for
       Employees of the Executive Branch.


8. INQUIRIES

  Questions and comments concerning the requirements of this regulation should be
  directed to OCIO, DISC, ENS, TIMG at ens.policy@ocio.usda.gov.


                                            -END-




                                               6
                                   APPENDIX A

                      ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


    CIO       Chief Information Officer
    COR       Contracting Officer’s Representative
    DISC      Digital Infrastructure Services Center
    DR        Departmental Regulation
    ENS       Enterprise Network Services
    FAC-COR   Federal Acquisition Certification Contracting Officer's Representative
    FITARA    Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
    FSSI      Federal Strategic Sourcing Initiative
    GAO       Government Accountability Office
    GSA       General Services Administration
    IT        Information Technology
    NIST      National Institute of Standards and Technology
    NIST IR   National Institute of Standards and Technology Interagency or Internal
              Report
    OCIO      Office of the Chief Information Officer
    OMB       Office of Management and Budget
    OPM       Office of Personnel Management
    P.L.      Public Law
    POC       Point of Contact
    TIMG      Telecommunications Infrastructure Management and Governance
    TMACO     Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer
    USDA      United States Department of Agriculture


1




                                        A-1
                                    APPENDIX B

                                    DEFINITIONS


a. Information Technology (IT). Any services or equipment, or interconnected system(s)
   or subsystem(s) of equipment, that are used in the automatic acquisition, storage,
   analysis, evaluation, manipulation, management, movement, control, display, switching,
   interchange, transmission, or reception of data or information by the agency where such
   services or equipment are used by an Agency if used by the Agency directly or if used
   by a contractor under a contract with the Agency that requires either use of the services
   or equipment or requires use of the services or equipment to a significant extent in the
   performance of a service or the furnishing of a product. The term information
   technology includes computers, ancillary equipment, peripheral equipment designed to
   be controlled by the central processing unit of a computer, software, firmware, and
   similar procedures, services, and related resources. (Source: OMB, M-15-14,
   Management and Oversight of Federal Information Technology, June 10, 2015)

b. Telecommunications. The preparation, transmission, communication, or related
   processing of information (writing, images, sounds, or other data) by electrical,
   electromagnetic, electromechanical, electro-optical, or electronic means. (Source:
   National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), National Institute of
   Standards and Technology Interagency or Internal Report (NISTIR), 7298 Revision 2,
   Glossary of Key Information Security Terms, May 2013)




                                          B-1
                                      APPENDIX C

                         AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Federal Acquisition Institute, Federal Acquisition Certification-Contracting Officer's
Representative (FAC-COR) Training Program

Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), P.L. 113-291, 128 Stat.
3292, Title VIII, Subtitle D, §831-837, December 19, 2014

GAO/Accounting and Information Management Division, GAO/AIMD-98-131, USDA
Telecommunications: Strong Leadership Needed to Resolve Management Weaknesses,
Achieve Savings, June 30, 1998

GSA, Federal Strategic Sourcing Initiative (FSSI)

NIST, IR 7298 Revision 2, Glossary of Key Information Security Terms, May 2013

Office of Government Ethics, Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive
Branch, November 18, 2016, Effective January 1, 2017

OMB, M-15-14, Management and Oversight of Federal Information Technology, June 10,
2015

USDA, DR 3180-001, Information Technology Standards, May 12, 2015

USDA, DR 3300-001, Telecommunications & Internet Services and Use, March 18, 2016

USDA, DR 4030-001, Section 508 Program, September 8, 2014

UDSA, DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007

USDA, USDA Information Technology Strategic Plan 2014-2018, April 1, 2014




                                           C-1
