                              U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                    WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                      NUMBER:
       DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                        DR 3300-026
                                                                      DATE:
     SUBJECT: Planning and Managing Wireless Technologies             January 23, 2020
     OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer, Digital            EXPIRATION DATE:
     Infrastructure Services Center, Enterprise Network Services      January 23, 2025



Section                                                                                    Page

1.   Purpose                                                                               1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                    1
3.   Scope                                                                                 2
4.   Background                                                                            2
5.   Policy                                                                                2
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                            5
7.   Compliance                                                                            8
8.   Policy Exceptions                                                                     9
9.   Inquiries                                                                             9

APPENDIX A Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                      A-1
APPENDIX B Definitions                                                                     B-1
APPENDIX C Authorities and References                                                      C-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of Agriculture
     (USDA) policy for planning and managing USDA’s wireless networks and devices that use
     USDA wireless networks.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     a.   This DR replaces Departmental Manual (DM) 3300-005, Policies for Planning and
          Managing Wireless Technologies in USDA, dated November 10, 2010.

     b.   This DR will be in effect until superseded or the expiration date.

     c.   The term “wireless network” encompasses any network that uses the Institute of
          Electrical and Electronics Engineers Standards Association (IEEE-SA) 802.11
       Standards, such as Wireless Local Area Networks (WLAN) or Wireless Fidelity (Wi-
       Fi).

  d.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their policies and procedures
       with this DR within 6 months of the publication date.

  e.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may supplement this DR when developing
       their internal guidance. Modifications to the intent or purpose of this DR are not
       allowed. If Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices publish internal guidance that
       supplements this DR, one copy of each supplement will be forwarded to the Office of
       the Chief Information Officer (OCIO), Digital Infrastructure Services Center (DISC),
       Enterprise Network Services (ENS), Telecommunications Infrastructure Management
       and Governance (TIMG) at ens.policy@usda.gov.


3. SCOPE

  a.   This DR applies to USDA wireless networks and devices (e.g., laptops) that use USDA
       wireless networks.

  b.   This DR excludes wireless devices (e.g., cellular phones) that are provisioned for use on
       a third-party cellular network.

  c.   This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, employees,
       contractors, data centers, cooperative partners, and others working for, or on behalf of,
       the USDA.


4. BACKGROUND

  The widespread adoption of wireless technologies within USDA represents a paradigm shift
  from telecommunications landline technologies. This shift introduces management
  challenges due to the pervasive availability of wireless consumer products in the marketplace
  and the tendency for USDA to treat wireless acquisitions as commodity buys. The most
  significant business challenges associated with a commodity approach to buying wireless
  technologies occur when the lack of a central acquisition strategy results in fractionalized
  purchases of non-standard products and services. As this practice continues, the Department
  loses visibility and control of wireless technologies. Thus, a policy is needed to ensure that
  there is a more strategic, centralized management of wireless technologies.


5. POLICY

  a.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are required to receive approval from the
       USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO) prior to the purchase of any wireless
       networking technologies regardless of the dollar amount. These purchases include

                                                 2
     all software and equipment for the implementation of new wireless networks as well
     as upgrades or changes to existing wireless networks. Mission Area, agency, and
     staff office approval requests for wireless networks will describe business and
     security requirements, include a cost trade-off analysis between the proposed
     wireless network and a hardwired network with equivalent capabilities, and provide
     total anticipated costs for each.

b.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are required to submit an annual report to
     the USDA OCIO telecommunications management staff that accounts for all
     wireless networks and associated infrastructure, and ensure that the information
     provided is mapped into the agency or staff office enterprise architecture (EA).
     Mission Area, agencies, and staff offices will ensure technical personnel are
     adequately trained to oversee the planning, development, implementation, and
     management of wireless networks in order to be compliant with the USDA Quality
     of Service (QoS)/Class of Service (CoS) Standard (eAuthentication access required).

c.   All Internet Protocol (IP) based data transmission (e.g., email) to and from
     Government networks will be registered with USDA Domain Name System (DNS)
     servers and routed through the USDA secure internet gateways. Agencies and staff
     offices will establish continuous access monitoring and reporting capabilities that
     identify the media access control (MAC) address for authorized users and can be
     referenced to the specific wireless device and to the user’s profile. Wireless usage
     reports will be analyzed by Mission Area, agency, or staff office
     telecommunications subject matter experts (SME) to:

     (1) Ensure that networks are secure and engineered in a manner that maintains high
         QoS to USDA customers;

     (2) Identify usage trends to improve future acquisition decisions; and

     (3) Determine corrective actions that address excessive, infrequent, or non-usage of
         Government-issued devices.

d.   USDA OCIO will establish enterprise contracts or place task orders through General
     Services Administration (GSA) contracts for wireless technologies. Mission Areas,
     agencies, and staff offices will limit wireless device purchases to those technologies
     that are available through GSA contracts approved by the USDA CIO. Mission
     Areas, agencies, and staff offices will appoint Telecommunications Mission Area
     Control Officers (TMACO) to place orders for all wireless technologies.

e.   USDA OCIO will facilitate the Departmental adoption of next generation wireless
     technologies and eliminate redundant Mission Area, agency, or staff office pilot tests
     of wireless networks. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will follow OCIO
     procedures for conducting and coordinating pilot tests and share test results with
     each other through the OCIO established processes.



                                               3
f.   Appropriate Uses of USDA Wireless Technologies

     (1) USDA wireless networks and devices may be used for, but are not limited
         to, the following purposes:

          (a) The communication and exchange of data between State and local
              governments, private sector organizations, and educational and research
              institutions, both in the United States and abroad;

          (b) The development of internet-based projects;

          (c) Interactive sharing of information without compromising USDA secured
              data;

          (d) The exchange of any non-sensitive data between USDA entities in support
              of Mission Area, agency, and staff office missions, or other official
              purposes; and

          (e) The distribution and collection of information related to official program
              delivery that is in compliance with Federal and Departmental guidelines.

     (2) In accordance with the Federal CIO Council’s Recommended Executive Branch
         Model Policy/Guidance on "Limited Personal Use" of Government Office
         Equipment Including Information Technology (Limited Personal Use), May 19,
         1999, employees may use Government wireless devices for personal matters on
         an occasional basis provided that there is no loss of employee productivity or
         interference with official employee duties.

g.   Inappropriate Uses of USDA Wireless Technologies

     In accordance with the Limited Personal Use guidance, employees will not use USDA
     wireless networks and devices:

     1.   To conduct illegal, inappropriate, or offensive activities to fellow employees or the
          public. Such activities include, but are not limited to, hate speech or material that
          ridicules others on the basis of race, creed, religion, color, sex, disability, or
          national origin;

     2.   To create, download, view, store, copy, or transmit sexually explicit or sexually
          oriented materials;

     (1) To create, download, view, store, copy, or transmit materials related to illegal
         gambling, illegal weapons, terrorist activities, and any other illegal activities or
         activities otherwise prohibited;




                                                4
       (2) To conduct activities that could cause congestion, delay, or disruption of service to
           any Government system or equipment. For example, greeting cards, video, or other
           large file attachments can degrade the performance of the entire network;

       (3) For commercial purposes or in support of “for-profit” activities or other outside
           employment or business activity (e.g., consulting for pay or sales of goods and
           services);

       (4) To engage in any outside fundraising activity, endorse any product or service,
           participate in any lobbying activity, or engage in any prohibited partisan political
           activity;

       (5) To post Departmental information to external newsgroups, bulletin boards, or other
           public forums without authority; and

       (6) To conduct activities that could generate more than a minimal expense to the
           Government.

  h.   Proper Representation

       (1) In accordance with the Limited Personal Use, it is the responsibility of employees
           to ensure they are not giving the false impression that they are acting in an official
           capacity when they are using Government office equipment for non-Government
           purposes. If there is an expectation that such a personal use could be interpreted to
           represent a Mission Area, agency, or staff office, then an adequate disclaimer must
           be used. One acceptable disclaimer is “The contents of this message are mine
           personally and do not reflect any position of the Government or my agency.”

       (2) It is the responsibility of employees not to use or wear any official Government
           logos, trademarks, seals, or insignias while displaying, portraying, or posting any
           acts that would be detrimental to the Government, including any State, local, or
           federally illegal activities, or any of the previously mentioned prohibited activities.

  i.   Privacy

       USDA employees will use Government wireless networks and devices with the
       understanding that such use serves as consent to monitoring of any type of use,
       including incidental and personal uses, whether authorized or unauthorized. In
       addition, access of such systems is not anonymous. For example, for each use of the
       internet over Government systems, these systems may capture information transmitted,
       received, or stored on the system.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA CIO will:

                                                  5
     (1) Provide leadership to Mission Area, agency, and staff office programs for the
         integration of wireless technologies into the existing USDA infrastructure;

     (2) Set the priorities for USDA wireless programs, projects, and activities based on
         Departmentwide business requirements and available resources;

     (3) Obtain the financial and human resources to implement USDA wireless programs,
         projects, and activities;

     (4) Represent the USDA to oversight agencies on wireless technologies-related issues;

     (5) Serve as the USDA representative to the Diplomatic Telecommunications Service
         Program Office (DTSPO);

     (6) Respond to oversight agencies, such as Office of Management and Budget (OMB),
         Government Accountability Office (GAO), Department of Homeland Security
         (DHS), Department of Commerce (DOC), and Federal Communications
         Commission (FCC), with timely and accurate USDA telecommunications program
         and cost information; and

     (7) Perform management and oversight responsibilities in accordance with the Federal
         Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), Public Law (P.L.) 113-
         291, as applicable to this directive.

b.   The ENS Director will:

     (1) Establish policies and procedures for the management of wireless technologies
         throughout USDA;

     (2) Oversee Mission Area, agency, and staff office compliance with USDA wireless
         technologies policies and procedures;

     (3) Manage USDA wireless technologies in accordance with prescribed laws,
         regulations, standards, and related USDA 3300 Series telecommunications
         directives;

     (4) Grant technical approval for acquisition of new wireless technologies when the
         analysis of the request indicates that this is the best approach for USDA;

     (5) Review and render a decision for Mission Area, agency, and staff office policy
         waiver requests;

     (6) Maintain an electronic file of approved waivers;

     (7) Work with Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to eliminate redundant

                                              6
         or unused wireless technologies;

     (8) Include wireless technology requirements and initiatives as part of the
         telecommunications planning process;

     (9) Use GSA and USDA mandated programs when Mission Area, agency, and staff
         office requirements can be met cost effectively; and

     (10) Maintain inventories of USDA wireless networks and devices to the extent
          necessary to:

         (a) Ensure that there are adequate and appropriate wireless networks and devices
             to support the Mission Area, agency, and staff office mission;

         (b) Ensure accountability for USDA wireless networks and devices; and

         (c) Meet Departmental and Federal requests for periodic or special inventory
             reports.

c.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs and Agency and Staff Office Information Technology (IT)
     Directors will:

     (1) Ensure Mission Area, agency. and staff office personnel comply with this directive;

     (2) Ensure Mission Area, agency, and staff office internal directives conform to this
         DR’s stated requirements;

     (3) Lead the cost-effective implementation of programmatic applications of wireless
         technologies;

     (4) Establish cooperative or collaborative programs with other Mission Areas, agencies,
         and staff offices to promote the cost-effective adoption of wireless technologies
         throughout USDA;

     (5) Set priority levels for internal programs, projects, and activities, that include
         wireless technologies, basing these priorities on business requirements and
         available resources;

     (6) Adhere to Federal and USDA wireless strategies, policies, standards, and best
         practices;

     (7) Align wireless technology planning, acquisition, design, integration, and
         management plans with the current USDA Information Technology Strategic Plan,
         USDA EA, USDA standards and Departmental directives, and Federal guidelines
         promulgated by Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), OMB, National
         Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA), Federal CIO


                                                7
           Council, DHS, National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), FCC, and
           other Federal organizations that manage wireless technologies;

       (8) Assess, design, implement, manage, and maintain a wireless network architecture
           that is compatible and fully integrated with the Universal Telecommunications
           Network (UTN);

       (9) Provide guidance to end users on the appropriate and secure use of Government
           wireless technologies;

       (10) Obtain waivers and approvals from the ENS Director when agency and staff office
            requirements cannot be met through mandated programs;

       (11) Assign TMACOs to select required wireless technology from GSA Program follow-
            on contracts for the Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices. More information
            on this topic can be found in DR 3300-020, Telecommunications Mission Area
            Control Officer Roles and Responsibilities;

       (12) Include wireless technology requirements and initiatives as part of the
            telecommunications planning process;

       (13) Provide the TMACO’s name and contact information to the USDA CIO; and

       (14) Maintain Mission Area, agency, and staff office inventories of USDA
            wireless networks and devices to the extent necessary to:

           (a) Ensure that adequate and appropriate wireless networks and devices support
               the Mission Area, agency, or staff office mission;

           (b) Ensure accountability for USDA wireless networks and devices; and

           (c) Meet Departmental and Federal requests for periodic or quarterly inventory
               reports.

  d.   TMACOs will perform their roles and responsibilities as provided in DR 3300-020.


7. COMPLIANCE

  a.   DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, Section 16 sets forth
       USDA’s policies, procedures, and standards on employee responsibilities and conduct
       relative to the use of computers and telecommunications equipment. DR 4070-735-001,
       Section 21, states that a violation of any of the responsibilities and conduct standards
       contained in this directive may be cause for disciplinary or adverse action; and

  b.   Such disciplinary or adverse action will be effected in accordance with applicable law
       and regulations such as Office of Personnel Management (OPM) regulations, OMB

                                                 8
       regulations, and the Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive
       Branch.


8. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  a.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are required to conform to this
       policy. If a specific policy requirement cannot be met as explicitly stated, Mission
       Areas, agencies, and staff offices may submit a waiver request to the ENS Director for
       review and determination. Submit the waiver request to ens.policy@usda.gov. The
       waiver request will explain the reason for the request, identify compensating controls
       and actions that meet the intent of the policy, and identify how the compensating
       controls and actions provide a similar or greater level of defense or compliance than the
       policy requirement.

  b.   Waivers to stipulations of this directive that have been granted approval by the ENS
       Director and that are associated with a NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-53 Revision
       4, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations,
       control will be recorded and tracked as a Plan of Action and Milestones (POA&M) item
       in the USDA Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44
       United States Code (U.S.C.) Section 3551, data management and reporting tool.

  c.   Waivers will expire at the end of the fiscal year or 6 months from the date of approval,
       whichever is longer. Unless otherwise specified, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
       offices will review and renew approved policy waivers every fiscal year.


9. INQUIRIES

  Questions and comments concerning the requirements of this regulation should be
  directed to OCIO, DISC, ENS, TIMG at ens.policy@usda.gov.


                                              -END-




                                                 9
                               APPENDIX A

                  ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


CFR       Code of Federal Regulations
CIO       Chief Information Officer
CoS       Class of Service
DHS       Department of Homeland Security
DISC      Digital Infrastructure Services Center
DM        Departmental Manual
DNS       Domain Name System
DOC       Department of Commerce
DR        Departmental Regulation
DTSPO     Diplomatic Telecommunications Service Program Office
EA        Enterprise Architecture
ENS       Enterprise Network Services
FCC       Federal Communications Commission
FISMA     Federal Information Security Modernization Act
FITARA    Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
GAO       Government Accountability Office
GSA       General Services Administration
IEEE-SA   Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineer – Standards Association
IP        Internet Protocol
IT        Information Technology
MAC       Media Access Control
NIST      National Institute of Standards and Technology
NTIA      National Telecommunications and Information Administration
OCIO      Office of the Chief Information Officer
OMB       Office of Management and Budget
OPM       Office of Personnel Management
OSTP      Office of Science and Technology Policy
P.L.      Public Law
POA&M     Plan of Action and Milestones
QoS       Quality of Service
SME       Subject Matter Expert
SP        Special Publication
TIMG      Telecommunications Infrastructure Management and Governance
TMACO     Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer
U.S.C.    United States Code
USDA      United States Department of Agriculture
UTN       Universal Telecommunications Network
Wi-Fi     Wireless Fidelity
WLAN      Wireless Local Area Network




                                       A-1
                                      APPENDIX B

                                     DEFINITIONS


a.   Domain Name System (DNS) Server. Any computer registered to join the DNS. A
     DNS server runs special purpose networking software, features an internet protocol (IP)
     address, and contains a database of network names and addresses for other internet
     hosts. DNS servers can be configured to perform as an authoritative name server, a
     recursive caching server, or both (Source: USDA, DR 3300-025, Secure Domain Name
     System, March 18, 2016)

b.   Enterprise Architecture (EA). The description of an enterprise’s entire set of
     information systems: how they are configured, how they are integrated, how they
     interface to the external environment at the enterprise’s boundary, how they are operated
     to support the enterprise mission, and how they contribute to the enterprise’s overall
     security posture. (Source: NIST, Information Technology Laboratory, Computer
     Security Resource Center, Glossary)

c.   Gateway. An intermediate system (interface, relay) that attaches to two (or more)
     computer networks that have similar functions but dissimilar implementations and that
     enables either one-way or two-way communication between the networks. (Source:
     NIST, Information Technology Laboratory, Computer Security Resource Center,
     Glossary)

d.   Information Technology (IT). Any services or equipment, or interconnected system(s)
     or subsystem(s) of equipment, that are used in the automatic acquisition, storage,
     analysis, evaluation, manipulation, management, movement, control, display, switching,
     interchange, transmission, or reception of data or information by the Agency where such
     services or equipment are used by an Agency, if used by the Agency directly or if used
     by a contractor under a contract with the Agency, that requires either use of the services
     or equipment or requires use of the services or equipment to a significant extent in the
     performance of a service or the furnishing of a product. The term information
     technology includes computers, ancillary equipment (including imaging peripherals,
     input, output, and storage devices necessary for security and surveillance), peripheral
     equipment designed to be controlled by the central processing unit of a computer,
     software, firmware and similar procedures, services (including provisioned services such
     as cloud computing and support services that support any point of the lifecycle of the
     equipment or service), and related resources. The term “information technology” does
     not include any equipment that is acquired by a contractor incidental to a contract that
     does not require use of the equipment. (Source: OMB, M-15-14, Management and
     Oversight of Federal Information Technology, June 10, 2015)

e.   Telecommunications. The preparation, transmission, communication, or related
     processing of information (writing, images, sounds, or other data) by electrical,
     electromagnetic, electromechanical, electro-optical, or electronic means. (Source:



                                             B-2
     NIST, Information Technology Laboratory, Computer Security Resource Center,
     Glossary)

f.   Wireless Technologies. Technologies that permits the transfer of information between
     separated points without physical connection. Note: Currently wireless technologies
     use infrared, acoustic, radio frequency, and optical. (Source: NIST, Information
     Technology Laboratory, Computer Security Resource Center, Glossary)




                                            B-2
                                    APPENDIX C

                        AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Federal CIO Council, Recommended Executive Branch Model Policy/Guidance on
“Limited Personal Use” of Government Office Equipment Including Information
Technology, May 19, 1999

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. §3551, et seq.,
December 18, 2014

Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), P.L. 113-291, 128 Stat.
3292, Title VIII, Subtitle D, §831-837, December 19, 2014

Federal Travel Regulation, 41 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 300, July 1, 2018

IEEE-SA, 802.11 Standards

NIST, Information Technology Laboratory, Computer Security Resource Center, Glossary

NIST, SP 800-53 Revision 4, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems
and Organizations, April 2013, includes updates as of January 22, 2015

Office of Government Ethics, Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive
Branch, November 18, 2016, Effective January 1, 2017

OMB, Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource, July 28, 2016

OMB, M-15-14, Management and Oversight of Federal Information Technology, June 10,
2015

USDA, DR 3300-020, Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer Roles and
Responsibilities, July 12, 2019

USDA, DR 3300-025, Secure Domain Name System, March 18, 2016

USDA, DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct (October 4, 2007)

USDA, Quality of Service (QoS)/Class of Service (CoS) Standard, Version 1.0, January 10,
2012

USDA, USDA Information Technology Strategic Plan 2014-2018

USDA, 3300 Series Telecommunications Directives



                                           C-1
