                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                               NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                       DR 3300-015
                                                               DATE:
 SUBJECT: Secure Communication Systems                         March 22, 2022
 OPI: Office of Homeland Security, National Security           EXPIRATION DATE:
 Systems Program                                               March 22, 2027



Section                                                                                     Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                  1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                       2
3.   Scope                                                                                    2
4.   Policy                                                                                   2
5.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                               4
6.   Compliance                                                                               8
7.   Policy Exceptions                                                                        8
8.   Inquiries                                                                                9

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                     A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                    B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                     C-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.   This Departmental Regulation (DR) defines the United States Department of Agriculture
          (USDA) requirements for the management and use of secure communication devices,
          material, and systems that protect Classified National Security Information (CNSI) to
          ensure that:

          (1) Secure communication assets are appropriately managed and controlled;

          (2) The area(s) where equipment is stored or used is approved and accredited by the
              Office of Homeland Security’s (OHS) Personnel and Document Security Division
              (PDSD) or CNSI Staff (CNSIS);

          (3) CNSI users are properly trained and made aware of their responsibilities by
              members of the OHS’ National Security Systems Program (NSSP) and
              OHS/PDSD/CNSIS; and
          (4) The activities of the user community, OHS PDSD, and NSSP are coordinated.

     b.   This policy complies with Executive Order (EO) 13526, Classified National Security
          Information; Committee on National Security Systems (CNSS) directives, policies, and
          instructions; National Security Agency (NSA) security doctrines; Intelligence
          Community Directives (ICD) issued by the Office of the Director of National
          Intelligence (ODNI); and USDA directives, which establish, implement, and support
          secure communications for the protection of CNSI. Guidance references are provided in
          Appendix C, Authorities and References of this document.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     a.   This policy supersedes DR 3300-015, Secure Communications Systems, dated July 14,
          2016, in its entirety.

     b.   This policy will remain in effect until superseded or expiration.

     c.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their policies and procedures
          with this DR within 6 months of its publication date.

     d.   CNSI is also referred to as classified information. Confidential business information
          and proprietary information are not the same as classified information.


3. SCOPE

     a.   This policy applies to all USDA secure communications systems (e.g., telephones,
          mobile telephones, video teleconference systems, servers, laptop and desktop computers,
          applications, and wireless devices) that are developed, maintained, or operated by
          USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, employees, political appointees,
          contractors, or other individuals working for or on behalf of the USDA.

     b.   This policy only applies to classified systems and national security systems used for the
          transmission and processing of CNSI. Departmental Manual (DM) 3440-001, USDA
          Classified National Security Information Program Manual, provides guidance for the
          protection of CNSI.


4.   POLICY

     a.   The OHS NSSP will be the primary office in the USDA to acquire and manage all
          telecommunication, computer, and network systems used to process, transmit, and store
          CNSI. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices that need access to secure
          communication systems will request support through the USDA NSSP Manager
          (NSSPM).



                                                  2
b.   Electronic transmission of classified information will be made via secure telephone,
     secure radio system, secure video teleconferencing system, secure data network, or a
     secure facsimile device, protected by an NSA-approved controlled cryptographic item
     (CCI), encryption device, or other NSA-approved architecture.

c.   Only devices validated by NSA and approved by the USDA for the transmission of
     CNSI will be used in USDA. A list of approved secure communication devices can be
     obtained by contacting the NSSP Office.

d.   Only authorized personnel may use, install, remove, or relocate any secure, non-mobile
     communication device without prior approval from the USDA Communications
     Security (COMSEC) Manager.

e.   Only authorized personnel may use mobile devices for the processing or transmission of
     CNSI. Users will adhere to the applicable NSA Security Doctrine for mobile devices.

f.   COMSEC devices (e.g., terminals or cryptographic material) may only be issued to
     specific approved individuals. These devices cannot be re-issued to another individual
     without first being returned to the USDA COMSEC Manager for proper inventory
     management.

g.   Secure Equipment and Systems Requests to Process CNSI

     (1) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices requesting CNSI systems will adhere to
         USDA and Federal policies and regulations for secure equipment. Security
         guidelines and requirements outlined in DM 3440-001 and DM 3300-015, Secure
         Communication Systems will be met to ensure the security of CNSI.

     (2) The requesting Mission Area, agency, or staff office will incur the costs associated
         with the acquisition of the requested system and the Operations and Maintenance
         (O&M) funding requirements for it.

     (3) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will identify their requirements for a
         CNSI system on form Agriculture Department (AD)-3084, Justification for a
         Classified National Security Information System, and submit it to the USDA OHS
         NSSP office, per DM 3300-015. System requests will be reviewed and signed by a
         Mission Area, agency, or staff office approving authority before the documentation
         is submitted to the USDA OHS NSSP office.




                                            3
5. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Director of OHS will:

       (1) Ensure secure communication technical assistance is available to Mission Areas,
           agencies, and staff offices;

       (2) Serve as the Designated Approving Authority (DAA) for information and
           telecommunication systems used to process CNSI. The DAA will:

           (a) Review and approve, or disapprove, all CNSI system requests; and

           (b) Ensure that all applicable assessment and authorization (A&A) processes
               required for the implementation of the identified technical solution are properly
               addressed;

       (3) Oversee the USDA OHS NSSP office;

       (4) Designate an NSSPM with oversight responsibility for the development,
           implementation, and evaluation of the USDA classified information systems A&A
           program, per the Committee on National Security Systems Policy (CNSSP) 22,
           Cybersecurity Risk Management Policy, dated August 31, 2016;

       (5) Provide sufficient resources to support the USDA NSSP;

       (6) Provide guidance, direction, and oversight for the security of processes and secure
           communication systems;

       (7) Provide direction, oversight, and concurrence review functions for the USDA A&A
           process for secure communication systems;

       (8) Review agency and staff office policy exception requests and render decisions per
           Section 7, Policy Exceptions, of this DR;

       (9) Approve or disapprove all requirements and requests for systems used to process
           CNSI after review of the information provided by PDSD and USDA NSSP; and

       (10) Maintain an oversight role to ensure consistent and effective implementation of
            secure communication systems.

  b.   Mission Area, agency and staff office system owners will:

       (1) Coordinate all CNSI telecommunications requirements with the USDA NSSPM;

       (2) Identify and provide initial acquisition funding and O&M funding, as appropriate,
           to support the requirements;



                                              4
     (3) Identify a Federal or contractor point of contact (POC), who is knowledgeable in all
         aspects of the request and can assist the reviewing entities with questions during the
         request process and review of the documents. The POC will adhere to USDA and
         Federal policies and regulations regarding the use of the system requested;

     (4) Coordinate with the USDA NSSPM all support agreements for managed CNSI
         services from non-USDA entities;

     (5) Register CNSI systems with the USDA NSSP office in accordance with DM 3300-
         015, and provide required resources to complete A&A for the respective classified
         stand-alone computer systems;

     (6) Consult with the USDA NSSPM to initiate the necessary procurement actions to
         obtain CCI and system components used for the processing or transmission of
         CNSI;

     (7) Ensure the protection of CCI, and notify the USDA COMSEC manager within 12
         hours of the discovery of the loss of COMSEC keys or equipment used to process
         or transmit CNSI;

     (8) Notify the USDA NSSPM and PDSD a minimum of 30 calendar days prior to the
         relocation of any secure communication equipment, to provide ample time to
         coordinate logistical changes or address security concerns with the OHS PDSD
         Classified National Security Information Staff;

     (9) Upon request, assist the COMSEC manager with semiannual inventory and
         equipment maintenance tasks; and

     (10) Contact the USDA COMSEC manager prior to transfer, reassignment, or any
          absence of the hand receipt holder exceeding 30 calendar days, to allow for a secure
          transfer of equipment and delegation of responsibility prior to the receipt holder’s
          departure. Failure to properly transfer devices prior to departure may result in a
          reportable COMSEC incident.

c.   The OHS PDSD will:

     (1) Verify the security clearance of all personnel who manage, operate, configure, and
         certify telecommunication and computer systems used to process CNSI;

     (2) Certify that the identified location has been approved for processing of CNSI;

     (3) Coordinate CNSI information technology matters with the USDA NSSPM;

     (4) Respond to employee questions on protecting classified information or working in a
         space approved for the processing and discussion of CNSI;



                                             5
     (5) Perform information risk assessments;

     (6) Review and approve new CNSI system requests for:

         (a) The intended purpose or use of a system;

         (b) Where and how storage will be maintained;

         (c) Risk assessment findings; and

         (d) Security operating guidelines;

     (7) Approve and maintain a copy of the facility equipment inventory; and

     (8) Approve system and facility standard operating procedures (SOP).

d.   Authorized users will:

     (1) Protect COMSEC devices, cryptographic keys, communication systems, and
         passwords to prevent access and disclosure to unauthorized personnel;

     (2) Report the physical loss of a cryptographic key, COMSEC device, or other secure
         communication system or component used to process CNSI within 12 hours of
         discovery to the USDA COMSEC manager and PDSD;

     (3) Complete initial training for each system and COMSEC device when issued;

     (4) Complete annual device and system refresher security training, as required, based
         on the type of device or system; and

     (5) Return or transfer COMSEC equipment to the NSSP office or other authorized
         person when duties change or upon leaving the organization.

e.   The USDA NSSPM will:

     (1) Hold and maintain a security clearance that allows access to Top Secret/Special
         Compartmented Information;

     (2) Oversee all COMSEC accounts within the USDA;

     (3) Identify, obtain, and remove NSA-issued USDA COMSEC accounts;

     (4) Serve as the USDA COMSEC Authority, and designate COMSEC user
         representatives to order encryption device keys for all USDA COMSEC accounts;




                                              6
     (5) Manage the centralized systems used by Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices
         to support CNSI communications;

     (6) Manage all service and service agreements with non-USDA support departments
         and Federal agencies from which CNSI information technology service and
         material are received;

     (7) Serve as the Information Systems Security Officer for classified standalone
         computer systems used to process CNSI:

         (a) Provide guidance and policy;

         (b) Write and review master system security plans;

         (c) Review system security plans (SSP) and memoranda of agreement for accuracy
             and compliance with USDA and Federal directives;

         (d) Develop user training documentation; and

         (e) Ensure compliance with the SSP;

     (8) Serve as the USDA Homeland Secure Data Network (HSDN) Program Manager;
         and

     (9) Coordinate with and advise USDA Departmental leadership on all secure
         communication systems available that meet Continuity of Operations and
         Continuity of Government requirements.

f.   The USDA COMSEC Manager will:

     (1) Serve as the USDA COMSEC Manager and COMSEC user representative for
         ordering, receiving, distributing, and inventorying COMSEC key material;

     (2) Develop the COMSEC SOP to be followed by all USDA NSSP staff and
         customers;

     (3) Coordinate the receipt, transfer, accountability, safeguarding, and destruction of
         COMSEC material assigned to a COMSEC account;

     (4) Attend the NSA COMSEC Manager Training Course, as required by NSA;

     (5) Maintain knowledge of the latest national security communication policies,
         equipment, and future technologies; and

     (6) Maintain the security clearance level commensurate with the duties and
         responsibilities of the position.



                                             7
  g.   The USDA OHS NSSP staff will:

       (1) Manage the day-to-day operations of the HSDN computer room and conference
           room facilities in the South Building;

       (2) Serve as the liaison to the Department of State to facilitate communications and
           manage USDA organizational roles and user profiles for receipt of classified cables;

       (3) Support secure video teleconferences and validate meeting participant clearances
           with PDSD;

       (4) Ensure that proper security procedures are followed; and

       (5) Direct questions to PDSD regarding proper procedures for the handling, storage, or
           use of CNSI.


6. COMPLIANCE

  DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, Section 16, Computers,
  establishes the USDA’s policies, procedures, and standards on employee responsibilities and
  conduct relative to the use of computers and telecommunications equipment. In addition,
  Section 21, Disciplinary or Adverse Action, states:

  a.   A violation of any of the responsibilities and conduct standards contained in this DR
       may be cause for disciplinary or adverse action; and

  b.   Disciplinary or adverse action will be affected in accordance with applicable laws and
       regulations.


7. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  a.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will conform to this policy. If,
       however, a specific policy requirement cannot be met as explicitly stated, a Mission
       Area, agency, or staff office may submit a waiver request. The waiver request will
       explain the reason for the request, identify compensating security controls or actions that
       meet the intent of the policy, and describe how the compensating controls or actions
       provide a similar or greater level of defense or compliance than the policy requirement.

  b.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will address all policy waiver requests to the
       Director, USDA Office of Homeland Security and submit the request to OHSEC-NSSP-
       SupportTeam@usda.gov for review and determination.




                                               8
8. INQUIRIES

  All questions regarding this DR will be directed to the USDA NSSPM or HSDN Support
  Team at OHSEC-NSSP-SupportTeam@usda.gov.


                                        -END-




                                          9
                              APPENDIX A

                 ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


A&A      Assessment and Authorization
AD       Agriculture Department
CCI      Controlled Cryptographic Item
CFFB     Central Facility Finksburg
CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
CHVP     Cryptographic High Value Product
CMCS     COMSEC Material Control System
CNSI     Classified National Security Information
CNSIS    Classified National Security Information Staff
CNSS     Committee on National Security Systems
CNSSD    Committee on National Security Systems Directive
CNSSI    Committee on National Security Systems Instruction
CNSSP    Committee on National Security Systems Policy
COMSEC   Communications Security
CSS      Central Security Service
DAA      Designated Approving Authority
DM       Departmental Manual
DR       Departmental Regulation
EO       Executive Order
FISMA    Federal Information Security Modernization Act
FOUO     For Official Use Only
HAIPE    High Assurance Internet Protocol Encryptor
HSDN     Homeland Secure Data Network
ICD      Intelligence Community Directive
IS       Information System
KME      Key Management Entity
MSK      Message Signature Key
NIST     National Institute of Standards and Technology
NSA      National Security Agency
NSSP     National Security Systems Program
NSSPM    National Security Systems Program Manager
NTISSI   National Security Telecommunications and Information Systems Security
         Instruction
O&M      Operations and Maintenance
ODNI     Office of the Director of National Intelligence
OHS      Office of Homeland Security
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
PCMCIA   Personal Computer Memory Card International Association
PDS      Protected Distribution System
PDSD     Personnel and Document Security Division
POC      Point of Contact



                                   A-1
SCRM     Supply Chain Risk Management
SDNS     Secure Data Network System
SOP      Standard Operating Procedure
SP       Special Publication
SSP      System Security Plan
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                                   A-2
                                         APPENDIX B

                                         DEFINITIONS


Authorized User. Any appropriately cleared individual with a requirement to access an
information system (IS) for performing or assisting in a lawful government purpose. (Source:
Committee on National Security Systems Instruction (CNSSI) 4009, CNSS Glossary, dated April
6, 2015)

Confidential Business Information. Information which concerns or relates to the trade secrets,
processes, operations, style of works, or apparatus, or to the production, sales, shipments,
purchases, transfers, identification of customers, inventories, or amount or source of any income,
profits, losses, or expenditures of any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other
organization, or other information of commercial value, the disclosure of which is likely to have
the effect of either impairing the International Trade Commission's ability to obtain such
information as is necessary to perform its statutory functions, or causing substantial harm to the
competitive position of the person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other organization from
which the information was obtained, unless the International Trade Commission is required by
law to disclose such information. The term “confidential business information” includes
“proprietary information.” (Source: Adapted from 19 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) §
201.6, Confidential business information)

Classified Information. See classified national security information. (Source: CNSSI 4009)

Classified National Security Information (CNSI). Information that has been determined,
pursuant to EO 13526 or any predecessor order, to require protection against unauthorized
disclosure and is marked to indicate its classified status when in documentary form. (Source:
CNSSI 4009)

Clearance. Formal security determination by an authorized adjudicative office that an individual
is authorized to access, on a need-to-know basis, a specific level of classified information (Top
Secret, Secret, or Confidential). (Source: CNSSI 4009)

Command Authority. The command authority is responsible for the appointment of user
representatives for a department, agency, or organization and their key and granting of modern
(electronic) key-ordering privileges for those user representatives. (Source: CNSSI 4009)

Communications Security (COMSEC). A component of information assurance that deals with
measures and controls taken to deny unauthorized persons information derived from
telecommunications and to ensure the authenticity of such telecommunications. COMSEC
includes cryptographic security, transmission security, emissions security, and physical security
of COMSEC material. (Source: CNSSI 4009)

COMSEC Account. Administrative entity, identified by an account number, used to maintain
accountability, custody, and control of COMSEC material. (Source: CNSSI 4009)



                                               B-1
COMSEC Manager. Individual who manages the COMSEC resources of an organization.
(Source: CNSSI 4009)

COMSEC Material. Item(s) designed to secure or authenticate telecommunications. COMSEC
material includes, but is not limited to key, equipment, modules, devices, documents, hardware,
firmware, or software that embodies or describes cryptographic logic and other items that
perform COMSEC functions. This includes Controlled Cryptographic Item (CCI) equipment,
Cryptographic High Value Products (CHVP), and other Suite B equipment, etc. (Source:
CNSSI 4009)

Continuity of Government. A coordinated effort within the Federal Government’s executive
branch to ensure that national essential functions continue to be performed during a catastrophic
emergency. (Source: CNSSI 4009)

Controlled Cryptographic Item (CCI). Secure telecommunications or information system, or
associated cryptographic component, that is unclassified and handled through the COMSEC
Material Control System (CMCS), an equivalent material control system, or a combination of the
two that provides accountability and visibility. Such items are marked “Controlled
Cryptographic Item” or, where space is limited, “CCI.” (Source: CNSSI 4009)

Cryptographic. Pertaining to, or concerned with, cryptography. (Source: CNSSI 4009)

Cryptography. Art or science concerning the principles, means, and methods for rendering plain
information unintelligible and for restoring encrypted information to intelligible form. (Source:
CNSSI 4009)

Encryption. The cryptographic transformation of data to produce ciphertext. (Source: CNSSI
4009)

Information Assurance. Measures that protect and defend information systems by ensuring their
availability, integrity, authentication, confidentiality, and nonrepudiation. These measures
include providing for restoration of information systems by incorporating protection, detection,
and reaction capabilities. (Source: CNSSI 4009)

Information System. A discrete set of information resources organized for the collection,
processing, maintenance, use, sharing, dissemination, or disposition of information. (Source:
CNSSI 4009)

Information Systems Security Officer. Individual assigned responsibility by the senior agency
information security officer, authorizing official, or information system owner for maintaining
the appropriate operational security posture for an information system or program. (Source:
CNSSI 4009)

Key. A numerical value used to control cryptographic operations, such as decryption,
encryption, signature generation, or signature verification. Usually, this is a sequence of



                                                B-2
random or pseudorandom bits used initially to set up and periodically change the operations
performed in cryptographic equipment for the purpose of encrypting or decrypting electronic
signals, determining electronic counter-countermeasure patterns, or producing another key.
(Source: CNSSI 4009)

Risk Assessment. The process of identifying, estimating, and prioritizing risks resulting from the
operation of an information system to organizational operations (including mission, functions,
image, and reputation), organizational assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation.
Part of risk management, incorporates threat and vulnerability analyses, and considers
mitigations provided by security controls planned or in place. Synonymous with risk analysis.
(Source: CNSSI 4009)

Secure Communications. Telecommunications deriving security by the use of NSA-approved
products and/or protected distribution systems (PDS). (Source: CNSSI 4009)

System Security Plan (SSP). Formal document that provides an overview of the security
requirements for an information system and describes the security controls in place or planned
for meeting those requirements. (Source: CNSSI 4009)

User. Individual, or (system) process acting on behalf of an individual, authorized to access an
information system. (Source: CNSSI 4009)

User Representative (COMSEC). The key management entity (KME) authorized by an
organization and registered by the Central Facility Finksburg (CFFB) to order asymmetric key
(including secure data network system (SDNS) key and message signature key (MSK)).
(Source: CNSSI 4009)




                                               B-3
                                       APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


CNSS references and the NSA policy manual may not be accessible on the unclassified network.
Please contact the NSSPM to obtain copies of these documents.

19 CFR § 201.6, Confidential Business Information

32 CFR Part 2001, Classified National Security Information; Implementing regulation for EO
13526

CNSS, Committee on National Security Systems Directive (CNSSD) 505, Supply Chain Risk
Management (SCRM), August 1, 2017

CNSS, CNSSI 1001, National Instruction on Classified Information Spillage, June 15, 2021

CNSS, CNSSI 1253, Security Categorization and Control Selection for National Security
Systems, March 27, 2014

CNSS, CNSSI 3021, Operational Security Doctrine for the AN/CYZ-10/10A Data Transfer
Device, January 10, 2006

CNSS, CNSSI 3029, Operational Systems Security Doctrine for TACLANE (KG-175), April 19,
2006

CNSS, CNSSI 4000, Maintenance of Communications Security (COMSEC) Equipment, October
12, 2012

CNSS, CNSSI 4001, Controlled Cryptographic Items, (FOUO), May 7, 2013

CNSS, CNSSI 4003, Reporting and Evaluating Communications Security (COMSEC) Incidents,
(FOUO), June 16, 2016

CNSS, CNSSI 4004.1, Destruction and Emergency Protection Procedures for COMSEC and
Classified Material, (FOUO), August 2006 with Annex B amended January 10, 2008

CNSS, CNSSI 4005, Safeguarding COMSEC Facilities and Materials, (FOUO), August 22,
2011

CNSS, CNSSI 4009, Committee on National Security Systems (CNSS) Glossary, April 6, 2015

CNSS, CNSSI 4031, Cryptographic High Value Products (CHVP), September 18, 2019




                                            C-1
CNSS, CNSSP 1, National Policy for Safeguarding and Control of COMSEC Material,
September 30, 2004

CNSS, CNSSP 3, National Policy for Granting Access to U.S Classified Cryptographic
Information, October 1, 2007

CNSS, CNSSP 19, National Policy Governing the Use of High Assurance Internet Protocol
Encryptor (HAIPE) Products, June 10, 2013

CNSS, CNSSP 22, Cybersecurity Risk Management Policy, August 31, 2016

CNSS, CNSSP 26, National Policy on Reducing the Risk of Removable Media for National
Security Systems, July 22, 2021

EO 13526, Classified National Security Information, December 29, 2009

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), December 18, 2014, 44
United States Code (U.S.C.) § 3551, et seq.

National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Special Publication (SP) 800-53,
Revision 5, Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations,
September 23, 2020, with updates as of December 10, 2020

NSA Central Security Service (NSA/CSS) Policy Manual 3-16, January 23, 2015

Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI), ICD 503, Intelligence Community
Information Technology Systems Security Risk Management, Certification and Accreditation,
September 15, 2008

ODNI, ICD 705, Sensitive Compartmented Information Facilities, May 26, 2010

OMB, Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource, July 28, 2016

USDA, AD-3084, Justification for a Classified National Security Information System, December
2014

USDA, DM 3300-015, Secure Communication Systems, November 15, 2021

USDA, DM 3440-001, USDA Classified National Security Information Program, June 9, 2016

USDA, DR 3440-001, USDA Classified National Security Information Program, June 9, 2016

USDA, DR 3440-002, Control and Protection of “Sensitive Security Information,” January 30,
2003

USDA, DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007



                                             C-2
USDA, DR 4600-003, USDA Defensive Counterintelligence and Insider Threat Programs, July
12, 2021




                                          C-3
