DR 3300-1                                                                     March 23, 1999


                                     APPENDIX       M



                       INTERNET PROTOCOL (IP) ADDRESSES



1      PURPOSE

       This Appendix establishes the policy for the management and use of Internet
       Protocol (IP) addresses within the United States Department of Agriculture
       (USDA).



2      BACKGROUND

       This directive augments the USDA IP Addressing Plan and other internal and
       external regulations that establish general policies governing all
       telecommunications networks, systems, hosts, and routers using Internet Protocol
       addressing. IP addresses are a Departmental resource that must be managed to
       ensure that the Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) achieves greater
       assignment and routing efficiencies.

       These addresses assigned to USDA are divided into three categories; the three
       Class B network addresses used on the USDA Internet Access Network, an 8K
       (8192) Classless Interdomain Routing (CIDR) block, and the other Class B and
       Class C network addresses in use in the Department. In each of these categories,
       addresses were delegated to USDA from the InterNIC and represent official
       licenses to operate on the Internet. Because of this and the scarcity of the resource
       in general, care must be taken in the allocation, use and management of these
       addresses. Routing constraints and capabilities will be an important consideration
       to be managed during the implementation of an Enterprise Network (EN).

       Although the next generation of IP (Ipv6 or Ipng) will provide for a much larger
       addressing space, its delay in implementation makes it imperative to continue to
       efficiently manage USDA’s current IP address allocation. The importance of
       assigning these addresses efficiently is necessary to provide the types of Internet-
       based services which are continuing to be more important to USDA’s
       constituents. The goal of achieving at least 25-50 percent assignment efficiency at
       the host level must be obtained. With the implementation of an EN the importance
       of assigning IP addresses efficiently within a geographically based topology is
       critical. Agencies must work with the OCIO to ensure that variable length
       addresses are used on Local Area Networks (LAN) to ensure that only the number
       of needed addresses is assigned to each LAN. The use of classless routing


                                             1
DR 3300-1                                                                 March 23, 1999


       protocols such as Open Shortest Path First can support splitting of Class C
       network addresses between sites. Address distribution must be based on location
       of a network supporting limited agency autonomy without compromising the
       concept of a shared network.



3      REFERENCES

       Source                Publication           Title/Subject

       Internet      Request for Comment Internet Protocol Network Information
                     Center (RFC) 791 (InterNIC)

       InterNIC              RFC 950               Internet Standard Subnetting
                             Procedures

       InterNIC              RFC 917               Internet Subnets

       InterNIC              RFC 1069              IP ISO Addressing



4      ABBREVIATIONS

       AS            -       Autonomous System

       CIDR          -       Classless Interdomain Routing

       CIO           -       Chief Information Officer

       CO            -       Certifying Official

       EN            -       Enterprise Network

       FTS2000       -       Federal Telecommunications System 2000

       IAN           -       Internet Access Network

       InterNIC      -       Internet Network Information Center

       IP            -       Internet Protocol

       ISSTD -       Information Systems Security and Telecommunications Division




                                           2
DR 3300-1                                                                March 23, 1999


       ITU-TSS -     International Telecommunications Union- Telecommunications
                     Standards Sector

       NSAP          -      Network Service Access Point

       NSEL          -      Network Selector

       OCIO          -      Office of the Chief Information Officer

       OSPF          -      Open Shortest Path First

       PRMD          -      Private Management Domain

       RD            -      Routing Domain

       RFC           -      Request for Comment

       TCP/IP        -      Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol

       TSO           -      Telecommunications Services and Operations

       USDA          -      United States Department of Agriculture



5      POLICY

       a      Authority

              (1)     The Chief Information Officer (CIO) is the central IP addressing
              authority for USDA. The CIO delegates functional responsibility to the
              Office of the Chief Information Officer Telecommunications Services and
              Operations (OCIO/TSO) to ensure success of this program by:

                     (a)    Managing USDA’s IP Addresses Resources;

                     (b)    Providing IP Address Provisioning and IP Address
                     Allocations;

                     (c)    Providing administration and maintenance of the Network
                     Information Base (NIB) database;

                     (d)    Maintaining the USDA IP Addressing Registry;




                                          3
DR 3300-1                                                                  March 23, 1999


                   (e)     Developing a transition plan to move the three Class B IP
                   addresses assigned to the USDA Internet Access Network to the
                   use of Class C addresses; and

                   (f)     Ensuring all existing and future IP addresses will be
                   registered with OCIO/TSO.

       b    Domain Names

            (1)     The use of the second level domain name, “usda.gov” has been
            officially registered with the InterNIC and will be used in official agency
            domain names of the form “...<q4>.<q3>.usda.gov”

            (2)     To use a second-level domain name other than “usda.gov,” an
            agency must send a request for approval to OCIO/TSO that contains
            justification for its use.

            (3)    Agencies using previously assigned second-level domain name,
            “ag.gov,” and all third-level domain names must use “usda.gov” as the
            second-level domain name as of January 1999.

            (4)    Agencies will not connect a host or other device that uses IP and
            has an unregistered IP address to the Internet, the USDA Internet Access
            Network, or to any network connected to either of these networks.

       c    Host Address Efficiency

            (1)    Achieve 25-50 percent assignment and routing efficiencies
            advocated by the InterNIC.

       d    USDA Address Advertisement

            (1)     The advertisement of USDA IP addresses will be made by the
            OCIO/TSO. Agencies using private ISPs must obtain their addresses and
            advertisement through the private ISP.



6      RESPONSIBILITIES

       a    Office of the Chief Information Officer will:

            (1)    Develop and maintain Department-wide policies and guidelines for
            implementing IP addresses according to the InterNIC recommendations
            and standards; and




                                          4
DR 3300-1                                                                    March 23, 1999


              (2)   Review and provide comments on all agencies supplements and
              agency-unique directives relating to this policy.

       b      Office of the Chief Information Officer-Telecommunications Services and
       Operations will:

              (1)   Assist the agencies in meeting addressing requirements as the
              Department transitions to a geographically based Enterprise Network;

              (2)     Maintain a USDA IP Addressing Plan. This plan will encompass
              all addressing resources allocated to the Department, including a
              geographic allocation plan for the unallocated portions of the Departments
              8K (8192) Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) blocks of IP addresses.
              The plan will be updated to meet the requirements of the USDA Enterprise
              Network as it is developed.

              (3)     Ensure that all addresses assigned under the allocation plan will be
              advertised to the Internet through the Department’s Internet Access
              Network and may not advertise their addresses through other Internet
              service providers to include:

                     (a)     Ensuring that the Departments 8K CIDR block will remain
                     a single route advertisement to present a consistent external view
                     to the Internet;

                     (b)    Continually assessing the internal network topology to
                     ensure that the advantages of routing efficiencies provided by the
                     CIDR concept will be realized; and

                     (c)    Reducing the number of internal routes thereby reducing
                     the need to readdress end systems devices.

              (4)     Coordinate the use from other USDA addressing resources or from
              private network addresses described in RFC1918 to include:

                     (a) Router-to-router Network Addressing will not be made from
                     the 2.5K block; or

                     (b)    If the OCIO/TSO determines that these network addresses
                     need to be allocated from this 2.5K block of addresses, some of
                     each sub-zone can be set aside for this purpose.

              (5)     Determine if Class B and Class C Network addresses that are not
              parts of the USDA 8K CIDR block used by agencies will remain on the
              network.




                                            5
DR 3300-1                                                                 March 23, 1999


            (6)    Coordinate with and assist the agencies in migrating to geography-
            based IP addressing environment.

            (7)     Receive and process agency IP Address Allocation request forms
            for IP addresses; and

            (8)     Maintain an electronic Network Information Base (NIB) data base
            of IP Addresses, keeping it current and accurate by requesting yearly calls
            for information from the agencies.

       c    Agencies and Staff Offices will:

            (1)   Designate an appropriate technical manager to be the IP
            Addressing Custodian;

            (2) Require the Custodian to develop an agency IP addressing plan that
            efficiently distributes the IP addressing resource assigned to the agency.
            The plan should contain procedures for accurately reporting the utilization
            of the resource. This plan will be incorporated in the overall USDA IP
            Addressing Plan maintained by the CIO;

            (3)     Request assistance from OCIO/TSO, as necessary, in migrating
            from existing, poorly utilized, address spaces to other portions of USDA’s
            collective addressing space to include:

                   (a) Establishing an active address management program to return
                   resources no longer needed to the InterNIC.

            (4)    Maintain and provide a complete electronic format inventory of IP
            resources, including the following information for each network and/or
            subnetwork address assigned:

                   (a)     Network Address;

                   (b)     Network Mask;

                   (c)     Physical Location of the Network;

                   (d)     Point-of-contact, responsible for network; management at
                   the location to include a name, telephone number, e-mail address
                   and a postal address; and

                   (e)     The number of Host (or device) Addresses assigned;

            (5)   Submit a request for IP Address Allocation to the USDA
            Addressing Authority. Include justification for the resource being


                                         6
DR 3300-1                                                                  March 23, 1999


            requested. For large address block requests, detail the request and
            supporting justification to include:

                   (a)     Total number and type of addresses being requested;

                   (b)     Network description;

                   (c) Total number of local area networks to be addressed;

                   (d)     Number of devices in the network;

                   (e) Future growth projections; and

                   (f) Other supporting documentation to include any requirements
                   analysis prepared for technical approval of the network;

                   If the request represents an increase in existing address allocations,
                   demonstration of efficient use of the existing resource should be
                   provided. Currently the InterNIC expects a minimum of 25 percent
                   utilization;

            (6) Respond to queries concerning agency specific addresses. This may
            include identifying an address and determining the individual responsible
            for actions taken on the Internet or USDA networks using that address. All
            information requested from outside the Department will be coordinated
            through the OCIO. (See section “Agencies and Staff Offices will” in
            Appendix I);

            (7)   Develop and submit yearly an Individual Agency Network IP
            Addressing Plan to include:

                   (a)     Points-of-Contacts;

                   (b)     Addressing Resource;

                   (c)     Justification for Addressing Resource;

                   (d)     Method of Address Distribution;

                   (e)     Method of Recording Address Distribution;

            (8)     Achieve at a minimum 25 percent IP address assignment
            efficiency.




                                         7
DR 3300-1                                                                   March 23, 1999


7      FORMS

       Obtain IP address delegation from the USDA Addressing authority by submitting
       form “USDA IP Network/Subnetwork Address Request Form.” (See Figure 1)



       These forms are available from OCIO/TSO and may be obtained electronically
       on-line and are located on the following computer host:

              http://www.net.usda.gov/internet/resources/addresses/index.html



8      DEFINITIONS

       a       Address. The uniquely coded label assigned to an object, device, or item
       of data to identify its location.

       b       CIDR. CIDR is an IP addressing concept based on route aggregation.
       Blocks of network addresses are grouped in binary (or power of two) groups
       using network masks. In this way, large groups of addresses can be represented in
       network routing tables as a single entry. This also yields management efficiencies
       regarding security, accounting, and other network management activities. Within
       the context of a network segment, each of these large groups can then be
       subdivided along binary boundaries into smaller groups. The smaller groups then
       can be allocated throughout the network segment and can even impact the way
       allocations are made on individual LANs.

       c       Domain. A defined set of applications, systems, users, or organizations
       interrelated by virtue of being administered by a common authority.

       d      InterNIC. The official network information center established by the
       National Science Foundation (NSF) to provide and coordinate registration
       services, directory and database services, and information services for the
       NSFNET community of Internet users.




                                            8
DR 3300-1                                                                    March 23, 1999


                                                Figure 1

                         USDA IP Network/Subnetwork Address Request Form

 To request IP addresses for your subnetwork, please complete this form. Any
subnetworks servicing USDA personnel and personnel supporting the mission of USDA
may apply. If you have any questions, please contact us at the address listed below.

Request Date :

Agency Information
Name :
Unit(s) :
Address :

Administrative Authority Information Technical Contact(s) Information
Name:
Title:
Email:
Voice:
Fax:
Postal:

Is your network currently connected to the Internet? [ ]Yes[ ] No
If so, please describe the connection point, method, and speed of access :

Description of Network (Use Attachment if necessary):


---------- Please send the completed form to :

Email : Domain.Names@usda.gov
Fax : 970/498-1660
Address : USDA/OCIO/TSO
3825 East Mulberry Street
Fort Collins, CO 80524
--------------------------------------------------------------------




                                                     9
