                              U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                    WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                    NUMBER:
     DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                        DR 3300-001-B
                                                                    DATE:
 SUBJECT: Telephone Use                                             July 16, 2020
 OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer, Digital              EXPIRATION DATE:
 Infrastructure Services Center, Enterprise Network Services        July 16, 2025



Section                                                                                      Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                 1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                      1
3.   Scope                                                                                   2
4.   Background                                                                              2
5.   Policy                                                                                  2
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                              5
7.   Compliance                                                                              7
8.   Policy Exceptions                                                                       7
9.   Inquiries                                                                               8

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                      A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                     B-1
Appendix C Authorities and References                                                        C-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes United States Department of Agriculture
     (USDA) policy for the management and use of Government telephone equipment.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     a.   This DR replaces DR 3300-1-B, Telephone Use, dated March 23, 1999.

     b.   This DR will be in effect until superseded or the expiration date.

     c.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their policies and procedures
          with this DR within 6 months of the publication date.
  d.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may supplement this DR when developing
       their internal guidance. Modifications to the intent or purpose of this DR are not
       allowed. If Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices publish internal guidance that
       supplements this DR, one copy of each supplement will be forwarded to the Office of
       the Chief Information Officer (OCIO), Digital Infrastructure Services Center (DISC),
       Enterprise Network Services (ENS), Telecommunications Infrastructure Management
       and Governance (TIMG) at ens.policy@ocio.usda.gov.


3. SCOPE

  This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, employees, contractors,
  data centers, cloud service providers, cooperative partners, and others working for, or on
  behalf of, the USDA.


4. BACKGROUND

  The USDA telephone use policy depends on, and is derived from, the regulations
  promulgated by Congress and the Executive Office of the President. Managers responsible
  for telecommunications systems within Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must be
  proactive in educating employees on telephone abuse to mitigate the risk of abuse and fraud
  to the systems.


5. POLICY

  a.   Use of Government Telephone Equipment

       Telephone equipment that is paid by the Government is available for conducting official
       business or for limited personal use as outlined in this DR. Official calls may include
       emergency calls and calls that Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices determine are
       necessary in the interest of the Government. Supervisors are responsible for the
       management of telephone use within the scope of their jurisdiction.

       (1) Criteria for Authorized Limited Personal Use

            Use of Government telephone equipment for limited personal use may be
            authorized if such use satisfies the following criteria:

            (a) It is of reasonable duration and frequency;

            (b) It reasonably could not have been made at another time; and

            (c) It does not adversely affect the performance of the employee’s official duties.




                                               2
     (2) Long Distance Calls

         Personal long distance toll and toll-free calls can be made during work hours using
         any type of Government telephone (e.g., cellular, smartphone, Voice over Internet
         Protocol (VoIP), analog) if the call is consistent with the criteria specified in
         Section 5a(1).

     (3) Prohibited Calls

         The following types of calls are prohibited when using Government equipment:

         (a) Calls that interfere with the performance of Government business; and

         (b) Calls to unsafe and unauthorized parties (e.g., “900” calls).

     (4) Collect Calls

         Incoming collect calls (calls placed from a non-Government number to a Federal
         Government number) and third-party calls are prohibited, except for official
         business and only when authorized in writing by the employee’s supervisor. Since
         the telephone company charges an additional fee for collect calls, employees and
         their supervisors should consult with the Telecommunications Mission Area
         Control Officer (TMACO) to determine if there is an alternative, cost-effective
         method for accepting collect calls.

b.   Installation of Government Telecommunications Resources in Private Residences

     Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will determine whether it is necessary to
     install Government-furnished telephones in an employee’s private residence. In general,
     this practice is discouraged to avoid possible conflicts of interest. If it is acceptable for
     the employee to perform Government work on his or her personal telephone, the
     supervisor may allow telework without providing a Government-furnished telephone for
     offsite use. If it is mandated that an employee must use a Government telephone for
     telework, the employee must adhere to this policy.

c.   Monitoring and Recording Telephone Conversations

     (1) In accordance with DR 1710-001, Interception and Monitoring of Telephone and
         Non-telephone Conversations, and DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities
         and Conduct, all parties on the call must receive prior and adequate notice that their
         call is being monitored and recorded, and all parties on the call must agree in
         advance to the monitoring and recording.

     (2) In accordance with DR 3300-001, Telecommunications & Internet Services and
         Use, and DR 1710-001, employees at customer service call centers, and at other



                                              3
         locations where calls from the general public may be received, will be reminded
         that any such calls in which they participate may be monitored for evaluating the
         performance of employees and for quality control purposes.

     (3) USDA customer service telephone numbers equipped with call monitoring or
         recording equipment will provide a suitable greeting announcement such as: “This
         call may be recorded for quality control or training purposes.” Once the caller on
         the incoming call is connected to a live USDA employee, the caller should be given
         the opportunity to provide consent to the recording or monitoring of the call. The
         call cannot be recorded or monitored if the caller does not provide consent.

     (4) For those calls that continue to be monitored or recorded, an automatic tone
         warning device, sometimes called a beep tone, will be provided. This tone would
         automatically produce a distinct signal that is repeated at regular intervals during
         the course of the telephone conversation when the recording or monitoring device is
         in use.

     (5) If speakerphones are used, all parties will be informed of the names of persons
         listening in prior to the subject matter of the call being introduced.

     (6) The Office of Inspector General (OIG) has an exception to the requirement for
         consensual recording of conversations. This exception is described in DR 1710-
         001, Section 3b(1).

d.   Minimizing Telephone Abuse and Fraud

     Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will implement cost-effective actions to
     minimize their exposure to telephone abuse. Abuse can be minimized by:

     (1) Reviewing and validating office telephone bills;

     (2) Blocking collect and third party calls through the Local Exchange Carrier (LEC)
         and telephone systems; and

     (3) Educating employees on the telephone use policy.

e.   Loss of Government Telephone Equipment

     USDA personnel will report the loss of Government telephone equipment to their
     manager as soon as possible to enable services to be deactivated and tracked and to
     minimize financial losses.




                                             4
  f.   Travel Regulations for Telephone Equipment

       USDA personnel will comply with DR 3580-004, Securing Remote Access to USDA
       Information Systems and Client Devices and DR 3580-005, Securing Client Devices for
       International Travel, regarding the use of telephone equipment while traveling.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO) will:

       (1) Represent the USDA to the Federal CIO Council, General Services Administration
           (GSA), and Office of Management and Budget (OMB) regarding requests for
           exceptions to mandatory telecommunications services contracts;

       (2) Represent the USDA to oversight agencies, such as OMB, Government
           Accountability Office (GAO), Department of Homeland Security (DHS),
           Department of Commerce (DOC), and Federal Communications Commission
           (FCC) on telecommunications-related issues;

       (3) Respond to oversight agencies with timely and accurate USDA telecommunications
           program and cost information;

       (4) Serve as the USDA liaison with international, inter- and intra-Local Access and
           Transport Area (interLATA and intraLATA) telecommunications service providers;

       (5) Serve as the USDA representative to the Diplomatic Telecommunications Service
           Program Office (DTSPO); and

       (6) Perform management and oversight responsibilities in accordance with the Federal
           Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), Public Law (P.L.) 113-
           291, as applicable to this directive.

  b.   The ENS Director will:

       (1) Establish procedures for monitoring, measuring, and enforcing compliance with this
           DR;

       (2) Oversee Mission Area, agency, and staff office compliance with USDA
           telecommunications policies and procedures;

       (3) Manage USDA telecommunications services, equipment, and facilities in
           accordance with prescribed laws, regulations, standards, and related USDA 3300
           Series telecommunications management directives;




                                             5
     (4) Review and render a decision for Mission Area, agency, and staff office policy
         waiver requests;

     (5) Maintain an electronic file of approved waivers;

     (6) Work with Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to eliminate redundant or
         unused services and equipment;

     (7) Include telecommunications requirements and initiatives as part of the
         telecommunications planning process;

     (8) Use GSA and USDA mandated programs when Mission Area, agency, and staff
         office requirements can be met cost-effectively through those programs;

     (9) Maintain inventories of USDA telecommunications resources to the extent
         necessary to:

         (a) Ensure adequate and appropriate telecommunications resources to support the
             Mission Area, agency, and staff office mission;

         (b) Ensure accountability for USDA telecommunications property; and

         (c) Meet Departmental and Governmental requests for periodic or special
             inventory reports.

c.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs and Agency and Staff Office Information Technology (IT)
     Directors will:

     (1) Ensure Mission Area, agency, and staff office personnel comply with this DR;

     (2) Ensure Mission Area, agency, and staff office internal directives conform to this
         DR’s stated requirements;

     (3) Provide guidance, oversight, and training on the issuance and use of Government-
         furnished telecommunications in Government and non-Government buildings;

     (4) Include telecommunications requirements and initiatives as part of the
         telecommunications planning process;

     (5) Select the most cost-effective solution to meet the telephone needs of the office;

     (6) Implement cost-effective actions to minimize the exposure to telephone abuse;

     (7) Require supervisory personnel to authorize, in writing, the approval of all
         international calls that incur charges for USDA.




                                             6
       (8) Obtain waivers and approvals from the ENS Director when Mission Area, agency,
           and staff office telecommunications requirements cannot be met through mandated
           programs; and

       (9) Provide the TMACO’s name and contact information to the DTSPO and USDA
           CIO.

  d.   The roles and responsibilities for TMACOs are provided in DR 3300-020,
       Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer Roles and Responsibilities.


7. COMPLIANCE

  a.   DR 4070-735-001, Section 16, sets forth USDA’s policies, procedures, and standards on
       employee responsibilities and conduct relative to the use of computers and
       telecommunications equipment. DR 4070-735-001, Section 21, states that a violation of
       any of the responsibilities and conduct standards contained in this directive may be
       cause for disciplinary or adverse action; and

  b.   Such disciplinary or adverse action will be affected in accordance with applicable laws
       and regulations, including the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) regulations,
       OMB regulations, and the Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive
       Branch.


8. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  a.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are required to conform to this
       policy. If a specific policy requirement cannot be met as explicitly stated, Mission
       Areas, agencies, and staff offices may submit a waiver request to the ENS Director for
       review and determination. Submit the waiver request to ens.policy@ocio.usda.gov. The
       waiver request will explain the reason for the request, identify compensating controls
       and actions that meet the intent of the policy, and identify how the compensating
       controls and actions provide a similar or greater level of defense or compliance than the
       policy requirement.

  b.   Waivers to stipulations of this directive that have been granted approval by the ENS
       Director and that are associated with a National Institute of Standards and Technology
       (NIST) Special Publication (SP) 800-53 Revision 4, Security and Privacy Controls for
       Federal Information Systems and Organizations, control will be recorded and tracked as
       a Plan of Action and Milestones (POA&M) item in the USDA Federal Information
       Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 United States Code (U.S.C.) Section
       3551, data management and reporting tool.




                                              7
  c.   Waivers will expire at the end of the fiscal year or 6 months from the date of approval,
       whichever is longer. Unless otherwise specified, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
       offices will review and renew approved policy waivers every fiscal year.


9. INQUIRIES

  Questions and comments concerning the requirements of this regulation should be directed to
  OCIO, DISC, ENS, TIMG at ens.policy@ocio.usda.gov.


                                            -END-




                                               8
                               APPENDIX A

                   ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


CIO         Chief Information Officer
DHS         Department of Homeland Security
DISC        Digital Infrastructure Services Center
DOC         Department of Commerce
DR          Departmental Regulation
DTSPO       Diplomatic Telecommunications Service Program Office
ENS         Enterprise Network Services
FCC         Federal Communications Commission
FISMA       Federal Information Security Modernization Act
FITARA      Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
GAO         Government Accountability Office
GSA         General Services Administration
interLATA   Inter-Local Access and Transport
intraLATA   Intra-Local Access and Transport
IT          Information Technology
LEC         Local Exchange Carrier
NIST        National Institute of Standards and Technology
OCIO        Office of the Chief Information Officer
OIG         Office of Inspector General
OMB         Office of Management and Budget
OPM         Office of Personnel Management
P.L.        Public Law
POA&M       Plan of Action and Milestones
SP          Special Publication
TIMG        Telecommunications Infrastructure Management and Governance
TMACO       Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer
U.S.C.      United States Code
USDA        United States Department of Agriculture
VoIP        Voice over Internet Protocol




                                    A-1
                                      APPENDIX B

                                     DEFINITIONS


a.   Telecommunications. The preparation, transmission, communication, or related
     processing of information (writing, images, sounds, or other data) by electrical,
     electromagnetic, electromechanical, electro-optical, or electronic means. (Source:
     NIST, Information Technology Laboratory, Computer Security Resource Center,
     Glossary)

b.   Telecommunications Services. The services and solutions that deliver or augment
     communications between users up to and including interstate and international
     communications. Telecommunications services refer to communications services or
     solutions specified as a discrete offering or set of capabilities. (Source: DR 3300-020,
     Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer Roles and Responsibilities, July 12,
     2019)




                                           B-1
                                    APPENDIX C

                        AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. §3551, et seq.,
December 18, 2014

Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), P.L. 113-291, 128 Stat.
3292, Title VIII, Subtitle D, §831-837, December 19, 2014

NIST, Information Technology Laboratory, Computer Security Resource Center, Glossary

NIST, SP 800-53 Revision 4, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems
and Organizations, April 2013, includes updates as of January 22, 2015

Office of Government Ethics, Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive
Branch, November 18, 2016, effective January 1, 2017

USDA, DR 1710-001, Interception and Monitoring of Telephone and Non-telephone
Conversations, February 6, 1984

USDA, DR 3300-001, Telecommunications & Internet Services and Use, March 18, 2016

USDA, DR 3300-020, Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer Roles and
Responsibilities, July 12, 2019

USDA, DR 3580-004, Securing Remote Access to USDA Information Systems and Client
Devices, November 30, 2018

USDA, DR 3580-005, Securing Client Devices for International Travel, November 30, 2018

USDA DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, Section 16, October 4,
2007

USDA, 3300 Series, Telecommunications Management Directives




                                         C-1
