                              U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                    WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                 NUMBER:
     DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION DR 3300-001-G
                                                                 DATE:
     SUBJECT: Sharing of Telecommunications Resources            September 12, 2019
     OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer, Digital       EXPIRATION DATE:
     Infrastructure Services Center, Enterprise Network          September 12, 2024
     Services



Section                                                                                    Page

1.   Purpose                                                                               1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                    1
3.   Background                                                                            2
4.   Scope                                                                                 2
5.   Policy                                                                                2
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                            3
7.   Compliance                                                                            5
8.   Policy Exceptions                                                                     6
9.   Inquiries                                                                             6

APPENDIX A Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                      A-1
APPENDIX B Definitions                                                                     B-1
APPENDIX C Authorities and References                                                      C-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of Agriculture
     (USDA) policy for sharing, optimizing, and consolidating telecommunications resources.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     a.   This DR replaces DR 3300-1-G, Sharing of Telecommunications Resources, dated
          March 23, 1999.

     b.   This policy is effective immediately when published and will remain in effect until
          replaced.
  c.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their policies and procedures
       with this DR within 6 months of the publication date.

  d.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may supplement this DR when developing
       their internal operating procedures. Modifications to the intent or purpose of this DR are
       not allowed. If Mission Areas, agencies, or staff offices publish a supplement to this
       DR, one copy of each supplement will be forwarded to the Office of the Chief
       Information Officer (OCIO), Digital Infrastructure Services Center (DISC), Enterprise
       Network Services (ENS), Telecommunications Infrastructure Management and
       Governance (TIMG) at ens.policy@ocio.usda.gov.


3. BACKGROUND

  USDA must take advantage of every opportunity to aggregate and optimize the acquisition of
  new telecommunications resources through the coordination of business processes and
  telecommunications planning among all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices.
  The Clinger-Cohen Act, 40 United States Code (U.S.C.) Section 11101, et seq., mandates
  that all Government Agencies refocus information technology (IT) management to directly
  support each of their respective strategic missions, implement an investment review process
  that drives budget formulation and execution for information systems, and rethink and
  restructure the way they perform their functions before investing in IT to support that work.


4. SCOPE

  This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, contractors, data centers,
  cloud service providers, cooperative partners, employees, and others working for, or on
  behalf of, the USDA.


5. POLICY

  In accordance with the Federal Shared Services Implementation Guide; Office of
  Management and Budget (OMB) Memorandum M-11-29, Chief Information Officer
  Authorities; and, Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), Public
  Law (P.L.) 113-291 §831-837, USDA will explore and implement opportunities to share,
  optimize, and consolidate telecommunications resources that will result in:

  a.   The use of telecommunications resources in a cost-effective and efficient manner;

  b.   The elimination of inefficient spending that results from duplicative service offerings
       and systems;

  c.   The reduction of support costs of redundant IT resources;




                                                 2
  d.   The use of telecommunications resources to achieve optimum configuration of services
       at each service delivery point; and

  e.   Increased information sharing among Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices that will
       help ensure telecommunications resources and the data being transported using these
       resources are adequately protected.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO) will:

       (1) Assess current and future telecommunications needs;

       (2) Provide Departmental leadership and identify cost reduction opportunities for
           sharing, optimizing, and consolidating telecommunications resources throughout
           USDA;

       (3) Provide consultation and analytical support to Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
           offices in developing and implementing plans of actions for sharing, optimizing,
           and consolidating telecommunications;

       (4) Provide guidance and direction on connectivity of telecommunications services to
           USDA partners such as agricultural research universities;

       (5) Review and approve Mission Area, agency, and staff office action plans for
           implementing changes in telecommunications services within Group One cities (see
           Appendix B for the list of Group One cities). Group One cities must be optimized
           for network backbone concentration nodes for an Enterprise Network (EN);

       (6) Include the sharing, optimization, and consolidation of telecommunications
           resources as described in DR3130-013, Information Technology Capital Planning
           and Investment Control;

       (7) Ensure that sharing, optimization, and consolidation are a part of the performance
           and results-based management process to establish goals for improving the
           efficiency and effectiveness of operations and, as appropriate, the delivery of
           services to the public through effective use of IT; and

       (8) Perform management and/or oversight responsibilities in accordance with FITARA,
           as applicable to this directive.

  b.   The ENS Director will:

       (1) Establish procedures for monitoring, measuring, and enforcing compliance with this
           DR;



                                                3
     (2) Oversee Mission Area, agency, and staff office compliance with USDA
         telecommunications policies and procedures;

     (3) Manage USDA telecommunications services, equipment, and facilities in
         accordance with prescribed laws, regulations, standards, and related USDA 3300
         Series Telecommunications Management directives;

     (4) Review and render decisions on Mission Area, agency, and staff office
         telecommunications policy waiver requests;

     (5) Maintain an electronic file of approved waivers;

     (6) Identify Mission Area, agency, and staff office business and program requirements,
         and work with the USDA CIO to develop standardized, cost-effective solutions
         based on a common telecommunications architecture;

     (7) Coordinate the designation of lead agencies, as required, prior to the
         implementation of an EN;

     (8) Work with Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to eliminate redundant or
         unused services and equipment;

     (9) Use General Services Administration (GSA) and USDA mandated programs,
         products, and services when organizational requirements can be met cost-
         effectively through the programs, products, and services; and

     (10) Maintain inventories of USDA telecommunications resources to the extent
          necessary to:

         (a) Ensure adequate and appropriate telecommunications resources to support
             Mission Area, agency, and staff office missions;

         (b) Ensure accountability for USDA telecommunications property; and

         (c) Meet Departmental and Federal requests for periodic or special inventory
             reports.

c.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs and Agency and Staff Office IT Directors will:

     (1) Ensure Mission Area, agency, and staff office personnel comply with this directive;

     (2) Ensure Mission Area, agency, and staff office internal directives conform to this
         DR’s stated requirements;

     (3) Seek and actively pursue opportunities for sharing, optimizing, and consolidating
         telecommunications resources;


                                               4
       (4) Eliminate redundant, uneconomical, or unused services, and equipment;

       (5) Designate a senior management official or a single point of contact (POC) to serve
           as the Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer (TMACO) to coordinate
           optimization and consolidation of telecommunications services internally, with the
           OCIO, and with other Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices;

       (6) Use GSA’s and USDA’s mandated programs when Mission Area, agency,
           and staff office requirements can be met cost-effectively through use of the
           programs;

       (7) Notify OCIO, through the telecommunications planning process, of all initiatives to
           share telecommunications resources;

       (8) Obtain a waiver from TIMG to decline sharing, optimizing, and consolidating
           opportunities within a Group One city; and

       (9) Maintain Mission Area, agency, and staff office inventories of
           telecommunications resources to the extent necessary to:

           (a) Ensure adequate and appropriate telecommunications resources to support
               Mission Area, agency, or staff office missions;

           (b) Ensure accountability for USDA property; and

           (c) Meet Departmental and Federal requests for periodic or quarterly inventory
               reports.

  d.   The roles and responsibilities for TMACOs are provided in DR3300-020,
       Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer Roles and Responsibilities.


7. COMPLIANCE

  a.   DR4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, Section 16, sets forth
       USDA’s policies, procedures, and standards on employee responsibilities and conduct
       relative to the use of computers and telecommunications equipment. DR 4070-735-001,
       Section 21, states that a violation of any of the responsibilities and conduct standards
       contained in this directive may be cause for disciplinary or adverse action.

  b.   Such disciplinary or adverse action will be effected in accordance with applicable
       laws and regulations such as Office of Personnel Management (OPM) regulations,
       OMB regulations, and the Standards of Ethical Conduct for Federal Employees of the
       Executive Branch.




                                                5
8. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  a.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are required to conform to this
       policy. If a specific policy requirement cannot be met as explicitly stated, Mission
       Areas, agencies, and staff offices may submit a waiver request. The waiver request will
       explain the reason for the request, identify compensating controls/actions that meet the
       intent of the policy, and identify how the compensating controls/actions provide a
       similar or greater level of defense or compliance than the policy requirement.

  b.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs and Agency and Staff Office IT Directors will address all
       policy waiver request memoranda to the ENS Director and submit the waiver request to
       ens.policy@ocio.usda.gov for review and determination.

  c.   Waivers to stipulations of this directive that have been granted approval by the ENS
       Director and that are associated with a control identified in National Institute of
       Standards and Technology (NIST) Special Publication (SP) 800-53 Revision 4, Security
       and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations, will be
       recorded and tracked as a Plan of Action and Milestones (POA&M) item in the USDA
       Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. §3551, et
       seq., data management and reporting tool.

  d.   Waivers will expire at the end of the fiscal year or 6 months from the date of approval,
       whichever is longer. Unless otherwise specified, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
       offices will review and renew previously approved policy waivers every fiscal year.


9. INQUIRIES

  Questions and comments concerning the requirements of this regulation should be
  directed to OCIO, DISC, ENS, TIMG at ens.policy@ocio.usda.gov.


                                            -END-




                                                 6
                              APPENDIX A

                  ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


APHIS    Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
ARS      Agricultural Research Service
CIO      Chief Information Officer
DISC     Digital Infrastructure Services Center
DR       Departmental Regulation
EN       Enterprise Network
ENS      Enterprise Network Services
FISMA    Federal Information Security Modernization Act
FITARA   Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
FNS      Food and Nutrition Service
FS       Forest Service
GSA      General Services Administration
IR       Interagency or Internal Report
IT       Information Technology
NASS     National Agricultural Statistics Service
NIST     National Institute of Standards and Technology
NRCS     Natural Resources Conservation Service
OCFO     Office of the Chief Financial Officer
OCIO     Office of the Chief Information Officer
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
OPM      Office of Personnel Management
P.L.     Public Law
POA&M    Plan of Action and Milestones
POC      Point of Contact
RD       Rural Development
SP       Special Publication
TIMG     Telecommunications Infrastructure Management and Governance
TMACO    Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                                  A-1
                                        APPENDIX B

                                       DEFINITIONS


a.   Enterprise Network (EN). A computer network built by an organization to interconnect
     its various sites to share computer resources.

b.   Lead Agency. The agency at a consolidated location that is designated by OCIO to
     oversee coordinating and implementing all telecommunications services at that site.

c.   Sharing. Federal offices located in the same building or campus using a single
     integrated telephone system, the same video teleconferencing facilities, or other
     telecommunications resources.

e.   Telecommunications. Preparation, transmission, communication, or related
     processing of information (writing, images, sounds, or other data) by electrical,
     electromagnetic, electromechanical, electro-optical, or electronic means. (Source:
     NIST, NISTIR 7298 Revision 2)

f.   Telecommunications Services. The services and solutions that deliver or augment
     communications between users up to and including interstate and international
     communications. Telecommunications services refer to communications services or
     solutions specified as a discrete offering or set of capabilities. (Source: DR 3300-020)

g.   USDA Group One Cities. The 23 cities that are network concentration nodes for an EN
     and the lead agency for each of these cities are the following:

     Albany, CA                           Agricultural Research Service (ARS)
     Albuquerque, NM                      Forest Service (FS)
     Atlanta, GA                          FS
     Austin, TX                           National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS)
     Boise, ID                            FS
     Chicago, IL                          Food and Nutrition Service (FNS)
     Dallas/Fort Worth, TX                FNS
     Denver, CO                           FS
     Des Moines/Ames, IA                  Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
     Fort Collins, CO                     OCIO
     Jackson, MS                          NRCS
     Kansas City, MO                      Rural Development (RD)
     Minneapolis/St. Paul, MN             Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
                                          (APHIS)
     New Orleans, LA                      Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO)
     Ogden, UT                            FS
     Orlando, FL                          NASS
     Phoenix, AZ                          FS

                                             B-1
Portland, OR           FS
Raleigh/Durham, NC     NRCS
Sacramento/Davis, CA   FS
San Francisco, CA      FS
St. Louis, MO          RD
Washington, DC         OCIO




                         B-2
                                    APPENDIX C

                        AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Clinger-Cohen Act, 40 U.S.C. §11101, et seq. (2017)

Federal Chief Information Officer Council, Federal Shared Services Implementation
Guide, April 16, 2013

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. §3551, et seq.,
December 18, 2014 (2017)

Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), P.L. 113-291, 128 Stat.
3292, Title VIII, Subtitle D, §831-837, December 19, 2014

NIST, IR 7298 Revision 2, Glossary of Key Information Security Terms, May 2013

NIST, SP 800-53 Revision 4, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems
and Organizations, April 2013

Office of Government Ethics, Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive
Branch, 5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 2635 (2018)

OMB, Memorandum M-11-29, Chief Information Officer Authorities, August 8, 2011

USDA, DR3130-013, Information Technology Capital Planning and Investment Control,
July 8, 2016

USDA, DR3300-020, Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer Roles and
Responsibilities, October 13, 2016

USDA, DR4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007

USDA, 3300 Series Telecommunications Management Directives




                                           C-1
