                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                  Number:
      DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                     DR 3300-006

                                                                  DATE:
     SUBJECT:                                                     June 1, 2016
     Network Class of Service and Quality of Service              OPI:
                                                                  Office of the Chief
                                                                  Information Officer,
                                                                  Enterprise Network
                                                                  Services



Section                                                                                    Page

1.   Purpose                                                                               1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                    2
3.   Scope                                                                                 2
4.   Background                                                                            2
5.   Policy                                                                                3
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                            3
7.   Compliance                                                                            5
8.   Policy Exceptions                                                                     5
9.   Inquiries                                                                             5

APPENDIX A Definitions                                                                     A-1
APPENDIX B Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                      B-1
APPENDIX C Authorities and References                                                      C-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of
          Agriculture (USDA) policy for the implementation of Class of Service (CoS) and
          Quality of Service (QoS) on the Departmental enterprise network.

     b.   This policy complies with the industry standards for CoS and QoS as defined and
          established by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) in the following Request for
          Comments (RFC) documents: RFC 2474, Definition of the Differentiated Services Field
          (DS Field) in the IPv4 and IPv6 Headers; RFC 2475, An Architecture for Differentiated
          Services; RFC 2597, Assured Forwarding PHB Group; RFC 3168, The Addition of
          Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) to IP; RFC 3246, An Expedited Forwarding
       PHB (Per-Hop Behavior); and RFC 3260, New Terminology and Clarifications for
       Diffserv.

  c.   Application of the CoS/QoS standards identified in the RFCs will provide USDA with a
       set of unified and cohesive methodologies for delivering greater network bandwidth
       optimization, reserving a minimum amount of bandwidth for critical agency
       applications, and prioritizing network service for current and future applications.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This DR is in effect at the date of signature and will remain in effect until superseded. If
       any provision of this DR is superseded by an official USDA memorandum or otherwise
       invalidated by external laws, directives, or standards, such invalidity does not affect
       other provisions of this DR. In the event of reorganization of offices or mission areas,
       USDA must ensure that each of the roles and responsibilities described in this DR are
       specifically assigned to a new or existing organization or team.

  b.   The terms CoS and QoS are defined differently by various industry vendors. For the
       purposes of this DR, CoS and QoS are defined as the following:

       (1) CoS refers to a grouping used by a Multi-Protocol Label Switching (MPLS)
           network to identify how traffic passes through that network; and

       (2) QoS refers to how software configurations are implemented in a traditional network
           via switches and routers. QoS represents an effort to guarantee delivery of a given
           capability at the level expected by the user community independent of the
           underlying network. Each network service (e.g., data, voice, and video) has
           different QoS expectations.


3. SCOPE

  This DR applies to all USDA agencies and staff offices, contractors, data centers, cloud
  service providers, cooperative partners, employees, and other personnel working with any
  USDA network.


4. BACKGROUND

  a.   The USDA enterprise network is an integrated and collaborative environment,
       incorporating multiple requirements from a variety of functionality-based, engineered
       solutions for the various USDA staff offices and agencies.

  b.   USDA senior leadership envisions a unified communications technology backbone that
       supports a broad range of integrated services across the enterprise network and offers


                                                2
       customers streamlined, intelligent communications options for accessing enterprise-
       managed and standalone services.

  c.   As USDA networks converge, many disparate users will share the same network
       resources. Organizations that transition to a converged network realize savings in
       information technology (IT) operational costs, improved performance through the
       reduction of network security boundaries across trusted networks, and increased
       efficiencies of available bandwidth across those networks. As more USDA agencies and
       staff offices begin leveraging converged services across a single trusted network, it is
       essential that high-priority traffic be identified and marked to ensure efficient
       prioritization and use of bandwith as a resource. USDA intends to make full use of the
       CoS and QoS industry standards across the Unified Telecommunications Network
       (UTN) to accomplish this goal.


5. POLICY

  As CoS and QoS are implemented on any network circuit in USDA, the implementation must
  comply with the current USDA Quality of Service (QoS)/Class of Service (CoS) Standard,
  which is maintained and published by the Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO),
  Enterprise Network Services (ENS) (eAuthentication access required). If an agency or staff
  office chooses to implement CoS and QoS and deviate from the current USDA QoS/CoS
  standard, the agency or staff office must submit a waiver request to the ENS Director for
  review and approval prior to implementation. Additional information about waiver requests
  can be found in section 8.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO) shall:

       (1) Ensure that agencies and staff offices comply with this DR; and

       (2) Sponsor, establish, and maintain a USDA UTN Technical Review Board (TRB).

  b.   The ENS Director shall:

       (1) Publish and maintain a Departmental network standard for CoS and QoS;

       (2) Complete a QoS design for USDA;

       (3) Implement and operationally maintain the QoS design across the UTN backbone;

       (4) Manage configuration, classification, identification and marking, policy, reporting,
           and accounting functions to control and administer end-to-end traffic across the
           USDA enterprise network;

                                              3
     (5) Review service level agreements (SLAs) and determine if credits or financial
         adjustments are applicable;

     (6) Review and render a decision for agency and staff office policy waiver requests;
         and

     (7) Maintain an electronic file of approved waivers.

c.   The USDA UTN TRB shall:

     (1) Review, approve, and update the USDA QoS/CoS standard, as needed;

     (2) Develop and recommend a CoS and QoS standard to meet the demand of current
         and future capabilities, services, and applications on the USDA enterprise network;
         and

     (3) Review and provide resources to assist agency and staff office implementation of
         CoS and QoS.

d.   Agency and Staff Office CIOs and Directors shall:

     (1) Ensure agency and staff office telecommunications personnel comply with this
         directive;

     (2) Ensure agency and staff office internal directives conform to this DR’s stated
         requirements;

     (3) Ensure that data packets are identified, marked, and/or tagged correctly according to
         the USDA QoS/CoS standard;

     (4) Coordinate shared network circuit capacity planning and software configuration
         with OCIO-ENS and other agencies and staff offices;

     (5) Manage configuration, classification, identification and marking, policy, reporting,
         and accounting functions to control and administer end-to-end traffic across the
         agency or staff office network;

     (6) Review SLAs and determine if credits or financial adjustments are applicable; and

     (7) Obtain waivers and approvals from the ENS Director when agency and staff office
         requirements cannot be met through mandated policies.




                                            4
7. COMPLIANCE

  a.   Compliance with this DR shall be enforced in accordance with the USDA QoS/CoS
       standard.

  b.   Agencies and staff offices are authorized to deviate from the CoS and QoS standard
       within their own network boundaries as long as they have an approved waiver from the
       ENS Director and meet the standard when interfacing with shared network segments.

  c.   Interoperability between an agency or staff office network and the OCIO Wide Area
       Network (WAN) must ensure CoS and QoS communication is tagged bi-directionally at
       any network routing device.


8. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  a.   All USDA agencies and staff offices are required to conform to this policy. In the event
       that a specific policy requirement cannot be met as explicitly stated, agencies and staff
       offices may submit a policy waiver request in writing. The waiver request shall explain
       the reason for the request, identify compensating controls/actions that meet the intent of
       the policy, and identify how the compensating controls/actions provide a similar or
       greater level of defense or compliance than the policy requirement.

  b.   Agency and staff office system owners and CIOs shall address all policy waiver request
       memoranda to the ENS Director and submit the waiver request to
       ens.policy@ocio.usda.gov for review and determination.

  c.   Waivers to stipulations of this directive that have been granted approval by the ENS
       Director and that are associated with a National Institute of Standards and Technology
       (NIST) IT security control shall be recorded and tracked as a Plan of Action and
       Milestones (POA&M) item in the USDA Federal Information Security Management Act
       (FISMA) data management and reporting tool.

  d.   Waivers will expire at the end of the fiscal year or six months from the date of approval,
       whichever is longer. Unless otherwise specified, agencies and staff offices shall review
       and renew approved policy waivers every fiscal year.

  e.   The ENS Director will provide a reason for any waiver request that is denied. If a
       waiver request is denied, the agency or staff office is expected to comply with the
       existing policy.


9. INQUIRIES

  Questions and comments concerning the requirements of this regulation should be
  directed to OCIO-ENS, Telecommunications Management and Governance (TMG) at
  ens.policy@ocio.usda.gov.

                                               5
        -END-
1




    6
                                              APPENDIX A

                                             DEFINITIONS


a.   Class of Service (CoS). Refers to a grouping used by an MPLS network to identify how
     traffic passes through that network.

b.   Intelligence Communications. Refers to a network’s ability to determine best path as
     well as traffic prioritization decisions for defined Internet Protocol (IP) services.

c.   Quality of Service (QoS). Refers to how mechanisms are implemented in a traditional
     network via switches and routers. QoS represents an effort to guarantee delivery of a
     given capability at the level expected by the user community independent of the
     underlying network. Each network service (e.g., data, voice, and video) has different
     QoS expectations.

d.   Telecommunications. Includes the transmission, emission, or reception of signals,
     writing, images, sounds, or intelligence of any nature, by wire, cable, satellite, fiber
     optics, laser, radio, or any other electronic, electric, electromagnetic, or acoustically
     coupled means. The term includes the telecommunications facilities and equipment
     necessary to provide telecommunications services. Telecommunications is a
     component of the information resources management system. (DR 3300-020,
     Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer (TMACO) – Roles and
     Responsibilities)




                                              A-1
                           APPENDIX B

               ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


CIO     Chief Information Officer
CoS     Class of Service
DR      Departmental Regulation
DS      Differentiated Services
ECN     Explicit Congestion Notification
ENS     Enterprise Network Services
FISMA   Federal Information Security Management Act
IETF    Internet Engineering Task Force
IP      Internet Protocol
IT      Information Technology
MPLS    Multi-Protocol Label Switching
NIST    National Institute of Standards and Technology
OCIO    Office of the Chief Information Officer
POA&M   Plan of Action and Milestones
QoS     Quality of Service
PHB     Per-Hop Behavior
RFC     Request for Comments
SLA     Service Level Agreement
TMACO   Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer
TMG     Telecommunications Management and Governance
TRB     Technical Review Board
USDA    United States Department of Agriculture
UTN     Unified Telecommunications Network
WAN     Wide Area Network




                                B-1
                                        APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


DR 3300-020, Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer (TMACO) - Roles and
Responsibilities, August 30, 2010

IETF, RFC 2474, Definition of the Differentiated Services Field (DS Field) in the IPv4 and
IPv6 Headers, December 1998

IETF, RFC 2475, An Architecture for Differentiated Services, December 1998

IETF, RFC 2597, Assured Forwarding PHB Group, June 1999

IETF, RFC 3168, The Addition of Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) to IP, September
2001

IETF, RFC 3246, An Expedited Forwarding PHB (Per-Hop Behavior), March 2002

IETF, RFC 3260, New Terminology and Clarifications for Diffserv, April 2002

USDA, USDA Quality of Service (QoS)/Class of Service (CoS) Standard, Version 1.0,
January 10, 2012




                                          C-1
