                             U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                   WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                             Number:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION DR 3300-001
                                                             DATE:
                                                             March 18, 2016
 SUBJECT: Telecommunications & Internet Services and         OPI:
 Use                                                         Office of the Chief Information
                                                             Officer, Enterprise Network
                                                             Services



Section                                                                                  Page

1. Purpose                                                                                 1
2. Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                      1
3. Scope                                                                                   2
4. Authority                                                                               2
5. Policy                                                                                  2
6. Planning                                                                                4
7. Roles and Responsibilities                                                              5
8. Penalties and Disciplinary Actions for Non-Compliance                                   9
9. Policy Exceptions                                                                       9
10. Inquiries                                                                              10

APPENDIX A Definitions                                                                   A-1
APPENDIX B Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                    B-1
APPENDIX C Authorities and References                                                    C-1



1. PURPOSE

   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes policies and assigns responsibilities for the
   management and use of telecommunications services, equipment, and resources within the
   United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). It serves as the overarching policy that
   addresses major topics applicable to the entire 3300 Telecommunications Management
   Directives series.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

   a.     This regulation supersedes DR 3300-001, Telecommunications & Internet Services
          and Use, dated March 23, 1999.
  b.   The use of telecommunications equipment (e.g., mobile devices, computers, local area
       networks, telephones, facsimile machines) and telecommunications services (e.g.,
       Internet, electronic messaging) by all USDA employees shall be in accordance with
       the requirements of Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive
       Branch, 5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 2635 and the Federal Chief Information
       Officer (CIO) Council’s Recommended Executive Branch Model Policy/Guidance on
       "Limited Personal Use" of Government Office Equipment Including Information
       Technology.

  c.   Agencies and staff offices may supplement this DR when developing their internal
       operating procedures. Modifications to the intent or purpose of this DR are not
       allowed. If agencies and staff offices publish a supplement to this DR, one copy of
       each supplement shall be forwarded to the Office of the Chief Information Officer
       (OCIO), Enterprise Network Services (ENS) at ens.policy@ocio.usda.gov.

  d.   Cyber security policies are issued by Agriculture Security Operations Center (ASOC)
       and may be found in the 3500 series DRs posted on the Departmental Directives Web
       site.


3. SCOPE

  a.   This DR applies to all USDA agencies and staff offices, contractors, data centers, cloud
       service providers, cooperative partners, employees, and others working for or on behalf
       of the USDA.

  b.   This policy does not address classified communications.


4. AUTHORITY

  This regulation is published pursuant to the authority:

  a.   Vested in the Secretary of Agriculture in General Authorization to Delegate Functions;
       Publication of Delegations, 5 United States Code (U.S.C.) 301 and Establishment of
       Department, 7 U.S.C. 2201; and

  b.   Delegated to the USDA CIO in Delegations of Authority by the Secretary of Agriculture
       and General Officers of the Department, Delegations of Authority to the Deputy
       Secretary, the Under Secretaries and Assistant Secretaries, 7 CFR 2.25 (a) (12).


5. POLICY

  a.   The USDA shall:

       (1) Improve USDA program delivery by implementing procedures and practices


                                                 2
         identified in the United States (U.S.) CIO’s 25 Point Implementation Plan to
         Reform Federal Information Technology Management (the 25 Point Plan) and
         migrating to a coordinated, interoperable, secure, and shared USDA enterprise
         network;

     (2) Use Governmentwide contracts and blanket purchase agreements (BPAs) in
         accordance with established regulations and interagency agreements, and transition
         to new contracts based on enterprisewide decision making processes;

     (3) Ensure that new or existing telecommunications systems and services are aligned in
         accordance with the USDA Enterprise Information Technology Governance (EITG)
         process and framework;

     (4) Maintain a comprehensive inventory of telecommunications equipment and
         services, which is reviewed and revalidated at least every six months. When
         equipment and services are determined to no longer be needed in current
         configurations, agencies and staff offices shall reallocate them for other approved
         uses, discontinue services, or dispose of equipment through established procedures;

     (5) Use technical industry standards that are developed by voluntary consensus
         standards bodies, as directed by National Technology Transfer and Advancement
         Act of 1995;

     (6) Ensure that telecommunications systems, services, and facilities are fully compliant
         with DR 4030-001, Section 508 Program, and accessible to hearing, speech, and
         physically impaired individuals;

     (7) Encourage the use of electronic exchange of information where practical and
         beneficial;

     (8) Procure or use telecommunications services and equipment in a manner that
         promotes information sharing among agencies and staff offices; and

     (9) Integrate digital strategy and open data requirements and guidance with existing
         processes and workflows.

b.   When employees use Government and non-Government furnished equipment and
     resources, they shall comply with the requirements of this DR; DR 4070-735-001,
     Employee Responsibilities and Conduct; DR 3505-003, Access Control for Information
     and Information Systems; and other USDA and Federal guidance.

c.   Employees may use telecommunications and Internet resources for personal matters
     on an occasional basis provided that the use involves minimal expense to the
     Government and does not interfere with official business or violate Federal law.
     Limited personal use of telecommunications and Internet resources shall normally
     take place during an employee’s personal time. This policy follows the Federal CIO
     Council’s Recommended Executive Branch Model Policy/Guidance on "Limited



                                              3
       Personal Use" of Government Office Equipment Including Information Technology.

  d.   Employees may not use USDA telecommunications and Internet resources to earn
       outside income.

  e.   Employees may not use telecommunications and Internet resources for activities that
       are inappropriate or offensive to fellow employees or the public (e.g., accessing
       sexually explicit materials, hate speech, remarks ridiculing others based on race,
       creed, religion, color, handicap, national origin).

  f.   Pursuant to the authority vested in the Inspector General Act of 1978, 5 U.S.C.
       Appendix 3, Sections 1-12, the http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/USCODE-2012-
       title5/pdf/USCODE-2012-title5-app-inspector-sec3.pdfOffice of Inspector General is
       exempt from the provisions in this directive for mission-related activities only.


6. PLANNING

  a.   Telecommunications Plans

       Agencies and staff offices shall develop a centralized telecommunications management
       plan (CTMP) that specifies how an agency or staff office will centrally manage
       telecommunications services. When developing a CTMP, the agency or staff office
       shall use the 25 Point Plan and the Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996.

  b.   Budget Estimates for Information Technology (IT)

       Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular No. A-11, Preparation,
       Submission, and Execution of the Budget, requires Federal agencies to submit annual
       budget estimates for IT.

  c.   Life Cycle Management (LCM)

       The USDA CIO advocates a LCM approach to information resources management,
       which includes the planning and development of an agency's telecommunications
       infrastructure. New and existing major IT investments shall be viewed within the
       context of the EITG process presented in DR 3130-008, Definition of Major
       Information Technology Investments and the Agriculture System Development Life
       Cycle (AgSDLC) methodology, as described in the Integrated IT Governance
       Framework: Guidebook. The agency or staff office must complete and approve
       strategic activities, such as planning and budgeting, before acquiring
       telecommunications resources.

  d.   Departmental Approvals

       Agency and staff office requests to acquire telecommunications resources shall be
       submitted for approval in accordance with the USDA Acquisition Approval Request


                                               4
       Instructions. Employees with this responsibility must contact the OCIO Capital
       Planning and IT Governance Division at Capitalplanningdivision@ocio.usda.gov to gain
       access to the USDA collaboration tool in which this document is stored.


7. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA CIO shall:

       (1) In accordance with the Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
           (FITARA):

           (a) Establish processes to regularly engage with program managers to evaluate IT
               resources supporting the strategic objectives of agency and staff offices;

           (b) Define the Departmentwide policy for the level of detail of planned
               expenditure reporting for all transactions that include IT resources;

           (c) Define the development processes, milestones, review gates, and the overall
               polices for all capital planning, enterprise architecture, and project
               management and reporting for IT resources;

           (d) Approve any movement of funds for IT resources that require Congressional
               notification; and

           (e) Conduct TechStat reviews, or use other applicable performance measurements
               to evaluate the use of IT resources.

       (2) Develop a Departmental telecommunications program LCM process to include:

           (a) Establish and maintain a USDA telecommunications architecture to serve as
               the framework for all telecommunications investment planning, acquisition,
               and deployment to ensure:

               1    Cost-effective telecommunications system solutions based on a common
                    telecommunications architecture; and

               2    Establishment of mission-based performance measures for these
                    telecommunications systems aligned with Departmental performance
                    plans.

           (b) Establish policies and procedures for the management of telecommunications
               resources, and provide leadership for the General Services Administration
               (GSA) and USDA cooperative contract transition process;

           (c) Review agency and staff office strategic and tactical telecommunications plans,



                                                5
         policies, and procedures;

    (d) Update the USDA Information Technology Strategic Plan 2014-2018 in
        accordance with new requirements included in OMB Memorandum M-13-13,
        Open Data Policy--Managing Information as an Asset;

    (e) Modernize existing systems to leverage application programming interfaces
        (APIs), which will enable USDA to integrate digital strategy and open data
        requirements and guidance with existing processes and workflows; and

    (f) Monitor and review telecommunications activities to ensure:

         1   Continuous and effective communications with agencies and staff offices,
             sound understanding of agency and staff office needs, and proper balance
             between cost and customer satisfaction requirements;

         2   Compliance with regulatory requirements and standards;

         3   Cost savings and/or cost avoidance are realized; and

         4   Maximum benefits are gained from USDA's telecommunications
             investments in supporting USDA program delivery.

(3) Provide advice and assistance to agencies and staff offices regarding
    telecommunications services and facilities to ensure that the Department's
    telecommunications resources are shared and used effectively and prudently;

(4) Serve as a liaison for telecommunications activities and interchange between USDA
    and other Government agencies;

(5) Provide leadership and direction for Departmentwide initiatives and the
    optimization and consolidation of telecommunications resources;

(6) Periodically conduct market surveys to ensure that equipment and services are
    being acquired at the most economical cost available, determine the need for
    Departmentwide mandatory-for-use telecommunications resources, and terminate
    uneconomical contracts;

(7) Establish a risk assessment program to identify risks to and conduct reviews of
    metropolitan area networks that connect to the USDA enterprise network;

(8) Conduct independent assessments of major telecommunications projects to ensure
    strategies and decisions are sound throughout the various stages of the project;

(9) Share independent validation and verification (IV&V) results with managers so
    risks are well understood and risk management approaches are developed before



                                         6
         projects can be authorized to proceed to the next phase of the acquisition process;

     (10) Provide leadership, guidance, and oversight in the establishment and maintenance
          of inventories of telecommunications resources; and

     (11) Ensure that telecommunications systems are continuously updated to provide
          reliable voice, data, facsimile, and video conferencing capability between the
          Secretary of Agriculture, Under Secretaries, and Assistant Secretaries.

b.   The ENS Director shall:

     (1) Establish policies and procedures for the management of telecommunications
         throughout USDA;

     (2) Establish procedures for monitoring, measuring, reporting, and enforcing
         compliance with this DR and other applicable guidance;

     (3) Manage USDA telecommunications services, equipment, and facilities in
         accordance with prescribed laws, regulations, standards, and related 3300 series
         DRs;

     (4) Oversee agency and staff office compliance with USDA telecommunications
         policies and procedures;

     (5) Review and render decisions on agency and staff office telecommunications policy
         waiver requests;

     (6) Maintain an electronic file of approved waivers;

     (7) Identify agency and staff office business and program requirements and work with
         the USDA CIO to develop standardized, cost-effective solutions based on a
         common telecommunications architecture;

     (8) Work with agencies and staff offices to eliminate redundant or unused services and
         equipment;

     (9) Include telecommunications requirements and initiatives as part of the
         telecommunications planning process;

     (10) Use GSA and USDA mandated programs when organizational requirements can be
          met cost-effectively through the programs; and

     (11) Maintain inventories of USDA telecommunications resources to the extent
          necessary to:

         (a) Ensure adequate and appropriate telecommunications resources to support the
             agency and staff office mission;


                                               7
         (b) Ensure accountability for USDA telecommunications property; and

         (c) Meet Departmental and Federal requests for periodic or special inventory
             reports.

c.   Agency and Staff Office CIOs and Directors shall:

     (1) Ensure agency and staff office personnel comply with this directive;

     (2) Ensure agency and staff office internal directives conform to this DR’s stated
         requirements;

     (3) Identify business and program requirements and work with the USDA CIO to
         develop standardized cost-effective solutions based on a common
         telecommunications architecture;

     (4) Establish a telecommunications management program to support project-level
         management structures and processes for managing, selecting, controlling, and
         evaluating investments in telecommunications systems;

     (5) Establish mission-based performance measures for telecommunications systems
         that align with agency and staff office performance plans prepared pursuant to the
         Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA) Modernization Act of 2010, the
         Digital Strategy at USDA, and OMB M-13-13, Open Data Policy--Managing
         Information as an Asset;

     (6) Modernize existing systems to leverage APIs;

     (7) Eliminate redundant, uneconomical, or unused services and equipment;

     (8) Determine the agency or staff office’s telecommunications and Internet
         services needs and requirements;

     (9) Include telecommunications requirements and initiatives as part of the
         telecommunications planning process;

     (10) Use GSA's and USDA's mandated programs when agency and staff office
          requirements can be met cost-effectively through use of the programs;

     (11) Obtain waivers and approvals from the ENS Director when agency and staff
          office requirements cannot be met through mandated programs;

     (12) Share telecommunications resources with other agencies and staff offices;
          and




                                              8
       (13) Maintain agency and staff office inventories of telecommunications
            resources to the extent necessary to:

           (a) Ensure adequate and appropriate telecommunications resources to support the
               agency or staff office mission;

           (b) Ensure accountability for USDA property; and

           (c) Meet Departmental and Federal requests for periodic or quarterly inventory
               reports.

       (14) Forward one copy of agency or staff office published supplements to this DR
            to OCIO-ENS at ens.policy@ocio.usda.gov.

  d.   Employees shall comply with the requirements of this DR.


8. PENALTIES AND DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS FOR NON-COMPLIANCE

  a.   DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, Section 16 sets forth
       USDA’s policies, procedures, and standards on employee responsibilities and conduct
       relative to the use of computers and telecommunications equipment. DR 4070-735-001,
       Section 21, states:

       (1) A violation of any of the responsibilities and conduct standards contained in this
           directive may be cause for disciplinary or adverse action; and

       (2) Disciplinary or adverse action shall be effected in accordance with applicable law
           and regulations.

  b.   Such disciplinary or adverse action shall be effected in accordance with applicable law
       and regulations such as the Code of Ethics for Government Employees, Office of
       Personnel Management (OPM) regulations, OMB regulations, and Standards of Conduct
       for Federal employees.


9. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  a.   All USDA agencies and staff offices are required to conform to this policy. In the event
       that a specific policy requirement cannot be met as explicitly stated, agencies and staff
       offices may submit a waiver request. The waiver request shall explain the reason for the
       request, identify compensating controls/actions that meet the intent of the policy, and
       identify how the compensating controls/actions provide a similar or greater level of
       defense or compliance than the policy requirement.




                                                 9
   b.   Agency and staff office system owners and CIOs shall address all policy waiver request
        memoranda to the ENS Director and submit the waiver request to
        ens.policy@ocio.usda.gov for review and determination.

   c.   Waivers to stipulations of this directive that have been granted approval by the ENS
        Director and that are associated with a control identified in National Institute of
        Standards and Technology (NIST) Special Publication (SP) 800-53 Revision 4, Security
        and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations, shall be
        recorded and tracked as a Plan of Action and Milestones (POA&M) item in the USDA
        Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) data management and
        reporting tool.

   d.   Waivers will expire at the end of the fiscal year or six months from the date of approval,
        whichever is longer. Unless otherwise specified, agencies and staff offices shall review
        and renew approved policy waivers every fiscal year.


10. INQUIRIES

   Questions and comments concerning the requirements of this regulation should be
   directed to OCIO-ENS, Telecommunications Management and Governance (TMG) at
   ens.policy@ocio.usda.gov.


                                               -END-




                                                 10
                                       APPENDIX A

                                       DEFINITIONS


a.   Agriculture System Development Life Cycle (AgSDLC). The system’s development
     life cycle process outlined by the OCIO-Information Resources Management (IRM)
     for building information systems in a very deliberate, structured, and methodical way,
     reiterating each stage of the product’s life. For USDA, these stages consist of
     selection and requirements analysis, development, implementation, operations,
     maintenance, and disposition.

b.   Life Cycle. A set of processes and their temporal relationships that describe a
     continuous flow of actions and states associated with the existence of system. The
     linear sequence of phases of a system’s existence that span an initiating action to a
     closing action, with an implied future re-execution of the sequence.

c.   Telecommunications. Includes the transmission, emission, or reception of signals,
     writing, images, sounds, or intelligence of any nature, by wire, cable, satellite, fiber
     optics, laser, radio, or any other electronic, electric, electromagnetic, or acoustically
     coupled means. The term includes the telecommunications facilities and equipment
     necessary to provide telecommunications services. Telecommunications is a
     component of the information resources management system. (DR 3300-020,
     Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer (TMACO) – Roles and
     Responsibilities, 08/30/10)

d.   Telecommunications Infrastructure. The underlying foundation or framework which
     supports the delivery of information comprised of telecommunications equipment,
     services, networks, and related resources.




                                               A-1
                             APPENDIX B

                ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS



AgSDLC   Agriculture System Development Life Cycle
API      Application Programming Interface
ASOC     Agriculture Security Operations Center
BPA      Blanket Purchase Agreement
CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
CIO      Chief Information Officer
CTMP     Centralized Telecommunications Management Plan
DR       Departmental Regulation
EITG     Enterprise Information Technology Governance
ENS      Enterprise Network Services
FISMA    Federal Information Security Modernization Act
FITARA   Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
GPRA     Government Performance and Results Act
GSA      General Services Administration
IRM      Information Resources Management
IT       Information Technology
IV&V     Independent Validation and Verification
LCM      Life Cycle Management
NIST     National Institute of Standards and Technology
OCIO     Office of the Chief Information Officer
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
OPM      Office of Personnel Management
POA&M    Plan of Action and Milestones
SP       Special Publication
TMACO    Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer
TMG      Telecommunications Management and Governance
U.S.     United States
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                                   B-1
                                     APPENDIX C

                         AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, 40 U.S.C. 1401, et seq.

Delegations of Authority by the Secretary of Agriculture and General Officers of the
Department, Delegations of Authority to the Deputy Secretary, the Under Secretaries and
Assistant Secretaries, 7 CFR 2.25 (a) (12), et seq.

Digital Strategy at USDA

DR 3130-008, Definition of Major Information Technology Investments, February 27, 2015

DR 3300-020, Telecommunications Mission Area Control Officer (TMACO) - Roles and
Responsibilities, August 30, 2010

DR 3505-003, Access Control for Information and Information Systems, February 10, 2015

DR 4030-001, Section 508 Program, September 8, 2014

DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007

Establishment of Department, 7 U.S.C. 2201, et seq.

Federal CIO Council, Recommended Executive Branch Model Policy/Guidance on
"Limited Personal Use" of Government Office Equipment Including Information
Technology, May 19, 1999

FITARA, December 19, 2014

General Authorization to Delegate Functions; Publication of Delegations, 5 U.S.C. 301, et
seq.

GPRA Modernization Act of 2010, Public Law 111-352, January 4, 2011

Inspector General Act of 1978, 5 U.S.C., Appendix 3, Sections 1-12, et seq.

National Technology Transfer and Advancement Act of 1995, Public Law 104-113, March
7, 1996

NIST SP 800-53 Revision 4, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems
and Organizations, April 2013




                                            C-1
OMB Circular No. A-11, Preparation, Submission, and Execution of the Budget, July
2013

OMB M-13-13, Open Data Policy--Managing Information as an Asset, May 9, 2013

Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch, 5 CFR 2635, et seq.

The White House, U.S. CIO, 25 Point Implementation Plan to Reform Federal Information
Technology Management, December 9, 2010

USDA, OCIO, Acquisition Approval Request Instructions, January 15, 2015

USDA, OCIO, Integrated IT Governance Framework: Guidebook, Version 3.2, April 1,
2014

USDA, OCIO, USDA Information Technology Strategic Plan 2014-2018, April 1, 2014

USDA, OCIO, 3300 Telecommunications Management Directive Series




                                           C-1
