                             U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                    WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                    NUMBER:
     DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                        DR 3300-001-C
                                                                    DATE:
     SUBJECT: Radio Frequency Management                            September 27, 2019
     OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer, Digital          EXPIRATION DATE:
     Infrastructure Services Center, Enterprise Network Services    September 27, 2024



Section                                                                                      Page

1.    Purpose                                                                                   1
2.    Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                        1
3.    Delegation of Authority                                                                   2
4.    Scope                                                                                     2
5.    Policy                                                                                    2
6.    Roles and Responsibilities                                                                6
7.    Policy Exceptions                                                                         9
8.    Inquiries                                                                                10

Appendix A - Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                       A-1
Appendix B - Definitions                                                                      B-1
Appendix C - Authorities and References                                                       C-1



1. PURPOSE

      This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of Agriculture
      (USDA) policy for radio frequency management.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

      a.   This DR supersedes DR 3300-001-C, Radio Frequency Management, dated July 10,
           2019.

      b.   This DR will be in effect until superseded or the expiration date.

      c.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their policies and procedures
           with this DR within 6 months of the publication date.

      d.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may supplement this DR when developing
       their internal guidance. Modifications to the intent or purpose of this DR are not
       allowed. If Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices publish internal guidance that
       supplements this DR, one copy of each supplement will be forwarded to the Office of
       the Chief Information Officer (OCIO), Digital Infrastructure Services Center (DISC),
       Enterprise Network Services (ENS), Telecommunications Infrastructure Management
       and Governance (TIMG) at ens.policy@ocio.usda.gov.


3. DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY

  a.   Per 7 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Section 2.60(a)(27), the Chief of the Forest
       Service (FS) has been delegated authority by the Under Secretary for Natural Resources
       and Environment to administer the radio frequency licensing work of the Department.

  b.   The FS Chief has delegated staff from the FS-Chief Information Office to serve on the
       following committees:

       (1) Interdepartment Radio Advisory Committee (IRAC);

       (2) Frequency Assignment Subcommittee (FAS);

       (3) Technical Subcommittee (TSC); and

       (4) Spectrum Planning Subcommittee (SPS) of the National Telecommunications and
           Information Administration (NTIA).


4. SCOPE

  This DR applies to those USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices using radio
  communications and spectrum management.


5. POLICY

  a.   USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will contact FS-Frequency
       Management to obtain spectrum management support and frequency ranges for radio
       equipment.

  b.   USDA wireless systems will be designed to use current technology, be spectrum
       efficient, and share resources among Mission Areas, agencies, or staff offices whenever
       it is cost effective and when savings can be achieved.

  c.   USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will adhere to Federal regulations and
       procedures for spectrum management when establishing and operating wireless
       communications systems and services.



                                              2
d.   USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices with missions that require a land
     mobile radio program will develop a strategic plan that describes their Frequency
     Modulated Land Mobile Radio (FM LMR) use. The plan will be reviewed, updated, and
     submitted annually to the ENS Director.

e.   Any device which radiates electromagnetic energy through free space must be
     authorized prior to procurement or used by USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
     offices. Frequency authorization must be obtained before funds can be obligated for the
     procurement of communications equipment requiring radio frequency authorization for
     use. Operations on an assigned frequency must be within the parameters of the
     frequency assignment. Cellular telephones and other leased personal communications
     services (PCS) are exempt from this requirement as they are licensed through the
     Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to the service provider.

f.   Applications or modifications for frequency assignment will be submitted to the USDA
     FAS Representative. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will contact the USDA
     FAS Representative for training and software requirements.

     (1) Requests for Radio Frequency Assignments (RFA)

         (a) Frequency requirements for new systems or major system upgrades must be
             planned in advance. Requests for frequency assignments will be forwarded to
             the USDA FAS Representative at least 1 year in advance of any planned
             procurements. NTIA has final approval for the frequency assignment requests.

         (b) A separate formal frequency assignment request is required for each frequency
             to be installed in a base station, repeater, group of mobile radios, or group of
             portable radios in a system.

         (c) Sharing of existing USDA systems among Mission Areas, agencies, or staff
             offices will be considered prior to developing a new system or expanding an
             existing system. Such sharing may be required when spectrum availability is
             limited, unavailable, or the traffic does not justify a separate system. NTIA’s
             Manual of Regulations and Procedures for Federal Radio Frequency
             Management ("Redbook") mandates that Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
             offices consider the use of commercial services in any system planning.

         (d) If the FS-Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Office determines that an RFA
             is exempt from disclosure under Freedom of Information Act of 1996, 5 United
             States Code (U.S.C.) § 552, as amended, the RFA will be accompanied by a
             justification letter stating the specific exemption(s) from disclosure under
             FOIA. The USDA IRAC Representative notifies NTIA of this exemption.

     (2) Five-Year Review

         All RFAs will reflect the actual installed configuration. In accordance with the
         NTIA Redbook, all RFAs must be reviewed and updated every 5 years. The FAS

                                            3
    Representative reviews and updates the RFAs and forwards the results to NTIA.

(3) Cooperative Communications

    (a) All wireless operations require radio frequency authorizations from NTIA.

    (b) Prior arrangements for sharing USDA wireless systems with other non-USDA
        entities must be coordinated with the USDA FAS Representative.

    (c) Arrangements permitting cooperative communications of mutual benefit
        among Mission Areas, agencies, or staff offices on each other’s authorized
        radio frequencies may be made by a memorandum of understanding (MOU)
        between Federal units or a cooperative agreement (between Federal and non-
        Federal units) signed by the responsible official having jurisdiction.
        Cooperative agreements require specific statutory authority. All cooperative
        agreements must be shared with the FAS Representative.

    (d) Copies of the Mission Area, agency, or staff office MOU must be on file with
        the Mission Area, agency, or staff office and the USDA FAS Representative.
        A formal MOU between units within USDA Mission Areas, agencies, or staff
        offices is not required.

    (e) Arrangements among Mission Areas, agencies, or staff offices within USDA,
        or with external agencies (Federal or non-Federal), must be forwarded to the
        USDA FAS Representative when authorizations or licenses are required.

(4) Citizens Band Radio and Family Radio Service (FRS) Use

    (a) USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must adhere to the
        regulations governing Citizens Band (CB) Radio Service in the NTIA Redbook
        when there is a need to communicate between Federal Government and non-
        Federal Government stations.

    (b) CB communications between Federal Government entities are prohibited.

    (c) Acquisition of FRS is prohibited, and no waivers will be granted.

(5) Programming and Frequency Changes in USDA Radio Systems

    (a) USDA Mission Area, agency, and staff office Spectrum Management Liaison
        Officers may delegate to the radio system operator the authority to program or
        change frequencies for which the system operator is responsible and has copies
        of RFAs, MOUs, or Cooperative Agreements. Individuals who are delegated
        the authority to reprogram or change frequencies in transmitters must have:

        1    A formal delegation that includes the specific frequencies that they are
             authorized to program or change; and


                                       4
        2    Knowledge of the terms and limitations of the RFA or license for each
             specific frequency being changed or programmed.

    (b) USDA radio equipment will not be programmed to operate outside the
        constraints of the RFA, license, or arrangement.

(6) Interference

    Interference with frequencies authorized for use by USDA radio systems will be
    reported to the USDA FAS Representative for resolution if the problem cannot be
    resolved locally.

(7) FOIA Exemptions

    The NTIA will release information concerning frequency assignments to the
    requester unless the FS-FOIA Office designates the assignment as FOIA-exempt.
    Most USDA frequency assignments are not exempt from release under FOIA.

(8) Shared Radio Systems

    (a) The NTIA Redbook mandates that the sharing of Government-owned radio
        resources with other Federal Agencies is required when deemed to be cost-
        effective and savings can be achieved.

    (b) USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, or other Federal Agencies may
        be required to share systems with other USDA Mission Areas, agencies, or
        staff offices in areas where frequencies are not available, or the traffic does not
        justify separate systems.

    (c) USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will not provide radio
        communications services to non-Federal entities or to the private sector except
        as provided in specific laws and regulations. Such use will be approved by the
        USDA IRAC Representative prior to providing such services.

    (d) USDA Mission Area, agency, and staff office requirements for use of non-
        Federal radio systems, such as microwave (other than common carrier), will be
        coordinated with the USDA IRAC Representative.

(9) Technical Assistance

    Technical assistance and advice pertaining to system design, equipment selection,
    sources of supply, and technical specifications may be obtained through the USDA
    TSC Representative.




                                        5
       (10) Procurement of Radio Equipment and Services

           All radio equipment will meet NTIA standards unless waived by the USDA IRAC
           Representative.

       (11) Disposition of Radio Equipment

           USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will perform actions to ensure
           excessed radio transmitting equipment can no longer transmit on the frequencies
           originally assigned (e.g., erasing the program, removing the frequency determining
           device) prior to declaring the equipment as excess property or otherwise
           transferring or disposing of the equipment pursuant to the Agriculture Property
           Management Regulation.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO) will:

       (1) Provide leadership and direction for Departmentwide radio communications
           initiatives;

       (2) Provide advice and assistance to Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices
           regarding radio telecommunications services and facilities; and

       (3) Apportion and collect the annual NTIA spectrum fees, and prepare and track
           corresponding paperwork.

  b.   The ENS Director will:

       (1) Establish procedures for monitoring, measuring, reporting, and enforcing
           compliance with this DR;

       (2) Oversee Mission Area, agency, and staff office compliance with this policy;

       (3) Serve, or delegate a representative to serve, on NTIA’s Policy and Plans Steering
           Group (PPSG);

       (4) Review and render decisions on Mission Area, agency, and staff office
           telecommunications policy waiver requests; and

       (5) Maintain an electronic file of approved waivers.

  c.   The FS Chief will:

       (1) Represent USDA on the IRAC, SPS, and the FAS of the NTIA;



                                              6
     (2) Establish and ensure compliance with policies, standards, and procedures for
         allotting and assigning frequencies within USDA;

     (3) License and assign radio frequencies for use by USDA Mission Areas, agencies,
         and staff offices, and maintain the records related to these actions; and

     (4) Inspect USDA’s radio operations to ensure compliance with national and
         international regulations and policies for radio frequency use.

d.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs, and Agency and Staff Office Information Technology
     (IT) Directors will:

     (1) Designate a Spectrum Management Liaison Officer to represent the Mission Area,
         agency, or staff office in all matters pertaining to radio communications and
         frequency management if the Mission Area, agency, or staff office uses transmitting
         devices requiring frequency assignments;

     (2) Notify the IRAC Representative when there is a change in Spectrum Management
         Liaison Officers;

     (3) Include the radio program in the budget planning process as identified in Office of
         Management and Budget (OMB), Circular A-11, Preparation, Submission, and
         Execution of the Budget; and

     (4) Prepare and maintain a strategic plan when the radio program within a Mission
         Area, agency, or staff office expands and becomes a significant capital asset
         (significant procurement, operating, or maintenance cost). The definition of a
         significant capital asset can be found in DR 3130-008, Definition of Major
         Information Technology Investments. This plan will be provided to the ENS
         Director and the USDA IRAC Representative upon origination and at each update.

e.   The USDA IRAC Representative will:

     (1) Ensure compliance with this policy, consistent with the delegations to the FS Chief
         in 7 CFR § 2.60(a)(27).

     (2) Engineer, select, and acquire frequencies to support validated requirements;

     (3) Authorize USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to use specific radio
         frequencies if their application for a radio frequency meets the spectrum
         requirements of the NTIA;

     (4) Provide interagency coordination and negotiation on frequencies, as required by
         NTIA;

     (5) Resolve interface problems encountered or created by USDA Mission Areas,
         agencies, and staff offices when such problems are caused by assignment

                                            7
         incompatibilities and cannot be resolved by the operating unit;

     (6) Review and provide comments on frequency applications submitted by Government
         and civilian agencies in order to protect USDA frequency assignments;

     (7) Serve as a member on all NTIA committees and subcommittees dealing with
         frequency management;

     (8) Provide guidance to USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices in the
         development of frequency plans that support future systems;

     (9) Maintain frequency engineering and control records of USDA frequency resources;
         and

     (10) Provide training to USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices in basic
          frequency management.

f.   The USDA FAS Representative will:

     (1) Be responsible for frequency assignment actions, support, and interference
         resolutions for all devices that require assigned frequencies to operate;

     (2) Process requests for RFAs for all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices;
         and

     (3) Establish procedures to protect against harmful interference that could result in loss
         of life or property, and coordinate any required resolution.

g.   The USDA TSC Representative will:

     (1) Provide technical advice on electromagnetic compatibility of new Government
         systems that operate nationwide and answering questions that USDA has on
         systems that may affect USDA operations; and

     (2) Provide technical assistance and training on spectrum management to USDA
         Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices.

h.   The USDA SPS Representative will be responsible for assisting in the development of
     recommendations regarding spectrum support for new systems submitted by Federal
     Agencies.

i.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Spectrum Management Liaison Officers will:
     (1) Serve as principal point of contact (POC) for all matters relating to radio
         communications and frequency management;

     (2) Review and recommend to the USDA IRAC Representative, on an ongoing basis,


                                             8
           revisions to the NTIA Redbook. NTIA accepts comments on the NTIA Redbook at
           any time;

       (3) Be familiar with NTIA policies; and

       (4) Manage all radio frequencies used by the Mission Area, agency, or staff office.
           This management includes:

           (a) Maintaining a file of all current RFAs for the Mission Area, agency, or staff
               office;

           (b) Submitting Mission Area, agency, or staff office requests for RFAs to the FAS
               Representative;

           (c) Disseminating RFAs to the Mission Area, agency, or staff office;

           (d) Reporting and/or resolving radio interference or noncompliance with
               regulations;

           (e) Coordinating radio planning efforts with the Mission Area, agency, or staff
               office responsible for preparation of the Mission Area, agency, or staff office
               IT Strategic Plan; and

           (f) Preparing and maintaining a strategic plan for FM LMR within the Mission
               Area, agency, or staff office. This plan is required by OMB each year.


7. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  a.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are required to conform to this
       policy. In the event that a specific policy requirement cannot be met, Mission Area,
       agency, and staff office system owners may submit a policy waiver request to the ENS
       Director at ens.policy@ocio.usda.gov. The waiver request will explain the reason for
       the request, identify compensating controls/actions that meet the intent of the policy, and
       identify how the compensating controls/actions provide a similar or greater level of
       defense or compliance than the policy requirement.

  b.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs and Agency and Staff Office IT Directors will address all
       policy waiver request memoranda to the ENS Director, and submit the waiver request to
       ens.policy@ocio.usda.gov for review and determination.

  c.   Waivers to stipulations of this directive that have been granted approval by the ENS
       Director and that are associated with a National Institute of Standards and Technology
       (NIST) control will be recorded and tracked as a Plan of Action and Milestones
       (POA&M) item in the USDA Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014
       (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. § 3551, et seq., data management and reporting tool.



                                               9
  d.   Waivers will expire at the end of the fiscal year or 6 months from the date of approval,
       whichever is longer. Unless otherwise specified, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
       offices will review and renew approved policy waivers every fiscal year.


8. INQUIRIES

  Questions and comments concerning the requirements of this regulation should be
  directed to OCIO, DISC, ENS, TIMG at ens.policy@ocio.usda.gov.


                                            -END-




                                              10
                            APPENDIX A

                ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


CB          Citizens Band
CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
CIO      Chief Information Officer
DISC     Digital Infrastructure Services Center
DOC      Department of Commerce
DR       Departmental Regulation
ENS      Enterprise Network Services
FAS      Frequency Assignment Subcommittee
FCC      Federal Communications Commission
FISMA    Federal Information Security Modernization Act
FITARA   Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
FM LMR   Frequency Modulated Land Mobile Radio
FOIA     Freedom of Information Act
FRS      Family Radio Service
FS       Forest Service
IRAC     Interdepartment Radio Advisory Committee
IT       Information Technology
MOU      Memorandum of Understanding
NIST     National Institute of Standards and Technology
NTIA     National Telecommunications and Information Administration
OCIO     Office of the Chief Information Officer
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
PCS      Personal Communications Services
POA&M    Plan of Action and Milestones
POC      Point of Contact
PPSG     Policy and Plans Steering Group
RFA      Radio Frequency Assignment
SPS      Spectrum Planning Subcommittee
TIMG     Telecommunications Infrastructure Management and Governance
TSC      Technical Subcommittee
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                                 A-1
                                      APPENDIX B

                                     DEFINITIONS


Federal Communications Commission (FCC). The regulatory organization that is
responsible for managing all non-Federal radio spectrum use in the United States.
(Source: Incorporation by Reference of the Manual of Regulations and Procedures for
Federal Radio Frequency Management, 47 CFR § 300.1)

Frequency Assignment Subcommittee (FAS). An IRAC subcommittee comprised of
representatives from Federal Agencies that use the spectrum. FAS assists NTIA, on behalf of
IRAC, in assigning and coordinating frequencies for use by Federal radio stations. FAS also
develops procedures for the processing of requests for frequency assignments. (Source: 47
CFR § 300.1)

Interdepartment Radio Advisory Committee (IRAC). IRAC serves in an advisory capacity to
the Administrator of NTIA (with reference to Federal radio stations) in assigning
frequencies, developing and executing policies, programs, procedures, and technical criteria
pertaining to the allocation, management, and use of the spectrum. (Source: 47 CFR §
300.1)

National Telecommunication and Information Administration (NTIA). The Federal
Government radio spectrum manager and the principal Executive Branch advisor on
telecommunications policy. (Source: 47 CFR § 300.1)

Policy and Plans Steering Group (PPSG). In order to enlist the leadership of Federal
Agencies in the resolution of spectrum policy matters, the Department of Commerce (DOC)
established the PPSG in January 2005. This advisory group is composed of top leadership
officials, at an assistant secretary-level or equivalent, from the Federal Agencies that are
major users of radio spectrum. The PPSG advises NTIA’s Administrator on spectrum policy
and strategic plans. The PPSG has committed to resolve major contentious spectrum issues
affecting Federal and non-Federal spectrum users. (Source: 47 CFR § 300.1)

Spectrum Management. Spectrum management is the planning and implementation of
programs to promote effective, efficient, and prudent use of the radio spectrum in the best
interests of the United States, taking care to conserve it for uses where other means of
communication are not available or feasible. This includes, but is not limited to, planning for
where in the spectrum specific uses can be placed most effectively, planning for
incorporation of new technology, planning for sharing of common facilities and uses, and
developing regulations to assure efficient, effective, and interference-free communications.
(Source: 47 CFR § 300.1)

Spectrum Planning Subcommittee (SPS). An IRAC subcommittee comprised of
representatives from Federal Agencies that use the spectrum. The IRAC develops both
recommendations and plans for spectrum use for submittal to NTIA, on behalf of IRAC,
regarding Mission Area, agency, or staff office requests for spectrum support for new

                                           B-1
systems. (Source: 47 CFR § 300.1)

Technical Subcommittee (TSC). An IRAC subcommittee comprised of representatives from
Federal Agencies that use the spectrum. The TSC assists NTIA, on the behalf of IRAC, in
developing policies, programs, procedures, and technical criteria regarding the allocation,
management, and use of the spectrum. (Source: 47 CFR § 300.1)




                                          B-2
                                      APPENDIX C

                         AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Delegations of Authority by the Under Secretary for Natural Resources and
Environment, 7 CFR § 2.60(a)(27) (2019)

DOC, NTIA, Manual of Regulations and Procedures for Federal Radio Frequency
Management ("Redbook"), May 2013, revised September 2017

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. § 3551, et
seq., December 18, 2014 (2017)

Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), Public Law (P.L.) 113-
291, Title VIII, Subtitle D, § 831-837, December 19, 2014

Freedom of Information Act of 1996 (FOIA), 5 U.S.C. § 552, et seq. (2017)

Incorporation by Reference of the Manual of Regulations and Procedures for Federal Radio
Frequency Management, 47 CFR § 300.1, (2018)

OMB, Circular A-11, Preparation, Submission, and Execution of the Budget, July 2017

USDA, Agriculture Property Management Regulation, Chapter 110, Subchapter B, Part 102-
36, May 2014

USDA, DR 3130-008, Definition of Major Information Technology Investments, February
27, 2015




                                         C-1
