                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                               NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                       DR 3410-001
SUBJECT: Information Collection Request Activities:            DATE:
Collection of Information from the Public                      January 26, 2022
OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer, Information      EXPIRATION DATE:
Resource Management Center                                     January 26, 2027



Section                                                                                   Page

1. Purpose                                                                                   1
2. Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                        1
3. Scope                                                                                     2
4. Background                                                                                2
5. Policy                                                                                    3
6. Privacy Requirements                                                                      5
7. Reporting                                                                                 5
8. Procedures                                                                                6
9. Roles and Responsibilities                                                                6
10. Inquiries                                                                               11

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                    A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                   B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                    C-1



1. PURPOSE

   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of Agriculture
   (USDA) policy for the management requirements associated with the clearance of an
   information collection request (ICR). This guidance must be used when collecting
   information from the public, including individuals, businesses, other private institutions, and
   State and local governments.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

   a.     This DR supersedes DR 3410-001, Information Collection Activities – Collection of
          Information from the Public, dated May 6, 2009.
  b.   This policy is effective immediately and remains in effect until it is superseded or it
       expires.

  c.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must align their policies and procedures
       with this DR within 6 months of the publication date.

  d.   This DR is not applicable to the collection of information from Federal employees or
       military personnel as part of their work-related duties.


3. SCOPE

  This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, employees, appointees,
  contractors, and others who work for, or on behalf of, USDA that are involved with
  developing or processing information collection requests.


4. BACKGROUND

  a.   The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (PRA), Public Law (P.L.) 104-13 and its
       implementing regulation, 5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 1320, Controlling
       Paperwork Burdens on the Public, were established in response to public complaints
       about the amount of paperwork burden imposed by the Federal Government on members
       of the public. Members of the public include, but are not limited to: individual people
       (including contractors), businesses, associations, and partnerships, State, tribal, and local
       governments, universities and foreign citizens, governments, and businesses.

  b.   The goals of the PRA are to:

       (1) Minimize the burden on the public when collecting information, especially by using
           technology;

       (2) Maximize the practical use of the information collected;

       (3) Ensure that an information collection does not duplicate already existing
           information, or duplicate effort;

       (4) Maximize the cooperation amongst Federal program areas and agencies;

       (5) Promote openness and accountability in the collection and use of information;

       (6) Improve integrity, quality, security, and utility of information to all users within and
           outside the Federal Government; and

       (7) Improve Federal responsibility and accountability.




                                                2
5. POLICY

  a.   The PRA requires every Federal agency, except those specifically exempted, to obtain
       approval from the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) for any planned
       information collections. Approved collections must be renewed at least every 3 years.

  b.   Collected information must:

       (1) Be essential to the Mission Area’s, agency’s, or staff office’s mission and have
           demonstrated practical use for the office in performing its function; and

       (2) Be collected in the most efficient, effective, and economical manner possible.

  c.   Approval and clearance is required for voluntary collections, mandatory collections, and
       collections required to obtain a Federal benefit (e.g., jobs, grants, permits.)

  d.   An information collection needs clearance if Mission Areas, agencies, or staff offices are
       collecting information in order to:

       (1) Obtain facts or opinions from 10 or more persons within a 12-month period by the
           use of standard questions or reporting requirements presented in forms, telephone or
           personal interviews, surveys, questionnaires, and web pages; requests for narrative
           responses to questions; requests for identical information, or almost any other
           means;

       (2) Require members of the public to provide information to the general public or to a
           third party;

       (3) Impose any requirements to label or mark items or packaging;

       (4) Require use of technological methods, including automated techniques, to monitor
           public compliance with Government requirements; or

       (5) Require compilation or maintenance of records, either alone or in conjunction with,
           the reporting of information.

  e.   Examples of information collections that require OMB clearance are:

       (1) Grant applications and reports if information is collected other than by use of, or in
           addition to, Standard Forms (e.g., narrative proposals, supporting documentation,
           performance reports);

       (2) Written reports (e.g., special use, grantee performance reports);

       (3) Surveys (e.g., in person, online, or telephone visitor surveys, customer surveys);



                                               3
     (4) Forms (e.g., visitor use reports, IRS 1040).

f.   Examples of information collections that do not require OMB clearance are:

     (1) Requests or collections from fewer than 10 members of the public;

     (2) Open-ended requests for comments or feedback;

     (3) Collections from Federal employees or military personnel as part of their work
         duties;

     (4) Discussions and questions from a public hearing, meeting, or online equivalent;

     (5) Some Federal investigations and civil actions, antitrust actions, and intelligence
         activities.

g.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices conducting or sponsoring an information
     collection are responsible for obtaining OMB approval.

     (1) An information collection is considered to be “conducted” if the information being
         collected is done using USDA staff and resources.

     (2) An information collection is considered to be “sponsored” if another agency is used
         to collect information, enters into a contract or a cooperative agreement with
         another person to collect information, or requires a person to provide information to
         another person, or otherwise causes another person to obtain, retain, solicit, or
         require the disclosure to third parties or the public of information by or for a USDA
         organization.

h.   USDA must provide members of the public with the option to submit information,
     transact business, and maintain records by paper or electronically when feasible. This
     will provide OMB with information on how to assess both compliance with PRA and the
     E-Government Act of 2002, P.L. 107-347.

i.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices cannot ask members of the public to respond
     to a collection that does not have OMB approval. If doing so, they are in violation of the
     PRA. By failing to comply, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices:

     (1) Could open USDA and the information collected to legal challenge; and

     (2) Will have the violations of the PRA reported to Congress and the President in the
         Information Collection Budget (ICB).




                                             4
6. PRIVACY REQUIREMENTS

  a.   Title III of the E-Government Act, also known as the Federal Information Security
       Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), requires Federal agencies to ensure the security of
       the information and information systems that support the operations and assets of the
       agency, including those provided or managed by another agency, contractor, or other
       source.

       Federal agencies and their contractors must comply with FISMA standards and
       obtain an Authority to Operate (ATO) appropriate for the types of information which
       reside on these information systems. They must also ensure that a Privacy Impact
       Assessment (PIA) is competed for these systems as well.

  b.   So that agencies and their contractors are aware of and prepare to meet the legal
       requirements for their information systems before initiating a new information
       collection, the following information should be completed:

       (1) Both ATO and PIA (if PII is collected) requirements apply to information systems
           of Federal agencies and their contractors (e.g., in the private sector and academia);

       (2) An ATO that is commensurate with the appropriate FISMA compliance level(s) is
           required, even if PII is not collected by an information collection; and

       (3) An information collection cannot begin if the information system that will be used
           to conduct or host the collected information does not have an appropriate ATO,
           even if an agency obtains OMB clearance for the collection.

  c.   USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will demonstrate in their OMB
       clearance package submissions that the ICR will result in information that complies with
       OMB and USDA Information Quality Guidelines when collecting information that
       requires OMB clearance under PRA. For additional information on PRA, see OMB’s
       Federal Collection of Information web page. For additional information on Privacy, see
       OMB’s Privacy web page.


7. REPORTING

  a.   OMB requires each Federal agency to submit an annual information collection budget
       (ICB) estimating the hours of burden to be imposed on the public in the next fiscal year
       and verifying accomplishments in prior years. Each year, OMB determines the ICB
       format, reduction goals, and other required inputs.

  b.   To achieve reduction goals, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must carefully
       review their rules and regulations. They also must be prepared to offset increases in
       some collections by identifying decreases in others.




                                               5
  c.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should plan their ICR needs 6 months or more
       in advance and expect strict adherence to the estimates for new ICRs that were
       submitted in the ICB. They must be prepared to reduce other proposed or existing
       collections if unexpected new collections are needed during the fiscal year to keep the
       new burden at or below the approved levels.

  d.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must provide a report for regulatory actions
       requiring a paperwork burden (e.g., notice of proposed rulemaking, interim final rule, or
       final rule.) Further information can be found in DR 1512-001, Regulatory Development
       and Review.

       (1) If a regulatory action involves paperwork burden, the Mission Area, agency, or staff
           office must:

           (a) Clear it with the appropriate program personnel and Mission Area, agency, or
               staff office Agency Information Collection Officer (AICO);

           (b) Prepare and input data into the Regulatory and Information Service Center
               (RISC) Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) Consolidated
               Information System (ROCIS); and

           (c) Submit one electronic copy of the ICR to the Departmental Information
               Collection Officer (DICO) at least 15 business days prior to the publication of
               the regulatory action.

       (2) The DICO must transmit the ICR to OMB through ROCIS or notify the sponsoring
           Mission Area, agency, or staff office if the package needs editing or does not
           contain all required information.

       (3) If an ICR pertains to rulemaking, the Mission Area, agency, or staff office must
           publish a notice in the Federal Register to inform the public of OMB’s decision on
           the ICR.


8. PROCEDURES

  Procedures and processes for the preparation of information collections can be found in DM
  3410-xxx, [DM forthcoming - draft in progress]


9. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Secretary, USDA will:

       (1) Comply with the requirements of the PRA and related policies as established by the
           OMB Director; and



                                               6
     (2) Delegate the responsibility for information collection activities to a senior official
         within USDA.

b.   The USDA CIO will:

     (1) Serve as the delegated senior official for information collection activities and report
         directly to the Secretary;

     (2) Serve as the focal point for all Departmentwide matters relating to ICRs, privacy,
         paperwork reduction, and elimination;

     (3) Establish an office to manage USDA’s compliance with and prompt, efficient, and
         effective implementation of the information policies and information resources
         management responsibilities, including the reduction of information collection
         burdens on the public; and

     (4) Ensure employees of the office are selected with special attention to the
         professional qualifications required to administer the functions described under the
         PRA.

c.   The Associate Chief Information Officer (ACIO) for Information Resource Management
     Center (IRMC) will designate individuals to serve as the DICOs.

d.   DICOs will:

     (1) Serve as the central point of contact for communications with OMB concerning the
         ICR;

     (2) Ensure that the ICR contains all required information;

     (3) Serve as the liaisons to OMB on ICR management clearances and activities;

     (4) Develop, establish, and publish Departmental ICR management policy, objectives,
         standards, and guidelines for the establishment and use of ICRs in accordance with
         governing statutes, regulations, policies, and procedures;

     (5) Ensure that ICRs comply with the legal requirements of the PRA, E-Government
         Act, and the Privacy Act, as applicable, to reduce, minimize, and control burden;
         protect sensitive information; and maximize practical use and public benefit;

     (6) Provide monthly reports to AICOs showing ICRs expiring within the next 12
         months;




                                              7
     (7) Review each ICR to ensure consistency with USDA and OMB policy,
         appropriateness of the statistical designs for proposed information collections,
         practical utility of the information being collected, as well as:

         (a) Ensure that an ICR is necessary; and

         (b) Encourage consolidation of collections and forms when practicable;

     (8) Review and submit new ICRs in ROCIS to OMB, and extensions and revisions of
         currently approved ICRs before their expiration dates;

     (9) Prepare and forward a notice with a 30-day comment period (calendar days) to the
         Federal Register of all new and expiring ICRs. Upon publication of the notice,
         submit the ICR to OMB in ROCIS for review and approval;

     (10) Respond to inquiries from OMB, maintaining records of transmittals and
          clearances, and notifying Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices of OMB action;

     (11) Ensure that each ICR is inventoried, displays an OMB control number, and
          discloses all necessary information as described in 44 U.S.C. § 3506, Federal
          agency responsibilities.

     (12) Provide training and technical assistance to Mission Area, agency, and staff office
          personnel in the development and clearance of ICR submissions; and

     (13) Notify the Mission Area, agency, and staff office clearance contacts of the
          requirements and current procedures to prepare and submit its ICB information to
          the IRMC ACIO. The IRMC ACIO will consolidate responses and submit to OMB
          in a timely manner to meet assigned due dates.

e.   Mission Area Under Secretaries, and Agency and Staff Office Heads will:

     (1) Establish and implement an effective Mission Area, agency, or staff office ICR
         Management Program within their respective organizations to meet the
         requirements of this DR;

     (2) Designate an AICO who will serve as a single point of contact within their agency
         on ICR matters. This individual interacts with program managers to ensure ICRs
         are submitted in the timeframes required to prevent ICR violations or require
         emergency or extension approvals from OMB. The Mission Area, agency, or staff
         office will report any changes in this designation immediately to the DICOs within
         OCIO, including the name, title, email address, and telephone number of the
         designee;

     (3) Ensure that Mission Area, agency, and staff office program managers understand
         and comply with all laws including the PRA, E-Government Act, and the Privacy



                                             8
         Act as it relates to information collected from the public, including individuals and
         entities;

     (4) Ensure that new and existing ICRs meet the timeframes outlined in this DR; and

     (5) Ensure that ICR needs within their agency are analyzed, including a periodic review
         of all regulations that result in paperwork burden, to ensure that an ICR is
         necessary.

f.   AICOs will:

     (1) Coordinate ICR management activities with the DICO;

     (2) Ensure that each ICR meets the requirements of this regulation and 5 CFR 1320;

     (3) Assist program managers or specialists by providing training, technical assistance,
         and guidance in preparing ICRs to keep public burden to a minimum;

     (4) Monitor Mission Area, agency, or staff office ICR activities to ensure compliance
         with applicable statutes, regulations, policies, procedures, and standards on all
         ICRs:

         (a) Review and clear PRA section in regulatory actions for any paperwork burden;

         (b) Review and monitor Mission Area, agency, or staff office ICRs to ensure that
             the 60-day Federal Register notice is published 6 months prior to the expiration
             date of an existing ICR, or the use date of a new ICR; and

         (c) Begin inputting the ICR data into ROCIS and notify OCIO 4 months prior to
             the ICR expiration date of an existing ICR, or the use date of a new ICR.

     (5) Review the monthly reports generated by OCIO and OMB in ROCIS to coordinate
         the preparation of renewal ICRs;

     (6) Complete a ROCIS training course to obtain login privileges to access ROCIS;

     (7) Identify and resolve PRA violations;

     (8) Ensure that an up-to-date inventory is maintained for all Mission Area, agency, or
         staff office ICRs, submissions, approvals, burden hours, total responses, and
         supporting materials;

     (9) Ensure Mission Area, agency, or staff office program managers are in compliance
         with the PRA and verify their adherence to the Privacy Act and E-Government Act;




                                             9
     (10) Coordinate with the USDA Departmental Forms Management Officer (DFMO) to
          ensure Agriculture Department (AD) and Standard Form (SF) compliance
          requirements are met, or with the Mission Area, agency, and staff office forms
          managers and webmasters for USDA component forms to ensure that all public use
          forms, surveys, or non-forms (collections of standardized information on the
          internet) contain instructions, the OMB approved control number, burden disclosure
          statement, and the expiration date, unless otherwise exempted. This information
          should be on the first page or as close to the front as possible, when posted on the
          internet or used with a web-based system;

     (11) Consult with the Mission Area, agency, or staff office records management officer
          about ICRs to ensure records have an authorized disposition per the applicable
          records retention schedule as indicated by DR 3080-001, Records Management; and

     (12) As necessary, and at the request of the DICO, the Mission Area, agency, or staff
          office AICO should provide the National Agricultural Statistics Service’s AICO
          with a copy of any ICR containing statistical methodology for review and
          comments before submitting to OCIO.

g.   Program Managers will:

     (1) Coordinate ICR activities with AICOs when developing a new or renewing an
         existing ICR;

     (2) Ensure that the ICR is necessary for the proper performance of the Mission Area,
         agency, or staff office’s function and has practical use;

     (3) Prepare and initiate publication of the 60-day Federal Register notice 6 to 8 months
         prior to the expiration date of an existing ICR or the use date of a new ICR;

     (4) Submit the ICR package to the AICO;

     (5) Comply with the Privacy Act, E-Government Act, and PRA;

     (6) Ensure all employees, and those who act on behalf of USDA (including
         contractors), do not disclose PII. For more information regarding the handling of
         PII, please refer to DR 3515-002, Privacy Policy and Compliance for Personally
         Identifiable Information (PII);

     (7) Institute procedures to protect the information’s confidentiality to the extent
         permitted by law when respondents submit proprietary or other confidential
         information;

     (8) Coordinate ICRs with the USDA DFMO per DM 3020-001, Departmental Forms
         Manual (see Section 7d), or with the Mission Area, agency, and staff office forms




                                             10
            managers and webmasters for USDA component forms, and USDA CIO for those
            ICRs that will be posted on the internet;

        (9) Prepare an ICR for any collection of information contained in a proposed rule; and

        (10) Notify AICO of any upcoming proposed rules containing a collection of
             information.

   h.   The USDA Departmental Forms Management Officer (DFMO) will:

        (1) Ensure the AD-687, Forms Action and Request Notice accompanies the
            Departmental form submission and contains the appropriate approvals;

        (2) Verify that Section 508 accessibility requirements are met; however, final Section
            508 edits and corrections will remain the responsibility of the sponsoring Mission
            Area, agency, or staff office’s Section 508 staff;

        (3) Confirm form submissions meet grammar, spelling, and Plain Language
            requirements;

        (4) Ensure the appropriate legal disclaimer language is in place, in consultation with the
            Office of the General Counsel (OGC);

        (5) Ensure Privacy Act language is in place, in consultation with the Departmental
            Privacy Office and OGC, if a submitted form is collecting PII;

        (6) Validate form numbers, OMB control numbers, revision information, publication
            dates, and expiration dates are accurate and meet any Departmental formatting
            requirements;

        (7) Finalize and publish forms to the Departmental forms website once they are
            approved by OMB; and

        (8) Contact the DICO to notify their AICOs about the form’s availability.


10. INQUIRIES

   Direct all questions concerning this DR to the OCIO IRMC IMD via email to
   usda.pra@usda.gov.


                                             -END-




                                               11
                                APPENDIX A

                   ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ACIO     Associate Chief Information Officer
AD       Agriculture Department
AICO     Agency Information Collection Officer
ATO      Authority to Operate
CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
CIO      Chief Information Officer
DFMO     Departmental Forms Management Officer
DG       Departmental Guidebook
DICO     Departmental Information Collection Officer
DM       Departmental Manual
DR       Departmental Regulation
EIT      Electronic and Information Technology
EO       Executive Order
FISMA    Federal Information Security Modernization Act
FRN      Federal Register Notice
GAO      Government Accountability Office
ICB      Information Collection Request Budget
ICO      Information Clearance Officer
ICR      Information Collection Request
IMD      Information Management Division
IRMC     Information Resource Management Center
IRS      Internal Revenue Service
IT       Information Technology
OBPA     Office of Budget and Program Analysis
OCIO     Office of the Chief Information Officer
OGC      Office of the General Counsel
OIRA     Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OMB Component)
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
OPI      Office of Primary Interest
PIA      Privacy Impact Assessment
PII      Personally Identifiable Information
P.L.     Public Law
PRA      Paperwork Reduction Act
RISC     Regulatory and Information Service Center
ROCIS    Regulatory and Information Service Center, Office of Information and
         Regulatory Affairs Consolidated Information System
SF       Standard Form
SORN     System of Records Notice
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                                     A-1
                                         APPENDIX B

                                         DEFINITIONS


a. Burden. The total time, effort, or financial resources expended by persons to generate,
   maintain, or provide information to, or for a, Federal Agency, including:

   (1) Reviewing instructions;

   (2) Acquiring, installing, and using technology and systems;

   (3) Adjusting the existing ways to comply with any previously applicable instructions and
       requirements;

   (4) Searching data sources;

   (5) Completing and reviewing the collection of information; and

   (6) Transmitting or otherwise disclosing the information. (Source: 44 U.S.C. § 3502,
       Definitions)

b. Electronic Government (E-Gov). The use by the Government of internet-based applications
   and other digital technologies, combined with processes that implement these technologies,
   to enhance the access to, and delivery of, Government information and services to the public,
   other agencies and other Government entities; and leverage investments in information
   technology to eliminate unnecessary duplication and improve effectiveness, efficiency, and
   service quality. This includes addressing the people and process changes associated with
   transformed business delivery. (Source: USDA, Departmental Guidebook (DG) 0100-002,
   USDA Departmental Directives Definitions Glossary)

c. Information Collection Budget (ICB). OMB’s annual report to Congress, providing a
   detailed accounting of the ICR activities of the Federal Government in a given fiscal year.

d. Information Collection Request (ICR). Obtaining, causing to be obtained, soliciting, or
   requiring the disclosure to third parties or the public of facts or opinions regardless of the
   form or format. Typical formats include, written report forms, application forms, schedules,
   questionnaires, reporting or recordkeeping requirements, or similar methods calling for the
   collection of information.

   The following are methods used to collect information under an ICR:

   (1) Mail (forms);

   (2) Personal or telephone interviews or group interviews (such as focus group sessions);




                                                 B-1
   (3) Communication via a web-based application;

   (4) Automated, electronic, mechanical, or other technological collection techniques (such as
       electronic transmissions from airplanes or boats, to ground or satellite receiving
       stations); or

   (5) Any other approach through which the respondent or potential respondent can provide
       the response, recordkeeping, or disclosure requested. (Source: 44 U.S.C. § 3502).

e. Practical Utility. The ability of an agency to use information, particularly the capability to
   process such information in a timely and useful fashion. (Source: 44 U.S.C. § 3502)

f. Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA). A tool for identifying and assessing privacy risks
   throughout the development life cycle of a program or system. A privacy impact assessment
   states what personally identifiable information (PII) is collected and explains how that
   information is maintained, how it will be protected and how it will be shared.

g. Personally Identifiable Information (PII). Any information about an individual maintained by
   an agency, including (1) any information that can be used to distinguish or trace an
   individual‘s identity, such as name, social security number, date and place of birth, mother‘s
   maiden name, or biometric records; and (2) any other information that is linked or linkable to
   an individual, such as medical, educational, financial, and employment information. (Source:
   Government Accountability Office (GAO) Report, GAO-08-536, Privacy – Alternatives
   Exist for Enhancing Protection of Personally Identifiable Information, Footnote 1)

h. Recordkeeping Requirement. A requirement imposed by or for an agency on persons to
   maintain specified records, including a requirement to:

   (1) Retain such records;

   (2) Notify third parties, the Federal Government, or the public of the existence of such
       records;

   (3) Disclose such records to third parties, the Federal Government, or the public; or

   (4) Report to third parties, the Federal Government, or the public regarding such records;
       (Source: 44 U.S.C. § 3502)

i. ROCIS. The electronic database system used to input the ICR documentation and
   submission to OMB. (OMB, Privacy Impact Assessment - Regulatory Information Service
   Center (RISC) RISC/OIRA Combined Information System (ROCIS))

j. Section 508. Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended (29 U.S.C. §
   794(D)) requires that Federal agencies’ electronic and information technology (EIT) be
   accessible to people with disabilities, including employees and members of the public.




                                                B-2
                                     APPENDIX C

                         AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, Public Law (P.L.) 104-106, February 10, 1996

Controlling Paperwork Burdens on the Public, 5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part
1320

Data Quality Act, P.L. 106-554, § 515, December 21, 2000

E-Government Act of 2002, P.L. 107-347, December 17, 2002

Executive Order (EO) 12866, Regulatory Planning and Review, September 30, 1993, as
amended by EO 13422

EO 13422, Further Amendment to Executive Order 12866 on Regulatory
Planning and Review, January 18, 2007

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014, P.L. 113-283, December 2014

Freedom to E-File Act, P.L. 106-222, June 20, 2000

GAO, Report GAO-08-536, Privacy – Alternatives Exist for Enhancing Protection of
Personally Identifiable Information, May 2008

OMB, Circular A-130, Memorandum for Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies:
Management of Federal Information Resources, revised, November 28, 2000

OMB, Memorandum M-03-22, OMB Guidance for Implementing the Privacy Provisions of
the E-Government Act of 2002, September 26, 2003

OMB, Office of Management and Budget Information Quality Guidelines, October 1, 2002

OMB, Privacy Impact Assessment - Regulatory Information Service Center (RISC)
RISC/OIRA Combined Information System (ROCIS), May 30, 2018

OMB, Statistical Policy, Directive No. 15, Standards for the Classification of Federal Data
on Race and Ethnicity, June 9, 1994

Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, P.L. 104-13, May 22, 1995

Privacy Act of 1974, codified at 5 U.S.C. § 552a, as amended




                                            C-1
Public Printing and Documents, 44 U.S.C. § 3502, Definitions

Public Printing and Documents, 44 U.S.C. § 3506, Federal agency responsibilities

Section 508, Rehabilitation Act of 1973, codified at 29 U.S.C. § 794d, Electronic and
information technology

USDA, AD-687, Forms Action and Request Notice, March 1991

USDA, DG 0100-002, USDA Departmental Directives Definitions Glossary, September 26,
2018

USDA, DM 3020-001, Departmental Forms Manual, September 16, 1991

USDA, DR 1512-001, Regulatory Development and Review, September 14, 2021

USDA, DR 3080-001, Records Management, September 16, 2016

USDA, DR 3515-002, Privacy Policy and Compliance for Personally Identifiable
Information (PII), October 30, 2020

USDA, DR 4030-001, Section 508 Program, September 8, 2014

USDA, OCIO, Information Quality Guidelines web page




                                          C-2
