U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE 
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250 

 

DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION 

NUMBER: 

DR 3460-001 

SUBJECT: Digital Signage Policy and Procedures within 
USDA Headquarters Facilities 

DATE: 

April 7, 2021 

OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer, Client 
Experience Center (CEC) 

EXPIRATION DATE: 

April 7, 2026 



 

 

 

Section Page 

 

1. Purpose 1 
2. Special Instructions/Cancellations 1 
3. Scope 2 
4. Background 2 
5. Policy 2 
6. Roles and Responsibilities 4 
7. Procedures 5 
8. Inquiries 7 


 

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations A-1 

Appendix B – Authorities and References B-1 

Appendix C – Process Flow C-1 

 

 

 

1. PURPOSE 

 
This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of Agriculture 
(USDA) policy for the use of Department-controlled digital signage within USDA 
headquarters facilities displaying in the National Capital Region at the Whitten, South, and 
Patriots Plaza III Buildings in Washington, D.C. 

 

 

2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS 

 

This policy supersedes DR 3460-001, Digital Signage Policy and Procedures within USDA 
HQ Facilities, dated November 12, 2013, in its entirety. 

 

 

 



3. SCOPE 

 

a. The scope of this policy applies to the Digital Signage Team (DST) and any Mission 
Area, agency, or staff office that would like to publish digital content to the Digital 
Signage Broadcast (DSB) system in the USDA South, Whitten, and Patriots Plaza III 
Buildings in Washington, DC. 


 

b. This directive also covers specialty monitors, such as directory boards that list the names 
and room numbers of USDA personnel and cafeteria boards that list cafeteria events and 
specials. 


 

 

4. BACKGROUND 


Digital signage provides an opportunity for USDA personnel to deliver targeted messages 
with a common goal at specific locations at specific times. Digital signage is a 
communication medium that informs staff and visitors about events occurring in a specific 
USDA location as well as other information through digital means. It is intended to replace 
paper-based signs, thus reducing waste, and complying with the Paperwork Reduction Act, 
44 United States Code (U.S.C.) § 3501, et seq. Standard information displayed will build 
interest in events and activities of general interest to all USDA employees or defined 
organizational segments of the Department. 

 

 

5. POLICY 


a. The USDA Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) is responsible for the 
oversight of digital signage policy. Given the need to control and balance the content 
and flow of such information to employees, the use of these messages should be limited 
to only those messages that are most effectively conveyed through such a medium to the 
targeted employee population. To be broadcast as an electronic message, messages must 
meet the criteria established below (Section 5c) and be approved in accordance with the 
procedures in Section 7. 
b. All content must be approved through an appropriate point of contact (POC) from the 
Agency Points of Contact List to ensure compliance with USDA policies before 
distribution. The POC can contact the DST if they have questions regarding the 
submitter’s request. In addition, all digital signage messages will remain on the displaymonitor 
until the Mission Area, agency, or staff office-provided end date. If the total 
message duration will be more than 30 business days, on the 25th business day the DST 
team will email the submitter to determine whether or not the end date should be 
extended. The message will be automatically cancelled on the 30th business day if no 
response is received. 
c. For authorization to communicate via the digital signage medium, messages must meet 
the following digital message criteria: 



 

(1) The message must directly pertain to the targeted audience. For example, common 
types of information are: 
(a) Scheduled events – onsite activities sponsored by the Department. 
(b) General interest – open to all USDA personnel. 
(c) Staff announcements – significant awards or achievements. 
(d) Welcoming statements – welcome special guests and visitors. 
(e) Departmental notices – messages from the USDA Secretary (Channel 6) or 
Mission Area, agency, or staff office directors. 
(f) Emergency notifications – building closings, fire, or other safety notifications. 
(g) Notices of missing persons and children. 
(h) Official business notices of the occupant Mission Area, agency, or staff office. 
(i) Department-approved campaigns (e.g., charity, blood drive, safety). 
(j) National news – USDA may use national and local news feeds; however, no 
other non-news programming will be allowed. 
(k) Weather alerts. 
(2) Content must comply with all relevant telecommunications, ethics and conduct, and 
civil rights regulations pertaining to such matters as fund raising, terminology, and 
visual appearance. Prohibited content is specified in DR 3300-026, Planning and 
Managing Wireless Technologies. 
(3) If Uniform Resource Locator (URL) links appear in messages, only website 
addresses of Federal, state, and local government agencies; transit authorities; or 
related USDA associations and organizations (e.g., Agriculture Federal Credit 
Union, USDA Employee Services and Recreation Association (ESRA), and their 
approved vendors) are permitted. 
(4) The DST must receive message requests at least 5 business days before the 
requested distribution date. 
(5) This message may only use USDA logo or imply USDA sponsorship if conveying 
official USDA information or it pertains to a USDA-sponsored event, and complies 
with DR 1430-002, Use of Logos/Marks at the United States Department of 
Agriculture. 



 

(6) All messages must comply with DR 4030-001, Section 508 Program, which 
addresses the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. § 794d. 
(7) All announcements and messages are to be concise, having no more than 35 words. 
(8) All message requests must be submitted to the DST, 
sm.ocio.emscs.servicedesk@usda.gov, electronically using Form Agriculture 
Department (AD)-3111), Digital Signage Request Form. 
(9) Digital signage monitors should be placed where most USDA personnel within the 
facility will pass, such as building entrances, elevator lobbies, and cafeterias. 


 

 

6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 


a. The USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO) will provide leadership and direction for 
Departmentwide digital signage initiatives. 


 

b. The OCIO, Client Experience Center (CEC) Associate Chief Information Officer 
(ACIO) will provide advice and assistance to Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices 
regarding digital signage services. 


 

c. The OCIO, CEC, Infrastructure Operations Division (IOD) Director will: 
(1) Establish procedures for monitoring, measuring, reporting, and enforcing 
compliance with this DR; and 
(2) Oversee Mission Area, agency, and staff office compliance with this policy. 
d. The OCIO, CEC, IOD Client Services Branch (CSB) Chief will establish and ensure 
compliance with policies, standards, and procedures for digital signage within USDA. 
e. The OCIO, CEC, IOD CSB staff or Client Delivery Subject Matter Expert will: 
(1) Resolve problems encountered by USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices 
when such problems are caused and cannot be resolved by the DST; 
(2) Be familiar with digital signage policies and standard operating procedures; and 
(3) Serve as the issue escalation point for the DST. 


 

f. Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Requestors will: 


 

(1) Contact the appropriate POC (see Agency Points of Contact List) to obtain approval 
for the digital signage; 



 

(2) Prepare the content to be displayed as digital signage; and 


 

(3) Complete Form AD-3111, save it to their local hard drive, and then email it and the 
digital content to their respective POC. Other communications regarding the 
request can be sent via email to sm.ocio.emscs.servicedesk@usda.gov. 


 

g. Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office POCs will: 


 

(1) Approve all digital signage requests; and 


 

(2) Email the completed form to the DST. 


 

 

7. PROCEDURES 


a. The requester accesses the USDA Digital Signage Broadcast SharePoint site; uses the 
Agency Points of Contact List for their Mission Area, agency, or staff office; and obtains 
approval for the digital signage. When developing content for the signage, consider the 
brevity in a billboard so that the message can be communicated quickly. 


 

b. The requester creates content based on guidance within the digital signage policy (see 
Section 5). Once completed, requester sends Form AD-3111 and the completed content 
to their Mission Area, agency, or staff office POC. 


 

c. The requester downloads and fills out form AD-3111. A link to DR 3460-001 and the 
Digital Signage Quick Tips are available on the USDA Digital Signage Broadcast 
SharePoint site. 


 

(1) Requester contacts POC and obtains approval of Digital Signage content. 


 

(2) Requester completes submission form and emails to POC. 


 

(3) POC reviews submission form for completeness, then forwards it to the DST team. 


 

(4) DST sends acknowledgment to POC. 


 

(5) If more information is required, DST will contact POC. 


 

(6) If more information is not required, DST uploads content and confirms it is 
displayed correctly. 


 

(7) If content is still up after 25 business days, DST sends reminder about content 
expiration. 


 

(8) If Extension is required, POC emails extension request to DST. 



 

(9) If Extension is not required, DST removes content from the Digital Signage system. 
d. The Mission Area, agency, or staff office POC emails the completed Form AD-3111 and 
the digital content to the DST (sm.ocio.emscs.servicedesk@usda.gov). 
e. The Mission Area, agency, or staff office POC will contact the requester for request 
status. 
f. Technical Instructions: 
(1) All announcements and messages must be concise, having no more than 35 words 
(see Form AD-3111). 
(2) Announcement text must have no grammatical or spelling errors. 
(3) All related photos for messages must be submitted along with Form AD-3111 
detailing the message. 
(4) The DST will accept still images in Joint Photographic Experts Group (JPEG) or 
portable network graphics (PNG) format. The required size is 1910 x 880 at 72 
dots-per-inch (DPI) and no smaller than 500 x 500 pixels. The file should be 
displayed in a landscape page orientation. Contact the DST at 
SM.OCIO.CTS.IOD.DSB@usda.gov with questions regarding text and illustration 
guidelines. 
(5) Digital slide content must be in PowerPoint format (original graphics or permission 
provided for copyright-protected graphics are allowed). Slides are displayed for 15 
seconds. Note that PowerPoint animation does not work on displays. 
(6) The CEC ACIO reserves the right to make any changes to submitted digital signage 
requests. 


 

(7) The DST does not provide any content creation services. 
(8) The use of solid blue backgrounds on screens is reserved for emergency 
communications. Digital signage submitted with a solid blue background will not 
be scheduled for display and will be returned to the requester. 
(9) If the content relates to an event that is later cancelled, please cancel the digital 
signage request by sending a notification to: SM.OCIO.CTS.IOD.DSB@usda.gov, 
or if necessary, submit a new digital signage request form advertising the 
cancellation. 


 

 


8. INQUIRIES 

 

Inquiries regarding this DM should be directed to the DST at 
SM.OCIO.CTS.IOD.DSB@usda.gov. 

 

 

-END- 


APPENDIX A 
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 

 

 

ACIO Associate Chief Information Officer 

AD Agricultural Department 

CEC Client Experience Center 

CIO Chief Information Officer 

CSB Client Services Branch 

DPI Dots Per Inch 

DR Departmental Regulation 

DSB Digital Signage Broadcast 

DST Digital Signage Team 

ESRA Employee Services and Recreation Association 

IOD Infrastructure Operations Division 

JPEG Joint Photographic Experts Group 

OCIO Office of the Chief Information Officer 

PNG Portable Network Graphics 

POC Point of Contact 

URL Uniform Resource Locator 

U.S.C. United States Code 

USDA United States Department of Agriculture 


APPENDIX B 
AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES 

 

 

Paperwork Reduction Act, 44 U.S.C. § 3501 et seq., December 11, 1980, as amended 

 

Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. § 794d, September 26, 1973, as amended 

 

USDA, AD-3111, Digital Signage Request Form, June 2020 


USDA, DR-3300-026, Planning and Managing Wireless Technologies, January 23, 2020. 

 

USDA, DR 1410-001, Publications Review and Clearance Policy, January 14, 2021 

 

USDA, DR 1430-002, Use of Logos/Marks at the United States Department of Agriculture, 
January 8, 2013 


USDA, DR 1440-002, Press Operations, September, 7, 2016 


USDA, DR 1600-002, Posting of Notices and Information Bulletins, April 4, 2002 


USDA, DR 3080-001, Records Management, August 16, 2016 


USDA, DR 3090-001, Litigation Retention Policy for Documentary Materials Including 
Electronically Stored Information, May 28, 2008 

 

USDA, DR 3450-002, Freedom of Information Act Implementing Regulations, February 7, 2003 


USDA, DR 4030-001, Section 508 Program, September 8, 2014 

 

USDA, OCIO, CEC, Agency Points of Contact List SharePoint site 

 

USDA, OCIO, CEC, Digital Signage Quick Tips SharePoint site 

 

USDA, OCIO, CEC, USDA Digital Signage Broadcast SharePoint site 

 



APPENDIX C 
PROCESS FLOW 

 

 

 

A flowchart that presents the Digital Signage Request Process. This process begins when the requester accesses the USDA Digital Signage Broadcast SharePoint Site and downloads and fills out the Digital Signage Request Form (AD-3111).
(1) Requester contacts POC and obtains approval of Digital Signage content.
(2) Requester completes submission form and emails to POC.
(3) POC reviews submission form for completeness, then forwards it to the DST team.
(4) DST sends acknowledgment to POC.
(5) If more information is required, DST will contact POC.
(6) If more information is not required, DST uploads content and confirms it is displayed correctly.
(7) If content is still up after 25 business days, DST sends reminder about content expiration.
(8) If Extension is required, POC emails extension request to DST.
(9) If Extension is not required, DST removes content from the Digital Signage system. (End of Process)

