                              U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                     WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250




                                                                                      Number:
    DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                           3440-2
SUBJECT: Control and Protection of “Sensitive Security               DATE:
Information”                                                         January 30, 2003
                                                                     OPI: Personnel and
                                                                     Document Security Division
                                                                     of the Office of Procurement
                                                                     and Property Management


TABLE OF CONTENTS

1     PURPOSE
2     SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS
3     POLICY
4     REFERENCES
5     BACKGROUND
6     DEFINITIONS
7     ABBREVIATIONS
8     RESPONSIBILITIES
9     FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT
10    IDENTIFICATION AND MARKING
11    CUSTODY AND STORAGE
12    DISSEMINATION AND TRANSMISSION
13    RECORDS DISPOSITION
14    DURATION OF SSI PROTECTION
15    CONTRACTOR PERSONNEL
16    PROTECTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (IT) ASSETS
17    MATERIAL FROM OTHER DEPARTMENTS
Appendix A  Attorney General’s Memorandum of October 12, 2001


1     PURPOSE

      This regulation establishes U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) procedures for
      identifying unclassified but sensitive information and safeguarding it against
      unauthorized use or disclosure. The regulation includes minimum protection
      requirements, including the identification of unclassified but sensitive information as
      “Sensitive Security Information,” and recommends additional security safeguards to be
      applied where warranted by the sensitivity of the information.
2   SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS

    This regulation applies to all organizational elements within USDA.


3   POLICY

    It is the policy of USDA to safeguard unclassified but sensitive security information
    within its control. USDA will withhold from release sensitive information that is not
    appropriate for public disclosure consistent with laws, regulations and court decisions.

    It is important to note that the Secretary of Agriculture is authorized to originally classify
    information as “Secret” by order of the President 67 FR 61465 (September 26, 2002).
    Therefore, if USDA originates documents that it believes should be classified,
    Departmental Administration (DA) should be notified as soon as possible.

    Information must not be designated as Sensitive Security Information (SSI) to conceal
    violations of law; inefficiency; administrative error; prevent embarrassment to a person,
    organization, department or agency; or restrain competition.



4   REFERENCES

    Computer Security Act of 1987, P.L. No. 1000-235, 101 Stat. 1724 (1988)

    Office of Management and Budget Circular A-130, Management of Federal Information
    Resources, Appendix III, Security of Federal Automated Information Resources

    Freedom of Information Act, 5 USC §552 (2000)

    Executive Order 12958, Classified National Security Information, April 12, 1995

    U.S. Attorney General’s Memorandum for Heads of All Federal Departments and
    Agencies Regarding the Freedom of Information Act (October 12, 2001)

    DM 3440-001 Classification, Declassification, and Safeguarding Classified Information,

    DR 3440-001 Classification, Declassification, and Safeguarding Classified Information.

    DR 3450-002 FOIA Implementing Regulations.

    DR 3040-001 Electronic Records Management Program.

    DR 3060-1 USDA Correspondence Management Regulation, Section 17, Handling of
    Restricted Information.

    DR 3080-1 Records Disposition.
5   BACKGROUND

    The need has arisen to establish formal guidance for all organizational elements outlining
    procedures for identifying, safeguarding, using, and maintaining the disposition of
    unclassified information that is considered sensitive security information, such as
    information pertaining to threats, vulnerabilities, and risks to homeland security and
    physical security at USDA facilities.


6   DEFINITIONS

    a       Critical Infrastructure means physical and cyber-based systems, assets (including
            information whether stored on paper, electronically, or using other means), and
            services essential to the government or economy of the United States or to a
            political subdivision thereof, including, but not limited to, systems, facilities, and
            stockpiles necessary for the operation, maintenance, or distribution of essential
            goods and services, such as telecommunications (including voice and data
            transmission and the Internet), electrical power, gas and oil storage,
            transportation, banking and finance, public health (including biological,
            chemical, radiological, and other hazardous materials), water supply, waste
            water, emergency services (including medical, fire, and police services), and the
            continuity of government operations;

    b       Sensitive Security Information means unclassified information of a sensitive
            nature, that if publicly disclosed could be expected to have a harmful impact on
            the security of Federal operations or assets, the public health or safety of the
            citizens of the United States or its residents, or the nation’s long-term economic
            prosperity; and which describes, discusses, or reflects:

            (1)     The ability of any element of the critical infrastructure of the United
                    States to resist intrusion, interference, compromise, theft, or
                    incapacitation by either physical or computer-based attack or other
                    similar conduct that violates Federal, State, or local law; harms interstate,
                    international commerce of the United States; or, threatens public health
                    or safety;

            (2)     Any currently viable assessment, projection, or estimate of the security
                    vulnerability of any element of the critical infrastructure of the United
                    States, specifically including, but not limited to vulnerability assessment,
                    security testing, risk evaluation, risk-management planning, or risk audit;

            (3)     Any currently applicable operational problem or solution regarding the
                    security of any element of the critical infrastructure of the United States,
                    specifically including but not limited to the repair, recovery, redesign,
                    reconstruction, relocation, insurance, and continuity of operations of any
                    element;
          (4)     The following categories are provided for illustration purposes only as
                  examples of the types of information (regardless of format) that may be
                  categorized as SSI:

                  1   Physical security status of USDA laboratories, research centers, field
                      facilities, etc., which may also contain vulnerabilities;

                  2   Investigative and analytical materials concerning information about
                      physical security at USDA facilities such as the above-named
                      facilities;

                  3   Information that could result in physical risk to individuals;

                  4   Information that could result in serious damage to critical facilities
                      and/or infrastructures;

                  5   Cyber Security Information, which includes, but is not limited to:

                      (a)      Network Drawings or Plans

                      (b)      Program and System Security Plans

                      (c)      Mission Critical and Sensitive Information Technology (IT)
                               Systems and Applications

                      (d)      Capital Planning and Investment Control Data (I-TIPS)

                      (e)      IT Configuration Management Data and Libraries

                      (f)      IT Restricted Space (Drawings, Plans and Equipment
                               Specifications as well as actual space)

                      (g)      Incident and Vulnerability Reports

                      (h)      Risk Assessment Reports, Checklists, Trusted Facilities
                               Manual and Security Users Guide

                      (i)      Cyber Security Policy Guidance and Manual Chapters

    c     Need-to-know means a determination made by an authorized holder of SSI that a
          prospective recipient requires access to that SSI in order to perform or assist in a
          lawful and authorized governmental function.


7   ABBREVIATIONS

    DA   Departmental Administration
    FOIA Freedom of Information Act
    IT   Information Technology
    OCIO   Office of the Chief Information Officer
    OGC    Office of the General Counsel
    OIG    Office of the Inspector General
    PA     Privacy Act
    SSI    Sensitive Security Information


8   RESPONSIBILITIES

    a      Under and Assistant Secretaries, Agency Administrators, Regional Directors,
           Office Directors, and Heads of Field Establishments, hereinafter called
           Departmental Organizations, will be responsible for the identification and
           designation of information that warrants protection of SSI.

    b      Heads of Departmental Organizations will:

           (1)     Specify the categories or types of information, which originate in their
                   organization or are prepared for the use of their organization, and that are
                   designated as SSI. The SSI label may be removed from information
                   requested in a FOIA request, if a Departmental Organization Head
                   determines that the information is no longer qualified under the
                   definition provided. If the sensitivity of the information requires
                   protection in excess of the minimum levels established in this order, the
                   Departmental Organizational Head should ensure that all offices with
                   custody of the information know and comply with such criteria. All
                   Departmental Organizations that originate SSI are responsible for
                   conducting reviews, in compliance with DR 3080-01, Records
                   Disposition.

           (2)     Identify those subordinate officials who have authority to determine
                   which information originating under their supervision or cognizance
                   requires protection against unauthorized disclosure. The officials so
                   designated are responsible for ensuring that personnel under their
                   direction are aware of information that is considered SSI.


    c      Agencies and Staff Offices will:

           (a)     Issue directives, if needed, establishing criteria for identifying SSI
                   responsibility within their organizations. All directives will have prior
                   approval by DA before being finalized and approved.

           (b)     Ensure that adequate security measures and procedures are implemented
                   to protect SSI.

           (c)     Ensure that employees of their organizations are aware of their
                   responsibility to protect SSI.

           (d)     Conduct a risk analysis and determination to identify potential threats
                   and appropriate vulnerabilities to SSI in their custody.
    (e)     Determine the potential harm resulting from the loss, misuse, or
            unauthorized access to or modification of SSI in their custody.

    (f)     Identify appropriate information and designate it as SSI.

    (g)     Ensure that prompt and appropriate disciplinary action is taken against
            personnel responsible for unauthorized disclosure of SSI.


d   Departmental Administration will:

    Monitor and ensure compliance with this DR and provide guidance regarding
    identification and protection of SSI.

e   The Office of the Chief Information Officer will:

    (a)     Establish records management disposition policies and procedures to
            ensure that records designated as SSI are maintained and disposed of
            according to USDA and Agency records control schedules.

    (b)     Partner with DA to ensure wise use is made of existing department
            resources in terms of security points of contact, security awareness
            training, and emergency procedures.

    (c)     Establish USDA policy and standards for IT system protection. System
            protection functions include encryption, network security products,
            reliability and security of computing systems, and physical barriers.
            OCIO will conduct compliance reviews to ensure that policy and
            standards are being followed.

    (d)     Establish strategies and procedures to reconstitute and restore critical
            information technology infrastructures after serious disruptions. OCIO
            will establish programs for restoration of services that includes risk
            management and consequence management analysis studies and tools,
            system survivability technologies, back-up and recovery capabilities, and
            cold/hot site strategies and requirements.

f   The Office of the General Counsel will:

    Provide concurrence prior to responding to any initial FOIA request, Privacy Act
    (PA) request, or any other request for records involving SSI. Agencies and Staff
    Offices should continue to comply with 7 C.F.R. 1.14 with regard to obtaining
    OGC concurrence when FOIA or PA appeals are denied, but shall also obtain
    OGC concurrence on any administrative appeal, whether it is granted or denied,
    for records involving SSI.
9    FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT REQUESTS

     FOIA requests for access to SSI should be processed as set forth in Section 8f and in
     accordance with USDA regulations and the Attorney General’s FOIA Memorandum of
     October 12, 2001, with consideration of all applicable FOIA exemptions, including one
     or more of the following:

     a      FOIA Exemptions Potentially Applicable to SSI:

            (1)     For SSI pertaining to USDA operations or assets, FOIA Exemption 2
                    should be considered;

            (2)     For current SSI consisting of private sector or industry information
                    submitted voluntarily to USDA that is customarily protected by the
                    submitter, FOIA Exemption 4 should be considered;

            (3)     For any SSI the disclosure of which is banned by federal statute, FOIA
                    Exemption 3 should be considered;, and

            (4)     For any SSI that consists of information compiled for law enforcement
                    purposes, FOIA Exemption 7 should be considered.



10   IDENTIFICATION AND MARKING

     USDA material which contains information that the head of the USDA organization has
     determined requires protection against unauthorized disclosure must be marked in a
     conspicuous manner with the following notice: “Sensitive Security Information -
     Disseminate on a Need-to-Know Basis Only.” The identification of SSI will be done by:

     a      Marking of the SSI notice at the bottom of the front cover (if one is present), the
            title page (if one is present), the first page, and the outside of the back cover (if
            one is present);

     b      Marking of the SSI notice at the top and bottom of every page in a document that
            contains SSI;

     c      Individual portion markings at the beginning of a paragraph containing SSI shall
            be done using the acronym SSI;

     d      Notating in a cover memo;

     e      Transmittal documents that have no classified information attached but do have
            SSI attachments shall have the statement “Sensitive Security Information
            Attachment - Disseminate on Need-to-Know Basis Only” affixed;

     f      Electronically transmitted messages or data containing SSI shall be preceded by
            the term “Sensitive Security Information - Disseminate on a Need-to-Know Basis
            Only” at the beginning of the text;
     g       Inclusion in a category identified as SSI use in an organization directive and
             known to all personnel handling the information;

     h       All documents that are distributed externally of USDA shall bear the marking on
             all pages:

             “This document contains information which may be exempt from
              mandatory disclosure under FOIA. Exemption(s) ______ apply.”, and

     i       Any other method authorized by DA.

     The purpose of identifying SSI is to ensure that all recipients of the material are aware
     that the information requires protection and should be disseminated on a need-to-know
     basis only. The identification method selected should have a minimal effect on the
     operational efficiency of the organization.


11   CUSTODY AND STORAGE

     a       Employees who have custody of material designated as SSI shall exercise due
             caution to ensure that the information is not available to individuals who have no
             requirement for it. At a minimum, individuals who cannot demonstrate a “need-
             to-know” must not be able to enter areas unescorted or unobserved, and have
             visual access to SSI.

     b       During non-duty hours, SSI shall be afforded, at a minimum, protection of
             storage in a locked desk or file cabinet, or storage in a facility or area using
             physical access control measures that afford adequate protection to prevent
             unauthorized access. The sensitivity of some SSI material may require a higher
             level of protection such as a safe with a combination lock.

     c       SSI stored and processed by an IT facility shall have adequate physical,
             administrative, and technical safeguards.


12   DISSEMINATION AND TRANSMISSION

     a       Information that has been identified and is known by the recipient as SSI shall be
             safeguarded from disclosure to unauthorized individuals whether or not the
             material is physically marked. Safeguarding from disclosure includes
             precautions against oral disclosure, prevention of visual access to the information
             and precautions against release of the material to unauthorized personnel.

     b       SSI leaving the control of the originating organization must be transmitted in a
             single brown envelope or in a wrapping properly sealed and addressed.

     c       SSI may be transmitted via any form of commercial shipping or U.S. Postal
             Service method.
     d    SSI may be discussed on the telephone; however, the ease of interception of
          telephone conversations dictates that discretion be used where the threat of
          interception exists. In the latter case, the use of voice privacy equipment or
          secure telephones should be considered.

     e    SSI should not be transmitted or discussed along unsecured pagers, wireless
          devices or telephone equipment. These devices are not inherently secure and
          require additional encryption capabilities before they can be used.

     f    SSI may be transmitted via unclassified fax machines. However, the sensitivity
          of the material will determine the need for more secure communications
          transmission (secure fax). In the latter case, if the holder is unaware of which
          method to use, DA or OCIO will provide guidance on the appropriate method of
          transmission via phone, fax, or IT.

     g    The Internet is not secure and therefore should not be used to transmit SSI. It is
          critical to safeguard and adequately protect SSI from unlawful or improper
          disclosure. OCIO will provide guidance on the appropriate methods of
          transmission.

     h    SSI that is distributed outside of the Department shall be accompanied by a letter
          stating that this material is to be treated with the same control measures
          comparable to the receiving agency’s prescribed measures established
          comparable to SSI, that at a minimum meet our security control measures
          (Sensitive But Unclassified, Limited Official Use Only, For Official Use Only,
          etc.). In the absence of the recipient agency’s internal security procedures for
          this level, a letter accompanying the document with appropriate control measures
          shall be provided.


13   RECORDS DISPOSITION

     a    Where appropriate, SSI may be destroyed by tearing into small pieces and
          discarding with other waste material. Material of higher sensitivity must be
          destroyed by shredding. The level of sensitivity of the material will be an
          integral element in determining the appropriate method of destruction. Small
          segments of microfiche and microfilm may be readable, therefore, destruction
          into very small particles or strips is necessary. DA shall provide guidance to all
          Departmental organizations on current security requirements for shredders, and
          other methods of destruction.

     b    IT storage media containing SSI data should be overwritten with nonsensitive
          data prior to release of the storage media. All data storage devices shall be
          rendered unreadable by approved methods such as degaussing, overwriting (6-7
          times with random 1’s and 0’s) or complete physical destruction prior to
          disposal. OCIO shall provide guidance to all Departmental organizations on
          current IT security requirements for proper destruction of IT storage media. For
          more guidance please refer to DR 3040-01.
     c       Records that carry the SSI designation should be handled according to an
             approved USDA or Agency records control schedule governing the subject
             content of the record. If a record designated as SSI requires a longer or shorter
             retention period, the USDA or Agency records management officer must be
             contacted to obtain a new disposition for that record.


14   DURATION OF SSI PROTECTION

     Information shall not remain protected as SSI when it ceases to meet the criteria
     established in sections 6.b of this regulation. Information ordinarily should remain
     protected as SSI for no longer than 10 years, unless a designating official makes a new
     determination that protection is warranted for a longer period.


15   CONTRACTOR PERSONNEL

     If SSI must be released to non-government personnel as part of a contract or grant, the
     head of the USDA organization, in conjunction with DA, shall determine whether the
     sensitivity of the information justifies a requirement for an investigation of contractor
     personnel handling the sensitive information. The procurement document must include
     the contractor background information requirements and other security requirements of
     the contract. The Security Points of Contact in the respective USDA organizations shall
     determine the extent of the investigation required, ranging from a suitability
     determination to a request for clearance for national security, and develop the mandatory
     security requirements for the contract. The contractual security requirements shall be
     forwarded to DA for concurrence prior to submitting the solicitation document to the
     procurement office.


16   PROTECTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (IT) ASSETS

     a       Security and the need to encrypt or otherwise protect SSI are commensurate with
             the risk and magnitude of harm resulting from the loss, misuse, or unauthorized
             access to or modification of information. This includes assuring that systems and
             applications used by an agency operate effectively and provides appropriate
             confidentiality, integrity, and availability through the use of cost-effective
             management, personnel, operational, and technical controls. This approach
             emphasizes a risk-based determination for cost-effective security on SSI.

     b       Information that is considered sensitive by a responsible authority, or determined
             to have a high value or information that represents a high risk should be
             cryptographically protected if it is vulnerable to unauthorized disclosure or
             undetected modification during transmission or while in storage.

     c       The use of personal home computers to store or transmit SSI is prohibited due to
             the high security risks in protecting sensitive information on non-government
             owned systems. Government-owned equipment will be issued and configured to
             maintain strong security protection appropriate to the highest level of information
             contained on the computer.
17    MATERIAL FROM OTHER DEPARTMENTS

      A number of government agencies have issued regulations for protecting sensitive
      information using designations such as For Official Use Only or Sensitive But
      Unclassified. Sensitive material from other government agencies should be safeguarded
      from unauthorized disclosure in accordance with this Regulation or provided additional
      protection in accordance with the specific requirements of the agency providing the
      sensitive information.



Attachment A




                                    October 12, 2001


MEMORANDUM FOR HEADS OF ALL FEDERAL DEPARTMENTS AND
AGENCIES
FROM: John Ashcroft, Attorney General
SUBJECT: The Freedom of Information Act
      As you know, the Department of Justice and this Administration are committed to
      full compliance with the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), 5 U.S.C. § 552
      (2000). It is only through a well-informed citizenry that the leaders of our nation
      remain accountable to the governed and the American people can be assured that
      neither fraud nor government waste is concealed.
      The Department of Justice and this Administration are equally committed to
      protecting other fundamental values that are held by our society. Among them are
      safeguarding our national security, enhancing the effectiveness of our law
      enforcement agencies, protecting sensitive business information and, not least,
      preserving personal privacy.
      Our citizens have a strong interest as well in a government that is fully functional
      and efficient. Congress and the courts have long recognized that certain legal
      privileges ensure candid and complete agency deliberations without fear that they
      will be made public. Other privileges ensure that lawyers' deliberations and
      communications are kept private. No leader can operate effectively without
      confidential advice and counsel. Exemption 5 of the FOIA, 5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(5),
      incorporates these privileges and the sound policies underlying them.
      I encourage your agency to carefully consider the protection of all such values
and interests when making disclosure determinations under the FOIA. Any
discretionary decision by your agency to disclose information protected under the
FOIA should be made only after full and deliberate consideration of the
institutional, commercial, and personal privacy interests that could be implicated
by disclosure of the information.
In making these decisions, you should consult with the Department of Justice's
Office of Information and Privacy when significant FOIA issues arise, as well as
with our Civil Division on FOIA litigation matters. When you carefully consider
FOIA requests and decide to withhold records, in whole or in part, you can be
assured that the Department of Justice will defend your decisions unless they lack
a sound legal basis or present an unwarranted risk of adverse impact on the ability
of other agencies to protect other important records.
This memorandum supersedes the Department of Justice's FOIA Memorandum of
October 4, 1993, and it likewise creates no substantive or procedural right
enforceable at law.

Go to: DOJ FOIA Page // DOJ Home Page
