                                  U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                         Washington, D.C.


               DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                             NUMBER:
                                                                                    3430-001
    SUBJECT:                                      DATE:     May 19, 2004
    Web Site Development and Maintenance
                                                  OPI:      Office of Communications


        Section                                                     Page

1       Purpose and Scope                                            1
2       Special Instructions/Cancellations                           2
3       Background                                                   2
4       Policy                                                       3
5       References                                                   5
6       Abbreviations/Definitions                                    6
7       Guidelines                                                   7
8       Responsibilities                                            10


1       PURPOSE AND SCOPE

        This regulation provides policies and guidelines for the design and publication of
        Department of Agriculture (USDA) organizational and personal Web pages. These Web
        pages, including Web-based application pages, are accessible by members of the public
        who have access to the Internet for telecommunications connectivity and use World Wide
        Web software browsers for search and retrieval services.

        A Web site provides the public with an introduction to or “picture” of an organizational
        unit. The Web site may describe the unit’s mission and major programs; provide
        guidance on ways to access significant contacts or data and information; and offer
        hyperlinks to other organizational units, including subordinate units, and/or to
        organizations outside the unit.

        This regulation is designed to ensure a standard, consistent, “look and feel” for all USDA
        Web sites and Web-based applications, while encouraging innovation in the current fast-
        moving software technology environment and minimizing constraints on ways in which
        agencies present material to the public. This document is intended to express basic
        policies and guidelines rather than to serve as a “how to” manual on Web page design.
DR 3430-001                                                                   May 19, 2004


2      SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

       This regulation supersedes DR-3430-001, dated December 24, 2003.


3      BACKGROUND

       Electronic information technologies such as the World Wide Web can be used to provide
       access to information that is well organized, easily found and retrieved, and offered at
       reasonable cost to information users and providers alike. These technologies provide a
       very effective way to communicate with members of the public who have access to the
       Internet through the use of personal or publicly available microcomputers.

       An additional advantage of using the World Wide Web is that it offers multimedia
       capabilities, including sound (e.g., music and voice) and images (e.g., pictures, maps, and
       graphics) that can greatly increase the effectiveness of a Web page. The power and
       utility of the World Wide Web is related to its ability to provide hyperlinks to associated
       documents. Such hyperlinks allow the user to easily access other sites, other documents,
       and other sections of the same document. Typically, hyperlinks are activated simply by
       selecting or “clicking on” a portion of text or an image that has been rendered as a
       hyperlink. Linked text is referred to as hypertext.
       To achieve the desired benefits of a successful public Internet-based information service
       and to avoid the frustrations of an unsuccessful one, the following considerations should
       be kept in mind in planning and designing such a service:
       a      Web sites should be accessible to users with limited as well as full access
              capabilities. Web page designers should be aware that many users’ available
              microcomputer and telecommunications technologies may lack the speed and
              capacity of those available to the designers. Many users still access the Internet
              through a standard dial-up connection and have a narrow bandwidth
              communications capability. Some users, especially users dependent on screen
              reading software, will have text-only capabilities.
       b      Information should be appropriate and presented in an organized manner. One
              major advantage of the World Wide Web is that it allows users to move easily
              from one linked site to another, thus accessing the Web sites of other
              organizations worldwide. If a linkage system is not properly designed, however,
              users can easily get “lost” and not recognize the significance or even the
              originator of the information they have accessed.

              An organized design incorporating the totality of information available about
              USDA is critical to the presentation of an accurate picture of the Department.
              Typically, many people are involved in generating information from a variety of
              sources to post on Departmental and agency Web sites. These content providers,
              the designated Web site manager (also referred to as a “webmaster” or the
              assigned system administrator) must cooperatively act with these individuals to


                                                2
May 19, 2004                                                                     DR 3430-001


               ensure that the Web sites and associated documents present an accurate,
               descriptive, and representative image of the entire Department or agency and its
               work rather than an image that is fragmented, misleading, or incomplete.

       c       The reality of worldwide access should be recognized. Web sites must be
               designed with the realization that the public documents they contain are
               accessible through an international network to users worldwide.

       d       User anonymity must be maintained. Web servers referenced in this regulation
               provide open service to the public and must accept outside users without requiring
               either a local user account or a password.

4      POLICY

       a       USDA fully supports the establishment of any open information server and
               service that (1) supports authorized mission-related activities of USDA, (2) is
               consistent with prudent operational and security considerations, (3) provides the
               public with easy electronic access to information about or disseminated by their
               Government, and (4) addresses the accessibility needs of individuals with
               disabilities as described in Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act.

               Federal agencies and employees are encouraged to maintain open electronic
               communication with the public while recognizing that with this privilege comes
               the responsibility to use the electronic forum wisely in serving the public interest.

               To facilitate communication between users and USDA, an e-mail contact shall be
               listed on the home page.

       b       Only public information approved for public release through standard USDA
               review and clearance processes will be maintained on Web sites or made
               accessible through links to other Web pages. Unless an exception has been
               approved, links shall be made only to Government web pages. Exceptions must
               be approved in advance by the USDA Office of Communications.

       c       Each home page must include a link to the “USDA Quality of Information
               Guidelines” as well as to agency-specific information on whom to contact to seek
               correction of USDA-disseminated information.

       d       Security is a major consideration in the implementation of any open public access
               system. The planned approach to creation of a Web site must include attention to
               Web site security, including firewalls and other isolation techniques. Agency
               security officers must be consulted as to the technical operation of Web sites.
               (See additional security references in Section 5.)




                                                 3
DR 3430-001                                                                  May 19, 2004


       e      Personal Web pages are permitted for individual employees in their official
              capacities if the information provided on the pages relates to and supports
              authorized USDA missions, such as descriptions of a USDA scientist’s research,
              rather than serving to aggrandize any individual. USDA employees establishing
              personal Web pages on official Web sites that are accessible by the public must
              follow the guidelines outlined in this regulation.

       f      USDA and agency/staff office home pages shall be linked with the USDA
              Privacy Policy statement. Any agency with unique privacy requirements, other
              than or in addition to those outlined in the USDA Privacy Policy statement, may
              establish and provide a hyperlink to its own privacy statement page. Agency
              privacy policy statements are subject to clearance requirements and must be
              linked with the USDA Privacy Policy statement.

       g       Persistent cookies should not be used on USDA Web sites, or by contractors in
              designing and/or managing Web sites on behalf of USDA agencies, unless all the
              following conditions are met:

              (1)    A compelling need to gather the data on the site exists, and a cookie
                     provides the best means of obtaining the data.

              (2)    Appropriate and publicly disclosed privacy safeguards are in place for the
                     handling of information derived from the cookie.

              (3)    Clear, conspicuous notice is provided on the Web site that a cookie is
                     being used.

              (4)    The Secretary of Agriculture has approved use of the cookie.

               In addition, all USDA Web sites, including sites designed, operated, or managed
              by contractors on behalf of USDA agencies, shall comply with the standards set
              forth in the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998 with respect to the
              collection of personal information online at Web sites directed to children.

       h      All information under consideration for publication in Web sites must be
              evaluated to determine whether the information constitutes Sensitive Security
              Information (SSI). SSI may not be made available except as described by USDA
              Departmental Regulation 3440-002, “Control and Protection of ‘Sensitive
              Security Information.’”




                                               4
May 19, 2004                                                                 DR 3430-001


       i       All USDA Internet Web sites must comply with provisions stated in the USDA
               Web Style Guide. The Guide defines guidelines and standards for look, feel, and
               navigation to promote consistency while also improving the overall user
               experience. Guide provisions apply to Web-based application pages which can be
               viewed by external customers, and include any Web page or application that
               target all USDA employees, such as a USDA enterprise application.

       j       Agency IntrAnet sites or other internal Web sites or Web applications, which are
               inaccessible to the public and used for internal nonpublic purposes, may not be
               required to use the guidance presented in the USDA Web Style Guide depending
               on the organization’s mission


5      REFERENCES

       a       Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998.

       b       Computer Security Act of 1987.

       c       USDA Departmental Regulation 3140-1, “USDA Information Systems Security
               Policy.”

       d       USDA Departmental Regulation 3140-2, “USDA Internet Security Policy.”

       e       USDA Departmental Regulation 3300-1, “USDA Telecommunications and
               Internet Services and Use.”

       f       USDA Departmental Regulation 3040-001, “Electronic Records Management.”

       g       USDA Departmental Regulation 3440-002, “Control and Protection of ‘Sensitive
               Security Information.’”

       h       USDA Departmental Regulation 4030-001, “Section 508 Implementation
               Final Guidance.”

       i       Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130 (revised) and OMB
               Circular A-130, Appendix III, “Security of Federal Automated Information.”

       j       The Privacy Act of 1974.

       k       USDA Privacy Policy.

       l       USDA Web Style Guide.




                                                5
DR 3430-001                                                                  May 19, 2004


6      ABBREVIATIONS/DEFINITIONS

       a      Browser. A shortened term for Web Browser. A browser is software used on the
              World Wide Web to access and/or retrieve documents through the use of Internet
              addresses known as “URLs.” Locating documents on the World Wide Web is
              facilitated through the use of hyperlinks in hypertext documents. Browsers may
              support only line mode, full-screen, or graphics including pictures and sound.
              Many browsers with various capabilities and platforms are available. Some
              browsers are proprietary and must be purchased, whereas others are available at
              no cost by downloading from a server. Examples of currently available browsers
              that should be supported include Internet Explorer, Netscape Navigator, Mozilla,
              Opera, and Safari.

       b      Dead link. A link to a nonexistent or non-operational page or server.

       c      Firewall. A dedicated device (hardware and software) placed between internal
              and external networks to control access and prevent misuse and abuse

       d      Home page. Primary page or starting point, often reached through a uniform
              resource locator (URL).

              Although a home page is described as a single document, it can contain multiple
              screens. An organizational home page contains information about a definable
              organization such as USDA, an agency, or a division of an agency. A personal
              Web page contains information related to an individual employee (e.g., a scientist
              whose work may be of interest to the public). See Section 4.e.

       e      HTML. HyperText Markup Language.

              HTML is the standard language used to produce Web pages and hyperlinks to
              other documents. Because this is a rapidly evolving technology, and because
              adherence to the international standards is voluntary, some variation exists in the
              versions of HTML available and the HTML features supported by various
              browsers. Agencies and offices need to be aware of these differences in electing a
              version to use. USDA will not adopt any single version of HTML.

       f      ISSPM. Information Systems Security Program Manager.

       g      Public document. Any document or information not subject to access limitations
              due to national security classification, the Privacy Act, Freedom of Information
              Act exemptions, or copyright protection.




                                               6
May 19, 2004                                                                    DR 3430-001


       h       Secondary pages. Additional pages, linked to a home page, or to another
               secondary page, containing additional information or resources.
       i       SSI. Sensitive Security Information. Unclassified information of a sensitive
               nature, further defined in Departmental Regulation 3440-002, “Control and
               Protection of ‘Sensitive Security Information.’”

       j       URL. Uniform Resource Locator. A URL is the address of a resource such as a
               home page. The address syntax also defines the type of resource, as follows:
               scheme://host.domain[:port]/path/filename. The USDA home page URL, for
               example, is <http://www.usda.gov>

       k       Web page. A document designed for access using a browser and developed in
               accordance with the HTML Web format standard. Typically, such documents are
               posted on an Internet or IntrAnet site.

       l       World Wide Web (or WWW; also referred to as “the Web”). A hypertext-based
               client/server application that guides the user to a linked collection of information
               in a hypertext markup language available through the Internet and accessible
               through common browsing software.


7      GUIDELINES

       a       Design approach

               (1)    USDA Internet Web sites must comply with the USDA Web Style Guide.

               (2)    A Web site or Web-based application shall be linked with metadata that
                      describes information and data available to the public upon request.

               (3)    The Web site shall be structured around the mission of the organization
                      and the information the organization wishes to convey to the public. The
                      information and data an agency or office plans to present must be
                      organized and its Web pages structured to provide the user with the
                      efficient presentation and navigation of the organization’s information. A
                      “tree” structure can be useful for organizing information, though given the
                      versatility of hypertext linkages, other modes of organization can also be
                      effective.

               (4)    An organization’s home page should be limited to a description of the
                      organization’s mission, functions, employees, and information resources.
                      It would be inappropriate, for example, for a division’s home page to
                      describe the mission or functions of the entire agency.




                                                 7
DR 3430-001                                                                 May 19, 2004




              (5)   Designers are encouraged to review the Web sites of other organizations
                    on the Internet to become familiar with designs that are effective.

              (6)   Agency program and public affairs staffs will develop each Web site
                    jointly. The appropriate agency Information Systems Security Program
                    Manager should be consulted regarding technical security issues prior to
                    posting online.

              (7)   Web pages shall be designed to support users (e.g., with limited access
                    capabilities such as text-only browsers) who cannot or who do not wish to
                    access pictures, graphics, or sound as well as to support users with full
                    access capabilities.

              (8)   A Web page under development should be reviewed and tested
                    thoroughly—preferably by an independent tester using a wide variety of
                    browsers—before release to the public. If particular versions of browsers
                    are required to access the content, those limitations should be explicit on
                    the page or on a technical page accessible through the Web page.

       b      Content

              (1)   Web pages should be kept simple to avoid a cluttered or confusing
                    appearance. As a general “rule of thumb,” a list or menu should be
                    limited to ten or less items, and a maximum of 15.
              (2)   Only USDA symbols approved by the Office of Communications or a
                    duly authorized agency representative should be used. Agencies that are
                    undergoing reorganization and do not have an appropriate logo should use
                    the USDA symbol.

              (3)   Secondary pages should contain navigational aids to assist the user in
                    returning to previous pages or directly to the home page of the
                    organization.

              (4)   Links to governmental material outside USDA shall be identified clearly.
                    (See Section 7. c. 2 & 3 for additional requirements regarding linking to
                    nongovernmental or private sector Websites). Links to proprietary
                    information or formats should be annotated appropriately. Links to large
                    documents should inform about the file size of the document and warn of
                    anticipated downloading time, if the time is lengthy.




                                              8
May 19, 2004                                                                   DR 3430-001




               (5)   Each Web page shall capture the most recent update of page information
                     as part of the page metadata. Agencies and staff offices may display the
                     date of the most recent update within the content area of the Web page.

               (6)   Each Web site should invite users to submit comments or suggestions
                     about page content via hyperlinks to user evaluation forms or by other
                     means, such as an online e-mail form addressed to the Webmaster or to
                     Contact Us.

               (7)   The use of “dead” hyperlinks is not permitted. To refer to a document or
                     document collection that is not yet available to the public, the phrase
                     “under construction” or “not yet available” may be used on a page without
                     a link to the page under development.

               (8)   Home and secondary pages may be constructed using 800 x 600 pixel
                     screen resolution with consideration of the navigational bars that each
                     Web browser contains (i.e., top header icons, status bar, and right side
                     scrollbars.) Pages that require printing should offer the ability to fully
                     print the page using either the “Printer Friendly” technique or code that
                     reformats a viewer’s page to the browser’s selected width.

       c       Management

               (1)   Home and secondary pages should be updated routinely to ensure that they
                     are current and accurate and that they address topics of greatest interest to
                     users. A “What’s New” menu item linked to a page with a menu linked to
                     new pages may be appropriate.

               (2)   Hyperlinks to nongovernmental information should be used only if
                     an official relationship, such as one involving a Memorandum of
                     Agreement or Memorandum of Understanding, exists between the USDA
                     program and the nongovernmental organization being linked.

               (3)   A waiver issued by the Office of Communications is required for each
                     link to a private sector Web site with which the agency does not have an
                     official relationship. Agencies and offices requesting the link shall
                     receive a reply in writing from the administrator or owner of the site to be
                     linked granting acceptance of the link. The agency or office making the
                     link is responsible for ensuring that the external link remains accurate.
                     The Office of Communications shall establish a notice for use during
                     linking to a private sector Web site informing the viewer that they are
                     exiting the government page.




                                               9
DR 3430-001                                                                   May 19, 2004


8      RESPONSIBILITIES

       a      Agencies will:

              (1)    Establish agency policy as to the levels of allowable Web pages (i.e., from
                     agency level to personal level), the content of a given document, and
                     internal approval procedures in accordance with this Departmental
                     Regulation.

              (2)    Consult with the Office of Communications on the development of all
                     Web pages, registering each home page and the name of the individual
                     designated as the responsible point of contact (e.g., the agency
                     Webmaster) with the Office of Communications Webmaster.

              (3)    Ensure that the appropriate agency cyber-security office has approved the
                     proposed installation approach for each agency home and secondary page.
                      Agencies also will establish responsibility for the content and currency of
                     each agency Web page and associated secondary pages, providing
                     resources to maintain the quality and currency of the information. The
                     assigned agency Webmaster routinely will verify the integrity of the
                     material, including all hyperlinks, to ensure that the content has not been
                     accidentally or maliciously altered or replaced.

              (4)    Review and analyze usage reports and user comments, such as usability
                     studies and customer satisfaction surveys, to improve agency
                     understanding of outside parties and interests accessing agency
                     information and make modifications if necessary based on this analysis.

              (5)   Determine information sensitivity in accordance with the
                    “Security Self-Assessment Guide for Information Technology
                    Systems” published by the National Institute of Standards
                    and Technology (Special Publication 800-26).

       b      The Office of Communications will:

              (1)    Oversee the design and continued quality of USDA Web pages, and assist
                     agencies in the appearance of the home page “look” and in identification
                     of appropriate Web page content.

                     The USDA Press Secretary or the USDA Director of Web Services has the
                     authority to block Internet access to Web pages that are non-compliant
                     with this regulation or the USDA Web Style Guide.




                                              10
May 19, 2004                                                                   DR 3430-001


               (2)    Define the information structure for all Departmental and agency Web
                      pages and associated links, and maintain a registry of all such home pages
                      along with the names of individuals designated as responsible contacts.

               (3)    Provide a list of approved agency home pages and URL’s to the
                      Information Systems Security Program Manager.

       c       The Office of the Chief Information Officer will:

               (1)    Provide customer support to agencies and staff offices in relation to
                      technical use of the USDA Internet Access Network.

               (2)    Ensure that USDA Internet access is protected by a firewall.

               (3)    Ensure that the Office of the Associate Chief Information Officer for
                      Cyber Security (a) responds to requests for guidance on security issues
                      relating to web pages and (b) reviews security documentation to ensure
                      adequate agency verification of security controls.

               (4)    Provide each agency with guidance in determining information sensitivity,
                      as required.

               (5)    Provide guidance regarding implementation and technical standards of
                      Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act.

               (6)    Approve domain names as authorized by Departmental Regulation
                      3300-1, USDA Telecommunications and Internet Services and Use. The
                      Web site URL shall be as simple as possible and consistent with the stated
                      naming conventions.


                                              END




                                               11
