                                U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                      WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                  NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION DR 3465-002
 SUBJECT: Privacy, Civil Rights, and Civil Liberties with         DATE:
 Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS)                                    October 7, 2019
 OPI: Office of the Chief Information Office, Enterprise          EXPIRATION DATE:
 Geospatial Management Office                                     October 7, 2024



Section                                                                                        Page

1.        Purpose                                                                              1
2.        Scope                                                                                1
3.        Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                   2
4.        Policy                                                                               2
5.        Roles and Responsibilities                                                           5
6.        Policy Exceptions                                                                    8
7.        Inquiries                                                                            9

APPENDIX A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                        A-1
APPENDIX B – Authorities and References                                                        B-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the policy for the reporting and
            management of Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) activities and the acquisition and
            management of data acquired by UAS within the United States Department of
            Agriculture (USDA).

     b.     This DR defines the strategic direction necessary to ensure the safeguarding of privacy,
            civil rights, and civil liberties of the citizens of the United States and USDA personnel
            when using UASs.


2. SCOPE

     a.     This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, programs, teams,
            organizations, appointees, and employees. This includes contractors and grantees
            operating on behalf of USDA.
  b.   This DR applies to all USDA UAS investments throughout their entire life cycle,
       regardless of funding source, whether owned and operated by USDA or operated on
       behalf of USDA. UAS investments or services beyond USDA operational control and
       conducted off of USDA owned lands by cooperating agencies and staff offices are
       excluded.

  c.   This DR applies to all USDA Information Technology (IT) investments throughout their
       entire life cycle, regardless of funding source, whether owned and operated by USDA or
       operated on behalf of USDA.

  d.   This DR is to ensure smart management of UAS flown data to protect Personally
       Identifiable Information (PII) and civil rights of in accordance to the DR 3080-001,
       Records Management, and DR 3465-001, Enterprise Geospatial Data Management
       (EGDM).

  e.   This DR does not apply to investigative operations or operations entirely under
       cooperator, entity under contract with the USDA who works with the USDA for by
       directional benefits, operational control and does not apply to fire suppression activities
       or to law enforcement activities commonly related to USDA Forest Service.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This DR is effective as of the publication date of this document and will remain in effect
       until superseded.

  b.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must align their policies with this
       DR within 6 months of the published date.


4. POLICY

  USDA will establish, maintain, and continuously update the UAS DR practices in accordance
  with legislative regulations and Office of Management and Budget (OMB) guidelines for all
  USDA IT major and non-major investments according to DR 3130-008, Definition of Major
  Information Technology Investments, and DR 3130-009, Non-Major Information Technology
  (IT) Investments.

  a.   The USDA follows the guidelines of what is a UAS as defined by the Federal Aviation
       Administration (FAA) Modernization and Reform Act of 2012, Public Law (P.L.) No.
       112-95. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will not deviate from this definition
       as defined in this Act and/or future revisions of this Act.

  b.   The USDA will follow future guidelines put forth from the FAA once reviewed for
       fitness in the USDA environment.



                                                  2
c.   This DR expands the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) definition
     of PII as found in Special Publication (SP) 800-122, Guide to Protecting the
     Confidentiality of Personally Identifiable Information (PII).

     (1) The NIST definition of PII is as follows:

         This document uses a broad definition of PII to identify as many potential sources
         of PII as possible (e.g., databases, shared network drives, backup tapes, and
         contractor sites). PII is ―any information about an individual maintained by an
         agency [or Mission Area, or staff office], including:

         (a) Any information that can be used to distinguish or trace an individual‘s
             identity, such as name, Social Security number (SSN), date and place of birth,
             mother‘s maiden name, or biometric records; and

         (b) Any other information that is linked or linkable to an individual, such as
             medical, educational, financial, and employment information. Five examples
             of PII include, but are not limited to:

              1    Name, such as full name, maiden name, mother’s maiden name, or alias;

              2    Personal identification number, such as SSN, passport number, driver’s
                   license number, taxpayer identification number, or financial account or
                   credit card number;

              3    Address information, such as street address or email address;

              4    Personal characteristics, including photographic image (especially of face
                   or other identifying characteristic), fingerprints, handwriting, or other
                   biometric data (e.g., retina scan, voice signature, facial geometry); and

              5    Information about an individual that is linked or linkable to one of the
                   above (e.g., date of birth, place of birth, race, religion, weight, activities,
                   geographical indicators, employment information, medical information,
                   education information, financial information).

     (2) The NIST definition does include facial geometry and voice signature but is
         strongly written for the tabular database environment where as UAS captures
         remotely sensed and imagery data. In order to protect the PII of U.S. citizens and
         USDA personnel, the USDA will broaden the NIST definition to include:

         (a) UAS that acquire imagery at a resolution that can be used to identify an
             individual’s identity or read license plates must follow USDA guidelines to
             protect PII. Face blurring will be required if people who are not part of the
             acquisition team are imaged;



                                                3
        (b) USDA will not fly UAS sensors that can be used to record conversations
            without a privacy determination;

        (c) USDA may fly UAS instruments that can be used to augment communications
            (this is a likely future application for wildland fire);

        (d) USDA will not fly UAS instruments that can observe through houses or roofs
            without a privacy determination by the Mission Area, agency, or staff office
            conducting the flight using a Privacy Threshold Analysis (PTA); and

        (e) If a Mission Area, agency, or staff office sources out the collection of UAS
            data to “any” outside collection source, then the outside source collector must
            follow all USDA PII policies and approval procedures.

d. If it is determined that the data acquired during a UAS project does contain PII and a
   determination from the Mission Area, agency, or staff office’s PTA was justified from
   the Mission Area, agency, or staff office, the Mission Area, agency, or staff office will
   only retain the data encrypted in a secure system with eAuthentication and it will not be
   retained greater than 180 days unless retention of the information is determined to be
   necessary to an authorized mission of the retaining Mission Area, agency, or staff office,
   is maintained in a system of records covered by the Privacy Act, or is required to be
   retained for a longer period by any other applicable law or regulation.

   (1) UAS-collected information that is not maintained in a system of records covered by
       the Privacy Act of 1974 will not be disseminated outside of the Mission Area,
       agency, or staff office unless dissemination is required by law, or fulfills an
       authorized purpose and complies with Mission Area, agency, or staff office
       requirements.

   (2) Additionally, if the PTA requires a Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA), it must be
       performed and submitted to their Mission Area, agency, or staff office security
       offices in accordance with the Departmental Manual (DM) 3515-002, Privacy
       Impact Assessment. This will not apply to emergency response situations using
       UAS and will be reviewed on a case-by-case situation by the USDA Geospatial
       Program Manager.

e. Accountability. All UAS projects need to be conducted in accordance with current
   White House, FAA, USDA and Mission Area, agency, and staff office policy. To
   provide for effective accountability, each USDA Mission Area, agency, and staff office
   is responsible for collaborative oversight and tracking of UAS flight activities within
   their respective agency. USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices employing
   UAS or UAS-collected information shall comply with Departmental direction and take
   appropriate steps to ensure effective oversight and accountability for their respective
   UAS programs. Accordingly, USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices shall
   ensure that:



                                             4
       (1) Oversight procedures are implemented for UAS use, including audits or
           assessments, in compliance with Departmental policies and regulations.

       (2) Mission Area, agency, and staff office personnel and contractors comply with UAS
           program training requirements, rules of behavior, and procedures for reporting
           suspected cases of misuse or abuse of UAS technologies.

       (3) Policies and procedures are implemented that provide meaningful oversight of
           individuals who have access to sensitive information (including any PII) collected
           using UAS consistent with applicable Federal laws, regulations, and policies, as
           well as Departmental policy guidance.

       (4) Any data-sharing agreements or policies, data use policies, and records
           management policies applicable to UAS conform to applicable laws, regulations,
           and policies.

       (5) Policies and procedures are implemented to authorize the use of UAS in response to
           a request for UAS assistance in support of Federal, State, local, tribal, or territorial
           government operations. Any authorized use, letter of authorization, or
           memorandum of understanding must include the requirements of this policy and
           appropriate safeguards to protect privacy, civil rights, and civil liberties.

   f. Transparency. Policies and procedures are to be implemented to keep the public
      informed about the USDA UAS program and to provide transparency in regard to where
      USDA UAS are authorized to operate in the US National Air Space (NAS)
      while not revealing information that could reasonably be expected to compromise law
      enforcement or national security.

       (1) Keep the public informed about the USDA UAS program as well as changes that
           would significantly affect privacy, civil rights, or civil liberties.

       (2) Make available to the public, on an annual basis, a general summary of USDA UAS
           operations during the previous fiscal year, to include a brief description of types or
           categories of missions flown, and the number of times the Mission Area, agency, or
           staff office provided assistance to other agencies, or to State, local, tribal, or
           territorial governments.

   g. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will implement a redress program if there are
      public inquiries into the reported UAS activities.


5. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA CIO will:




                                                  5
     (1) Provide executive accountability for Departmental PII pertaining to the use of all
         UASs and the data collected from this platform;

     (2) Provide executive governance oversight over UAS technology-enabled business
         processes, including all geospatial capital assets created, provisioned, and
         consumed across the Department; and

     (3) Delegate executive leadership for UAS technology, data, and information solutions
         to the Enterprise Geospatial Program Manager.

b.   The USDA Geospatial Information Officer (GIO) will:

     (1) Have authority, responsibility, and accountability for USDA Departmental UAS
         data retention and disposal of data containing PII;

     (2) Be responsible for reviewing all waiver requests in association with this DR and
         determining next steps of waiver.

     (3) Act as the primary UAS point of contact at the Department level; and

     (4) Be responsible for all inquiries into this DR.

c.   The USDA Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) will:

     (1) Review and act upon Plan of Action and Milestones (POA&M); and

     (2) Report to the GIO any outstanding POA&Ms related to waivers of this DR on an
         annual basis.

d.   The USDA Enterprise Geospatial Program Manager will:

     (1) Coordinate with the Remote Sensing Coordination Committee (RSCC) and the
         UAS Subgroup within the RSCC;

     (2) Act as the primary point of contact for a UAS public facing web site;

     (3) Review all UAS uses in emergency response as requested for PIA responsibilities.

     (4) Maintain copies of waivers and certificates of authorization issued by the FAA.

f.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs, and Agency and Staff Office IT Directors will:

     (1) Be accountable for monitoring and reporting of UAS technologies and spatial data
         management practices, metadata and lifecycle management from the UAS
         platforms; and



                                               6
     (2) Compose the annual geospatial data management report for the USDA CIO. Data
         for report will be derived from FAA flight logs.

g.   The USDA Remote Sensing Coordination Committee UAS Advisory Committee will:

     (1) Provide advice to the USDA Enterprise Geospatial Program Manager concerning
         UAS policy, operations, and procedures with the scope of RSCC’s contribution
         including business technical requirements, portfolio management through the
         USDA, USDA Information Technology Capital Planning and Investment Control
         Guide, May 5, 2013, acquisition, solutions development, and archival infrastructure
         and practices;

     (2) Provide advice on governance oversight for the Department’s UAS imagery;

     (3) Ensure coordination, visibility and adequate data lifecycle management of UAS
         imagery assets for all USDA agencies and staff offices; and

     (4) Research, review, and recommend UAS policy, data standards and best practices.

h.   Agency and Staff Office Directors and Administrators will:

     (1) Be responsible for ensuring UAS assets are managed in a coordinated, documented,
         and predictable manner within their respective IT portfolios;

     (2) Provide executive oversight, including assignment and support of four key
         geospatial data management roles and functions within their respective agencies or
         staff offices: UAS Data Owner, UAS Data Steward, UAS Data Custodian, and
         UAS Data Stakeholder;

     (3) In concert with flight operators, be responsible for ensuring all UAS flights are
         conducted with air-worthy aircraft and trained Remote Pilots in Command; and

     (4) Ensure confidential and protected data is handled appropriately and not disclosed to
         unauthorized entities.

i.   UAS Data Owners will:

     (1) Have functional area authority within a business program and be responsible for
         making decisions concerning the use of UAS datasets and imagery;

     (2) Maintain a digital governance reference to all raw data use to derive geospatial
         product and service, and be responsible for the management of those UAS assets;

     (3) Ensure the quality, integrity, accuracy, timeliness, and completeness of the UAS
         data;



                                              7
       (4) Be responsible for data collection, extraction, conversion, cleansing, and metadata
           creation;

       (5) Be responsible for data updating, Quality Assurance/Quality Control (QA/QC), data
           distribution, and open data channel management; and

       (6) Delegate these responsibilities to the Data Stewards as appropriate.

  j.   UAS Data Stewards will:

       (1) Be the designated Departmental experts for specific UAS data sets;

       (2) Manage individual data sets to promote data accessibility and reusability across the
           Department, and to meet the data content and data quality requirements of all users;

       (3) Serve as a consultant to other program offices on the content, quality, and
           applicability of their data; and

       (4) Act as the liaison if UAS data contains PII for reporting of retention or disposal of
           data.

  k.   UAS Data Custodians will:

       (1) Manage the enterprise storage and delivery of data provided by Data Owners and/or
           Data Stewards; and

       (2) Be responsible for ensuring the geospatial data security, integrity, and availability.

  l.   UAS Data Stakeholders will:

       (1) Have an interest, or share, in the use or creation of UAS data; and

       (2) Record and document the original purpose, requirements and nature of the UAS
           data intended for meeting specific mission and staff office, and other stakeholder,
           goals and/or objectives. This documentation will be retained for a period of 7
           years, or a longer retention period if deemed appropriate by the Data Stakeholder.


6. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  a.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, and entities will conform to this
       policy. In the event that a specific policy requirement cannot be met as explicitly stated,
       Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, program offices, and contractor facilities may
       submit a waiver request.




                                                 8
  b.   The waiver request must identify the sponsoring executive, explain the reason for the
       request, identify compensating controls and actions that meet the intent of the policy,
       and identify how the compensating controls and actions provide a similar or greater
       level of quality, mitigation or compliance than the policy requirement.

       Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will address all policy waiver request
       memoranda to the USDA GIO and the Geospatial Program Manager. The waiver
       request must explain the reason for the request, identify compensating controls and
       actions that meet the intent of the policy, and identify how the compensating controls
       and actions provide a similar or greater level of defense or compliance than the policy
       requirement. The waiver request can also apply to an extension of the 180-day retention
       policy but must identify why the data must be kept beyond the allotted time period if PII
       is in the data.

  c.   Unless otherwise specified, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will review and
       renew policy waivers every fiscal year, or as needed. Approved waivers must be tracked
       as a POA&M item in the USDA Federal Information Security Modernization Act
       (FISMA) data management and reporting tool database, and completion of this Mission
       Area, agency, or staff office requirement must be certified in writing by the CISO.


7. INQUIRIES

  Information regarding this DR, policy recommendations, updates and/or changes, and
  relationships to other Administration, Departmental, Mission Area, agency, staff office, and
  Federal government policy, directives, and memoranda should be directed to the USDA GIO
  located in Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) Enterprise Geospatial
  Management Office (EGMO).


                                              -END-




                                                 9
                            APPENDIX A

                ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


CIO      Chief Information Officer
CISO     Chief Information Security Officer
CRIA     Civil Rights Impact Analysis
DM       Departmental Manual
DR       Departmental Regulation
EGDM     Enterprise Geospatial Data Management
EGMO     Enterprise Geospatial Management Office
FAA      Federal Aviation Administration
FISMA    Federal Information Security Modernization Act
GIO      Geospatial Information Officer
ISO      International Organization for Standardization
IT       Information Technology
NIST     National Institute of Standards and Technology
OCIO     Office of the Chief Information Officer
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
PTA      Privacy Threshold Analysis
PIA      Privacy Impact Assessment
PII      Personally Identifiable Information
P.L.     Public Law
PM       Presidential Memorandum
POA&M    Plan of Action and Milestones
QA/QC    Quality Assurance/Quality Control
RSCC     Remote Sensing Coordination Committee
SP       Special Publication
SSN      Social Security Number
UAS      Unmanned Aerial System
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                                 A–1
                                        APPENDIX B

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Authorities:

   Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Modernization and Reform Act of 2012, P.L. 112-95,
   February 14, 2012

   The Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. §3551, et
   seq.

   Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. §552a (2017)

References:

   International Organization for Standardization (ISO), Standard ISO 19115-2:2009,
   Geospatial Information - Metadata Part 2: Extensions for Imagery and Gridded Data,
   February 15, 2009

   NIST, SP 800-122, Guide to Protecting the Confidentiality of Personally Identifiable
   Information (PII), April 2010

   OMB, Circular A-16 Revised, Coordination of Geographic Information and Related Spatial
   Data Activities, August 19, 2002

   OMB, Memorandum M-13-13, Open Data Policy-Managing Information as an Asset, May
   9, 2013

   USDA, DM 3515-000, Privacy Requirements, February 17, 2005

   USDA, DM 3515-002, Privacy Impact Assessment, February 17, 2005

   USDA, DR 3080-001, Records Management, May 23, 2013

   USDA, DR 3085-001, Vital Records Management Program, August 19, 2011

   USDA, DR 3130-008, Definition of Major Information Technology Investments, February
   27, 2015

   USDA, DR 3130-009, Non-Major Information Technology Investments, November 18, 2015

   USDA, DR 3130-010, United States Department of Agriculture Enterprise Information
   Technology Governance, December 3, 2015



                                                B–1
   USDA, DR 3130-013, Information Technology Capital Planning and Investment Control,
   July 8, 2016

   USDA, DR 3465-001, Enterprise Geospatial Data Management, August 5, 2016

   USDA, DR 3515-xxx, Privacy Policy and Compliance for Personally Identifiable
   Information, forthcoming

Other Guidance:

   USDA, Integrated IT Governance Framework: Guidebook, version 3.2, April 1, 2014

   USDA, USDA Information Technology Capital Planning and Investment Control Guide,
   May 5, 2013




                                            B–2
