                                                                           Number:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                    DR 3441-001

SUBJECT:                                               DATE:
USDA Sensitive Compartmented Information               January 18, 2012
Security Program
                                                       OPI: Office of Homeland
                                                       Security and Emergency
                                                       Coordination



  1.       PURPOSE

           This regulation establishes the responsibilities and procedures for accessing,
           safeguarding, and disseminating Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI)
           within U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). SCI is defined as classified
           information concerning or derived from intelligence sources, methods, or
           analytical processes, which is required to be handled within formal access
           control systems established by the Director of National Intelligence. This
           Departmental Regulation (DR) is applicable Departmental employees,
           contractors, and individuals serving in advisory, consultant, or non-employee
           affiliate capacities who have been granted access to SCI materials.

  2.       REFERENCES

           a. National Security Act of 1947;
           b. Executive Order 13526, December 29, 2009;
           c. Intelligence Community Directive (ICD) 503 Information Technology
               Systems Security Risk Management, Certification and Accreditation,
               September 15, 2008;
           d. Intelligence Community Program Memorandum (ICPM) 2006-700.8
               Directive Administrative Security, July 12, 2006;
           e. ICD 700 Protection of National Intelligence, September 21, 2007;
           f. ICD 701 Unauthorized Disclosures, March 14, 2007;
           g. ICD 703 Protection of SCI Sources and Methods;
                  (1) ICPG 703.1 Continuing Reporting
                  (2) ICPG 703.2 SCI Management
                  (3) ICPG 703.3 Non-Title 50
                  (4) ICPG 703.4 Foreign Partners
                  (5) ICPG 703.5 Dissemination Controls
                  (6) ICPG 703.6 Risk Management
           h. ICD 705 Physical/Technical Security Standards, May 26, 2010;
           i. ICPM 2007-700-33 Foreign Travel, September 13, 2007


                                            1
     j. ICD 710Classification and Control Markings System, September 11, 2009


3.   POLICY

     USDA will safeguard SCI within its control from unauthorized disclosure. It
       is the policy of USDA that:

     a. USDA agencies must provide a legitimate justification when requesting
        SCI access for each individual and limit the number of SCI clearances to
        the minimum necessary to meet USDA mission requirements;

     b. SCI shall not be released or shared with persons who do not possess an
        active security clearance equal to or higher than the classification level of
        the material in question and without a verified need to know;

     c. SCI material may only be processed, stored, discussed, or safeguarded in
        facilities within USDA identified and accredited as SCI Facilities (SCIFs);

     d. Annual security awareness training is required of all employees cleared to
        access SCI;

     e. Destruction of SCI shall be completed by shredding with a National
        Security Agency certified shredder;

     f.   Incidents involving the alleged mishandling and potential compromise of
          SCI must be reported immediately upon discovery to the Personnel and
          Document Security Division (PDSD) of the Office of Homeland Security
          and Emergency Coordination; and

     g. SCI cleared persons must report any personal foreign travel in advance to
        PDSD and may be required to attend specialized briefings or debriefings
        related to the travel itinerary.



4.   ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

     a. The Secretary of Agriculture is responsible for designating a Senior
        Agency Official to manage, develop and administer the SCI Security
        Program. This designation is currently made to the Director, Office of
        Homeland Security and Emergency Coordination (OHSEC). The Senior
        Agency Official is required to maintain a Top Secret clearance, with SCI
        access.

     b. The Senior Agency Official is the primary liaison between USDA and the
        CIA and the National Security Agency (NSA). This position is


                                       2
   responsible for identifying necessary resources to manage the SCI
   Security Program and providing program oversight.

c. Subcabinet Officials, Agency Administrators, and Staff Office Directors,
   whose organizations require access to SCI material, are responsible for:

   (1)     Ensuring the number of persons granted access to SCI material is
           based on clearly-articulated, mission related “need-to-know”
           criteria, endorsing the written justification, and submitting the SCI
           request to OHSEC; and

   (2)     Ensuring employees who hold a security clearance with access to
           SCI receive initial SCI security indoctrination training, annual
           security refresher training, and a debriefing after SCI access is
           terminated.


d. The Director, OHSEC, is responsible for:

    (1)    Establishing and administering the USDA SCI Security Program
           in accordance with all applicable authorities, regulations and manuals;

    (2)    Maintaining an oversight role to ensure consistent and effective
           implementation of the SCI Security Program throughout USDA;

    (3)    Approving or denying requests for access to SCI;

    (4)    Serving as the focal point for intelligence liaison between USDA and
           the intelligence community for matters of national security and
           intelligence related matters, excluding cyber-security;

    (5)    Approving all requests for installation, maintenance, upgrade and
           disposal of all Information Technology (IT) systems and equipment
           whereby SCI is accessed, stored, and processed;

    (6)    Approving all requests for the construction, modification, or closure
           of any SCIF within USDA operations; and

    (7)    Obtaining final accreditation for SCIFs and ensuring such facilities
           are adequately justified by USDA mission requirements.

f. The Chief, Office of Chief Information Office is responsible for:


   (1)     Providing Communications Security support to maintain the integrity
           of technical equipment to support the ongoing requirements for secure
           telecommunications and SCI connectivity;



                                  3
   (2)     Incorporating, where appropriate, applicable USDA information
           security policies and procedures into USDA policies and standards for
           IT system protection;
   (3)     Serving as the focal point for intelligence liaison between USDA
           and the intelligence community for matters related to cyber
           security;
   (4)     Coordinating with OHSEC to investigate the potential breaches or
           mishandling of classified information occurring within classified
           IT systems, conducting requisite forensic investigations; and
   (5)     Sharing with OHSEC the results of any forensic investigation to
           confirm or mitigate mishandling or compromise of classified
           information.

g. PDSD is responsible for implementing all policies and directives noted herein
   to maintain proper control and protection of collateral and SCI related
   documents and systems. This includes:

   (1)     Day-to-day management of the Department’s SCI information
           security program;


   (2)     Processing and sponsoring all SCI clearance requests to the CIA and
           notifying appropriate officials of all approvals and denials of access;

   (3)     Issuing and updating Department-wide SCI information security
           policies and procedures;


   (4)     Coordinating and providing initial SCI security indoctrination
           training, annual refresher training, and security debriefings;


   (5)     Coordinating approval, construction, accreditation, and
           maintenance of all SCIFs and


   (6)     Receiving reports of incidents of suspected mishandling or
           inadvertent disclosure of classified information; conducting requisite
           security inquiries/investigations; and making referrals to external
           agencies when a compromise of SCI has occurred; and


   (7)     Notifying CIA of any personnel security issues or concerns that may
           jeopardize an individual’s continued eligibility for SCI access.




                                  4
h. Employees, contractors, and other individuals maintaining SCI access at
   USDA are responsible for the following:

   (1)    Adhering to the provisions of this DR;

   (2)    Immediately reporting security irregularities and security violations to
          their respective information security coordinators and supervisors;

   (3)    Completing an initial SCI security indoctrination briefing, annual
          security refresher briefing, and security debriefings in a timely manner;

   (4)    Notifying PDSD of impending personal travel to or through foreign
          countries by completion of form AD-1196 and participating in any
          required defensive threat briefings, and

   (5)    Reporting to PDSD any close and continuing contact with foreign
          nationals by submitting a completed Foreign Contact Questionnaire.
          Contact includes personal and/or intimate relationships, outside
          employment, domestic help, and any situation that causes SCI cleared
          persons to believe they are being targeted by a foreign government.

                                END




                                  5
