                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                 NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                         DR 3445-001
                                                                 DATE:
 SUBJECT: Media Protection
                                                                 May 19, 2026
 OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer,                   EXPIRATION DATE:
 Cybersecurity and Privacy Operations Center                     May 19, 2031




Section                                                                                   Page

1.    Purpose                                                                                    1
2.    Scope                                                                                      2
3.    Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                         2
4.    Background                                                                                 3
5.    Policy                                                                                     4
6.    Roles and Responsiblities                                                                  6
7.    Penalties and Disciplinary Actions for Noncompliance                                       9
8.    Policy Exceptions                                                                          9
9.    Inquiries                                                                                 10

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                       A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                      B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                       C-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of
          Agriculture’s (USDA) policy for protecting all forms of media that record and store
          digital or nondigital information.

     b.   USDA complies with Federal requirements to establish, implement, and enforce media
          protection policies and procedures.

     c.   This DR provides the basis for USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to
          develop and implement media protection procedures that outline how to:

          (1)   Access digital and nondigital media, based on the data’s sensitivity;
       (2)   Protect USDA personnel, missions, and processes against malicious or
             unauthorized activities; and

       (3)   Protect the confidentiality and integrity of USDA data.


2. SCOPE

  This DR applies to all:

  a.   USDA personnel working for, or on behalf of, USDA. The term “USDA personnel”
       encompasses USDA employees, appointees, contractors, partners, interns, fellows,
       affiliates, and volunteers;

  b.   Federal information, per DR 3080-001, Records Management, in any medium or form
       generated, collected, provided, transmitted, stored, maintained, or accessed by or on
       behalf of USDA; and

  c.   Information systems or services (including cloud-based services) used or operated by
       USDA, USDA contractors, or other organizations on behalf of, or funded by, USDA and
       interconnections between or among systems or services.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This policy supersedes the previous version of DR 3445-001, Media Protection, dated
       October 30, 2019.

  b.   This policy is effective immediately. It remains in effect until superseded or expired.

  c.   Nothing in this policy alters the requirements for protecting national security systems or
       information. This includes the requirements identified in:

       (1)   The Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 United
             States Code (U.S.C.) § 3551, et seq., SUBCHAPTER II—Information Security;

       (2)   The Committee on National Security Systems (CNSS) policies, directives,
             instructions, and standards; and

       (3)   Intelligence community policies, directives, and instructions.

  d.   This DR does not deal with classified or Classified National Security Information (CUI).
       CUI is sensitive information that does not meet the criteria for classification but still
       requires protection.

  e.   This policy is closely related to other USDA policies, programs, and procedures,
       including:

       (1)   DR 3080-001, Records Management;

                                               2
       (2)   DR 3440-001, USDA Classified National Security Information Program;

       (3)   DR 3440-003, Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) Program;

       (4)   DR 3515-002, Privacy Policy and Compliance for Personally Identifiable
             Information (PII);

       (5)   DR 3185-004, Enterprise Zero Trust Architecture;

       (6)   DR 3530-007, Encryption Security and Public Key Infrastructure;

       (7)   DR 3580-004, Securing Remote Access to USDA Information Systems and Client
             Devices;

       (8)   DR 3580-005, Securing Client Devices for International Travel; and

       (9)   DR 3640-001, Identity, Credential, and Access Management.

  f.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their media protection
       procedures with this DR within 6 months of the publication date.


4. BACKGROUND

  a.   Digital and nondigital media provide ways of recording and storing information and
       exist in a variety of formats.

       (1)   Digital media can be:

             (a)    Magnetic, such as disks or tapes;

             (b)    Optical, such as optical discs, such CDs or DVDs; and

             (c)    Nonvolatile storage, such as thumb drives, external hard drives, and
                    portable data cards.

       (2)   Examples of nondigital media include paper documents and microfilm.

  b.   Media is portable; easy to conceal; and easily misplaced, lost, or stolen. Protecting
       media reduces the risk of:

       (1)   Unauthorized data exposure (loss of confidentiality);

       (2)   Data tampering (loss of integrity); or

       (3)   Inability to access data when needed (loss of availability).




                                                3
5. POLICY

  Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will:

  a.   Protect and control access to all types of media and information used by, or on behalf of,
       USDA;

  b.   Create, update, and maintain processes and procedures that reflect policy consistent with
       other USDA policies and procedures related to records management;

  c.   Ensure that all media are protected throughout their lifecycle and wherever located,
       whether in use, in storage, in transport, or during maintenance;

  d.   Define appropriate use for trusted and untrusted USDA removable media;

  e.   Prevent untrusted removable digital media from being used on devices owned or
       operated by, or on behalf of, USDA, by using automated mechanisms;

  f.   Encrypt, when necessary, all government-issued digital media storage devices, per DR
       3530-007;

  g.   Encrypt all non-publicly available Federal information residing on USDA removable
       digital media and client devices when taken outside of USDA facilities, when required.
       See National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Federal Information
       Processing Standards Publication (FIPS PUB) 140-2, Security Requirements for
       Cryptographic Modules. Also see NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-111, Guide to
       Storage Encryption Technologies for End User Devices;

  h.   Specify other technical safeguards, such as requirements to:

       (1)   Scan media for malicious code regularly or prior to use;

       (2)   Disable or remove the ability to insert, read, or write to media. Alternatively,
             configure removeable digital media ports to “read only” and disable “read, write,
             execute” capabilities;

       (3)   Protect media containing PII (e.g., media encryption, password protection,
             logging, and secure transport) per DR 3515-002;

       (4)   Ensure all media, including client devices, taken on international travel comply
             with the requirements in DR 3580-005;

       (5)   Dispose of all nondigital media containing non-publicly available Federal
             information (e.g., shredded, burned), consistent with National Archives and
             Records Administration (NARA)-approved records retention schedules; and




                                               4
i.   Develop, disseminate, and implement media protection procedures that:

     (1)   Identify both digital and nondigital media to be protected;

     (2)   List the types of media or devices authorized to store USDA information;

     (3)   Define restrictions on uses of media or activities with media (e.g., transport or use
           on non-USDA systems) and the circumstances of the restrictions;

     (4)   Identify and describe roles and responsibilities for media protection activities.

j.   Specify physical and logical discretionary and nondiscretionary access control methods
     for protecting access to different types of media;

k.   Specify acceptable methods and locations for securely storing the various types of media
     throughout the media’s lifecycle. Specify acceptable methods for restricting access to
     stored media containing non-publicly available Federal information. This includes, but is
     not limited to, media stored at:

     (1)   Facilities owned or operated by, or on behalf of, USDA; and

     (2)   Primary or alternate storage locations for contingency and disaster planning
           purposes. DR 3571-001, Information System Contingency Planning and Disaster
           Recovery Planning, addresses the frequency and quality of digital information
           stored at alternate storage sites.

l.   Specify acceptable methods for protecting and controlling different types of media
     (including non-digital media like microfilm or paper), during transport outside of
     controlled areas. Compare the information stored on the media with the following
     requirements:

     (1)   Authorize transport of media and the circumstances for doing so (i.e., business
           needs);

     (2)   Maintain accountability for, and tracking of, media throughout the transport
           process or a system to prevent or detect loss or misuse;

     (3)   Identify acceptable protection methods, both technical and physical. These can
           include encryption, packaging, or locked containers to prevent unauthorized
           access, destruction, or tampering;

     (4)   Identify cryptographic mechanisms to protect non-publicly available information
           stored on digital media during transport; and

     (5)   Indicate restrictions on transport methods (e.g., in personal vehicles) or
           destinations (e.g., outside the United States). Transportation of media will be in
           accordance with DR 3515-002.



                                              5
  m. Refer to DR 3080-001 or the NARA-approved records retention schedule to identify
     digital and nondigital media preservation requirements for information that is released
     for disposition. Apply the necessary requirements for the transfer of permanent historical
     records and the migration or destruction of temporary records; and

  n.   Specify requirements to sanitize media prior to their disposal, release out of
       organizational control, or release for reuse. Ensure that digital media are sanitized prior
       to redeployment, maintenance, decommissioning, or disposal. This will include:

       (1)   Employing sanitization mechanisms with the strength and integrity commensurate
             with the types of information residing on the media;

       (2)   Ensuring that unauthorized users do not obtain access to data stored by the
             previous user.

       (3)   Describing the sanitization techniques and procedures to be employed, per NIST
             SP 800-88, Revision 1, Guidelines for Media Sanitization; and

       (4)   Reviewing the specific requirements for media containing data from information
             systems categorized as high impact. Use the standards for high impact specified in
             NIST, FIPS PUB 199, Standards for Security Categorization of Federal
             Information and Information Systems. These requirements will include:

             (a)    Reviewing, approving, tracking, documenting, and verifying media
                    sanitization and disposal actions;

             (b)    Testing sanitization equipment and reviewing procedures at least annually,
                    to verify that the intended sanitization is being achieved; and

             (c)    Defining circumstances for nondestructive sanitization techniques for
                    portable digital media storage before connecting them to an information
                    system.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBLITIES

  a.   The USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO) will:

       (1)   Be the senior agency official responsible for media protection; and

       (2)   Ensure the Department’s media protection and sanitization goals are aligned with
             business objectives and risk management practices.

  b.   The USDA Chief Privacy Officer (CPO) will:

       (1)   Provide oversight and guidance on PII issues; and

       (2)   Coordinate with System Owners and Data Stewards to:


                                                6
           (a)    Ensure acceptable methods of protecting, controlling, and securing
                  information; and

           (b)    Ensure appropriate oversight before sanitizing information or media

c.   The Departmental Records Officer will:

     (1)   Provide oversight and guidance on Federal and Departmental requirements for
           related records management and retention issues; and

     (2)   Coordinate with System Owners and Data Stewards to:

           (a)    Ensure acceptable methods of protecting, controlling, and securing
                  information; and

           (b)    Ensure appropriate oversight before sanitizing information or media.

d.   Office of Homeland Security (OHS) will advise USDA personnel on matters relating to
     data that is classified when compiled.

e.   The USDA Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) will:

     (1)   Ensure that the Department’s information security program and plans adequately
           address media protection. Ensure that personnel update the information security
           program and plans accordingly, as Federal requirements for media protection
           change; and

     (2)   Provide compliance oversight and guidance to Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
           offices on Federal and Departmental requirements for media protection.

f.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs will:

     (1)   Ensure that procedures for media protection are developed, implemented, and
           updated as needed and that they comply with Federal and Departmental
           requirements; and

     (2)   Ensure that all personnel are aware of media protection requirements.

g.   Mission Area Assistant CISOs and Information Systems Security Managers (ISSM)
     will:

     (1)   Coordinate with the USDA CPO, Departmental Records Officer, OHS Director,
           System Owners and Data Stewards to:

           (a)    Ensure acceptable methods of protecting, controlling, and securing
                  information are in place before sanitizing information or media; and

           (b)    Ensure appropriate procedures and safeguards are in place before sanitizing
                  information or media.

                                            7
     (2)   Develop, disseminate, and update agency procedures for media protection;

     (3)   Ensure that rules of behavior include media protection requirements; and

     (4)   Provide oversight and guidance on compliance with all media protection
           requirements.

h.   Data Stewards will:

     (1)   Coordinate with System Owners to assign roles and define responsibilities for
           marking, protecting, and securely storing information or media;

     (2)   Review agency media protection procedures. Ensure requirements address
           procedural gaps. Provide instructions for agency personnel on how to implement
           and follow the procedures;

     (3)   Ensure media protection procedures address requirements for protecting any media
           which:

           (a)    Contain PII;

           (b)    Are transported outside of USDA-controlled facilities; or

           (c)    Are being taken on, or returning from, international travel.

     (4)   Coordinate with System, Database, and Network Administrators to ensure that
           media are properly sanitized prior to disposal, release out of organizational control,
           or release for reuse.

i.   System Owners will:

     (1)   Document media protection lifecycle requirements as part of their system security
           plans (SSP), including but not limited to:

           (a)    Appropriate levels of protection based on the types of information (e.g., per
                  non-publicly available information) stored on various types of media;

           (b)    Backup media and transport to alternate storage; and

           (c)    Roles and responsibilities, including but not limited to, marking media and
                  media sanitization.

     (2)   Ensure that media for their systems are properly marked, stored, and transported;
           and

     (3)   Verify through the Office of the General Counsel that the media and information
           are not subject to electronic discovery litigation or other legal requirements or
           restrictions prior to sanitizing, disposing of, or destroying the media.


                                              8
  j.   System, Database, and Network Administrators will:

       (1)   Comply with all Federal and Departmental media protection requirements and
             rules of behavior included in the Information Security Awareness Training course;

       (2)   Properly mark all system media, as applicable; and

       (3)   Ensure that media are properly sanitized prior to disposal, release out of
             organizational control, or release for reuse.

  k.   All USDA personnel will:

       (1)   Complete the annual Information Security Awareness Training course, which
             includes many aspects of media protection, in accordance with DR 3545-001,
             Information Security Awareness (ISA) Program;

       (2)   Comply with all Federal and Departmental media protection requirements and
             rules of behavior included in the Information Security Awareness Training course;

       (3)   Follow documented procedures for using, storing, and transporting digital and
             non- digital media;

       (4)   Promptly report lost or stolen digital or nondigital media, per incident reporting
             policy and procedures; and

       (5)   Report misuse or abuse of media to appropriate authorities.


7. PENALTIES AND DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS FOR NONCOMPLIANCE

  a.   Responsibilities and conduct, in regard to using computers and telecommunication
       equipment, appear in DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct,
       Section 16, Computers.

  b.   In addition, DR 4070-735-001, Section 21, Disciplinary or Adverse Action, states:

       (1)   Any violation of the responsibilities or standards contained in this DR may be
             cause for disciplinary or adverse action; and

       (2)   Any disciplinary or adverse action taken will be consistent with the applicable
             laws and regulations.


8. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  a.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will conform to this policy.




                                               9
  b.   Any Mission Area, agency, or staff office that cannot meet a specific policy requirement
       must request a policy exception via email. Contact the Office of the Chief Information
       Officer (OCIO) Cybersecurity and Privacy Operations Center (CPOC) Security
       Management Division (SMD) Risk Management Branch at POAMProgram@usda.gov.
       An approved policy exception is an acceptance of risk but does not constitute
       compliance.


9. INQUIRIES

  Send any questions or concerns about this DR to OCIO CPOC via CPOC-
  CyberPolicy@usda.gov.


                                           -END-




                                             10
                                 APPENDIX A
                      ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


CFR        Code of Federal Regulations
CIO        Chief Information Officer
CISO       Chief Information Security Officer
CNSS       Committee on National Security Systems
CNSSI      Committee on National Security Systems Instruction
CPO        Chief Privacy Officer
CPOC       Cybersecurity and Privacy Operations Center
CS         Cybersecurity
CUI        Controlled Unclassified Information
DM         Departmental Manual
DR         Departmental Regulation
E.O.       Executive Order
FIPS PUB   Federal Information Processing Standards Publication
FISMA      Federal Information Security Modernization Act
ISSM       Information Systems Security Manager
KEK        Key Encryption Key
LSI        Large-Scale Integration
MEK        Media Encryption Key
NARA       National Archives and Records Administration
NIST       National Institute of Standards and Technology
OCIO       Office of the Chief Information Officer
OHS        Office of Homeland Security
OMB        Office of Management and Budget
PII        Personally Identifiable Information
P.L.       Public Law
SBU        Sensitive but Unclassified
SMD        Security Management Division
SOP        Standard Operating Procedure
SP         Special Publication
SSP        System Security Plan
U.S.C.     United States Code
USDA       United States Department of Agriculture




                                         A-1
                                          APPENDIX B
                                          DEFINITIONS


Clear. A method of sanitization by applying logical techniques to sanitize data in all user-
addressable storage locations for protection against simple non-invasive data recovery techniques
using the same interface available to the user; typically applied through the standard read and
write commands to the storage device, such as by rewriting with a new value or using a menu
option to reset the device to the factory state (where rewriting is not supported). (Source: NIST
SP 800-88, Revision 1)

Cryptographic Erase. Method of sanitization in which the Media Encryption Key (MEK) for the
encrypted Target Data (or the Key Encryption Key (KEK)) is sanitized, making recovery of the
decrypted Target Data infeasible. (Source: CNSS CNSSI 4009, Committee on National Security
Systems (CNSS) Glossary)

Cryptography. Art or science concerning the principles, means, methods for rendering plain
information unintelligible and for restoring encrypted information to intelligible form. (Source:
CNSS CNSSI 4009)

Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI). Information that requires safeguarding or
dissemination controls pursuant to and consistent with applicable law, regulations, and
governmentwide policies but is not classified under E.O. 13526, Classified National Security
Information, or the Atomic Energy Act, 42 U.S.C. § 2011, as amended. (Source: E.O. 13556,
Controlled Unclassified Information

Cybersecurity (CS). Prevention of damage to, protection of, and restoration of computers,
electronic communications systems, electronic communications services, wire communication,
and electronic communication, including information contained therein, to ensure its availability,
integrity, authentication, confidentiality, and nonrepudiation. (Source: CNSS CNSSI 4009)

Data Steward. Individual or group that helps to ensure the careful and responsible management of
Federal information belonging to the Nation as a whole, regardless of the entity or source that
may have originated, created, or compiled the information. Data stewards provide maximum
access to Federal information to elements of the Federal Government and its customers, balanced
by the obligation to protect the information in accordance with the provisions of FISMA and any
associated security-related federal policies, directives, regulations, standards, and guidance.
(Source adapted from: NIST Computer Security Resource Center, Glossary)

Destroy. A method of sanitization that renders target data recovery infeasible using state-of-the-
art laboratory techniques and results in the subsequent inability to use the media for storage of
data. (Source: NIST SP 800-88, Revision 1)

Encryption. Any procedure used in cryptography to convert plain text into cipher text to prevent
anyone but the intended recipient from reading that data. (Source: NIST SP 800-101, Revision 1,
Guidelines on Mobile Device Forensics)


                                                B-1
Federal Information. Information created, collected, processed, maintained, disseminated, or
disposed of by, or for, the Federal Government in any medium or forum. (Source: Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic
Resource)

Federal Information System. An information system used or operated by an executive Agency,
by a contractor of an executive Agency, or by another organization on behalf of an executive
Agency. (Source: NIST SP 800-53, Revision 5, Security and Privacy Controls for Information
Systems and Organizations)

Media. Physical devices or writing surfaces including, but not limited to, magnetic tapes, optical
disks, magnetic disks, Large-Scale Integration (LSI) memory chips, and printouts (but not
including display media) onto which information is recorded, stored, or printed within an
information system. See also singular “Medium.” (Source: NIST SP 800-53, Revision 5)

Media Sanitization. The actions taken to render data written on media unrecoverable by both
ordinary and extraordinary means. (Source: NIST SP 800-88, Revision 1)

Medium. Material on which data are or may be recorded, such as paper, punched cards, magnetic
tape, magnetic disks, solid state devices, or optical discs. (Source: NIST SP 800-88, Revision 1)

Mobile Device. Small mobile computers such as smartphones and tablets which often run a
mobile-specific OS such as Apple iOS and Google Android. Mobile devices are most often used
for remote access methods that use web browsers, primarily SSL VPNs and individual web
application access. (Source: NIST SP 800-46, Revision 2, Guide to Enterprise Telework, Remote
Access, and Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) Security)

Personally Identifiable Information (PII). Any information about an individual maintained by an
Agency, including (1) any information that can be used to distinguish or trace an individual’s
identity, such as name, social security number, date and place of birth, mother’s maiden name, or
biometric records; and (2) any other information that is linked or linkable to an individual, such
as medical, educational, financial, and employment information. (Source: NIST Computer
Security Resource Center, Glossary)

Purge. A method of Sanitization by applying physical or logical techniques that renders Target
Data recovery infeasible using state of the art laboratory techniques. (Source: NIST SP 800-88,
Revision 1)

Removable Media. Portable data storage medium that can be added to or removed from a
computing device or network. (Source: CNSS CNSSI 4009)

Sanitization. Actions taken to render data written on media unrecoverable by both ordinary and,
for some forms of sanitization, extraordinary means. Process to remove information from media
such that data recovery is not possible. It includes removing all classified labels, markings, and
activity logs. (Source: NIST SP 800-172A, Assessing Enhanced Security Requirements for
Controlled Unclassified Information)



                                               B-2
Sanitize. A process to render access to Target Data on the media infeasible for a given level of
effort. Clear, Purge, and Destroy are actions that can be taken to sanitize media. (Source: NIST
SP 800-88, Revision 1)

Storage. Retrievable retention of data. Electronic, electrostatic, or electrical hardware or other
elements (media) into which data may be entered, and from which data may be retrieved.
(Source: NIST SP 800-88, Revision 1)

Target Data. The information subject to a given process, typically including most or all
information on a piece of storage media. (Source: NIST SP 800-88, Revision 1)

Trusted Removable Device. Ability to take organizationally defined actions when unauthorized
hardware and software components are detected (e.g., disallow a flash drive to be connected
even if a USB port is present). Ability to store the operating environment (e.g., firmware image,
software, applications) in read-only media (e.g., Read Only Memory).

Untrusted Removable Device. Portable device that can be connected to an information system
(IS), computer, or network to provide data storage. These devices interface with the IS through
processing chips and may load driver software, presenting a greater security risk to the IS than
non-device media, such as optical discs or flash memory cards.

Zero Trust. A collection of concepts and ideas designed to minimize uncertainty in enforcing
accurate, least privilege per-request access decisions in information systems and services in the
face of a network viewed as compromised. (Source: NIST SP 800-207, Zero Trust Architecture)




                                                 B-3
                                         APPENDIX C
                              AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) § 2635.101, et seq., Part 2635—Standards of Ethical
Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch

18 U.S.C. § 1028, Fraud and related activity in connection with identification documents,
authentication features, and information

Atomic Energy Act, 42 U.S.C. § 2011, et seq., Division A—Atomic Energy

CNSS, CNSSI 4009, Committee on National Security Systems (CNSS) Glossary, March 7, 2022

CNSS, Committee on National Security Systems website, May 6, 2016

E.O. 13526, Classified National Security Information, December 29, 2009

FISMA, 44 U.S.C. § 3551, et seq., SUBCHAPTER II—Information Security

NARA, National Archives website

NIST, Computer Security Resource Center, Glossary, April 22, 2024

NIST, FIPS PUB 140-2, Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules, December 3, 2002

NIST, FIPS PUB 199, Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information and
Information Systems, February 1, 2004

NIST, FIPS PUB 200, Minimum Security Requirements for Federal Information and Information
Systems, March 1, 2006

NIST, SP 800-46, Revision 2, Guide to Enterprise Telework, Remote Access, and Bring Your
Own Device (BYOD) Security, July 2016

NIST, SP 800-53, Revision 5, Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and
Organizations, September 2020, includes updates as of December 10, 2020

NIST, SP 800-88, Revision 1, Guidelines for Media Sanitization, December 17, 2014

NIST, SP 800-101, Revision 1, Guidelines on Mobile Device Forensics, May 2014

NIST, SP 800-111, Guide to Storage Encryption Technologies for End User Devices, November
15, 2007

NIST, SP 800-172A, Assessing Enhanced Security Requirements for Controlled Unclassified
Information, March 2022


                                              C-1
NIST, SP 800-207, Zero Trust Architecture, August 2020

OMB, Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource, July 28, 2016

USDA, DR 3185-004, Enterprise Zero Trust Architecture, September 9, 2024

USDA, DM 3440-001, USDA Classified National Security Information Program Manual, June 9,
2016

USDA, DR 3440-003, Controlled Unclassified Information; September 13, 2021

USDA, DR 3080-001, Records Management, August 16, 2016

USDA, DR 3085-001, Vital Records Management Program, August 19, 2011

USDA, DR 3090-001, Litigation Retention Policy for Documentary Materials including
Electronically Stored Information, May 28, 2008

USDA, DR 3099-001, Records Management Policy for Departing Employees, Contractors,
Volunteers and Political Appointees, July 2, 2012

USDA, DR 3410-001, Information Collection Activities – Collection of Information from the
Public, January 26, 2022

USDA, DR 3440-001, USDA Classified National Security Information Program, June 9, 2016

USDA, DR 3515-002, Privacy Policy and Compliance for Personally Identifiable Information
(PII), October 30, 2020

USDA, DR 3530-007, Encryption Security and Public Key Infrastructure, August 5, 2024

USDA, DR 3545-001, Information Security Awareness (ISA) Program, October 25, 2023

USDA, DR 3571-001, Information System Contingency Planning and Disaster Recovery
Planning, June 1, 2016

USDA, DR 3580-004, Securing Remote Access to USDA Information Systems and Client
Devices, November 30, 2018

USDA, DR 3580-005, Securing Client Devices for International Travel, November 30, 2018

USDA, DR 3640-001, Identity, Credential, and Access Management, June 8, 2021

USDA, DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007

USDA, DR 4080-811-002, Telework and Remote Work Programs, November 22, 2021




                                             C-2
