                             U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                   WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                               NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                       DR 3580-005
 SUBJECT: Securing Client Devices for International            DATE:
 Travel                                                        November 30, 2018
 OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer, Information     EXPIRATION DATE:
 Security Center                                               November 30, 2023



Section                                                                                    Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                     1
2.   Scope                                                                                       2
3.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                          3
4.   Background                                                                                  4
5.   Policy                                                                                      5
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                                  9
7.   Penalties and Disciplinary Actions for Non-Compliance                                      13
8.   Policy Exceptions                                                                          13
9.   Inquiries                                                                                  14

Appendix A Authorities and References                                                          A-1
Appendix B Definitions                                                                         B-1
Appendix C Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                          C-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the policy for secure remote access to
          United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) information and information systems
          prior to, during, and upon return from foreign locations.

     b.   It is USDA policy to comply with Federal requirements to establish, implement, and
          enforce a policy on:

          (1) USDA information systems that facilitate remote access from international
              locations; and

          (2) The use of devices and removable media when used to remotely access USDA
              information systems from international locations.

     c.   This policy complies with the requirements of:
       (1) The Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA);

       (2) Federal Information Processing Standards Publication (FIPS PUB) 200, Minimum
           Security Requirements for Federal Information and Information Systems;

       (3) National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), Special Publication (SP)
           800-53 Revision 4, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems
           and Organizations;

       (4) NIST, SP 800-46 Revision 2, Guide to Enterprise Telework, Remote Access, and
           Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) Security;

       (5) NIST, SP 800-114 Revision 1, User’s Guide to Telework and Bring Your Own
           Device (BYOD) Security;

       (6) NIST, SP 800-124 Revision 1, Guidelines for Managing the Security of Mobile
           Devices in the Enterprise;

       (7) Office of Management and Budget (OMB), Memoranda M-11-27, Implementing the
           Telework Enhancement Act of 2010: Security Guidelines;

       (8) OMB, M-17-12, Preparing for and Responding to a Breach of Personally
           Identifiable Information; and

       (9) Telework Enhancement Act of 2010.

  d.   This policy serves as the foundation for agencies and staff offices to develop and
       implement foreign remote access policies and procedures that comply with Federal and
       Departmental requirements.


2. SCOPE

  a.   This policy applies to:

       (1) All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, employees, appointees,
           contractors, and others who work for, or on behalf of, USDA and use, or are
           responsible for, maintaining USDA information systems remotely accessed by
           devices or use removable media from international locations; and

       (2) All Federal information, in any medium or form, generated, collected, provided,
           transmitted, stored, maintained, or accessed by, or on behalf of, USDA and all
           information systems or services (including cloud-based services) used or operated
           by USDA, USDA contractors, or other organizations on behalf of, or funded by,
           USDA.
  b.   This directive builds on other information security policies that cover application and
       client device security requirements used domestically. However, this DR is written with


                                               2
       an emphasis on specifying requirements for ensuring the security of USDA information
       systems when individuals remotely access them from foreign locations. Related policies
       include:

       (1) DR 3505-003, Access Control for Information and Information Systems,
           forthcoming;

       (2) DR 3580-004, Securing Remote Access to USDA Information Systems and Client
           Devices, November 30, 2018; and

       (3) DR 35xx-xxx, Bring Your Own Device, forthcoming.

  c.   Users should comply with DR 5400-007, Text Messaging While Driving, which provides
       safety guidance about the use of Government furnished equipment while driving.

  d.   Nothing in this policy will alter the requirements of DR 4080-811-002, Telework
       Program, that defines approved worksites for USDA, when those worksites may be
       used, and the conditions in which they may be used.

  e.   Nothing in this policy will alter the requirements for the protection of information
       associated with national security systems such as those identified in FISMA, policies,
       directives, instructions, and standards issued by the Committee on National Security
       Systems (CNSS), or the intelligence community.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This policy is effective immediately and remains in effect until superseded.

  b.   All agencies and staff offices will align their international remote access policies and
       procedures with this policy within 6 months of the publication date.

  c.   This DR uses the term “remote client device” in place of NIST’s “telework client
       device.” The two categories of client devices used in this policy and defined by NIST
       are:

       (1) Personal computers (PC) (e.g., desktops and laptops); and

       (2) Mobile devices (e.g., smartphones, tablets).

       Note: The term “remote client device” in this DR encompasses any device in the two
       categories of devices used to remotely access USDA information systems.

  d.   USDA desktop computers within USDA facilities that access USDA information
       systems do not need the same security requirements as remote client devices that access
       USDA information systems remotely. Section 5a addresses USDA desktop
       requirements when they remotely access USDA facilities.




                                                  3
  e.   The term “controlled unclassified information” (CUI) replaces and encompasses all
       previous terms and labels for sensitive information such as for official use only (FOUO),
       sensitive but unclassified (SBU), Sensitive Security Information (SSI), and personally
       identifiable information (PII). The categories of CUI can be found in the National
       Archives and Records Administration (NARA) CUI Registry – Categories and
       Subcategories.

  f.   The term “burner” refers to a client device that cannot be sanitized to meet NIST SP
       800-88 Revision 1, Guidelines for Media Sanitization requirements and is to be used
       once; the primary use is during foreign travel to a country of high risk .

  g.   The term “Government furnished” followed by “equipment,” “device,” or their plural
       forms will be used to describe the category of devices whose security posture is
       managed by USDA. The term is used in place of “Organization-Controlled Device,”
       which NIST uses and is defined in Appendix B.

  h.   The terms “international travel” and “foreign travel” apply to trips, as well as permanent
       duty assignments in any country, territory, or commonwealth outside of the United
       States and its territories.

  i.   The term “wireless” refers to client devices, (e.g., laptops, mobile devices) and
       networking devices (e.g., access points) exchanging data through radio communication
       within a limited geographic area, such as an office building.

  j.   Wi-Fi is a trademark of the Wi-Fi Alliance.


4. BACKGROUND

  The USDA remote access infrastructure affords personnel convenient and efficient methods
  to use USDA resources from external locations. However, remote client devices used to
  perform work from foreign locations introduce additional risks to USDA information and
  information systems; therefore, these devices have additional security requirements than
  those operating within USDA controlled areas and those operating from remote locations
  within the United States and its territories.

  System owners that permit access to information systems from foreign locations must
  safeguard USDA information systems from threats arising from the lack of physical security
  controls, the use of insecure networks, and potentially compromised client devices used by
  personnel on foreign travel. Personnel using remote client devices are responsible for
  protecting them by knowing when, where, and how the devices are permitted to be used.
  Foreign governments are very skilled at collecting information even from devices that are
  turned off. Devices and sensitive information taken to foreign countries are susceptible to
  infection and compromise. Infected devices may not be discovered upon return and, if
  reconnected to USDA networks, may compromise the security of additional information. For
  these reasons, the Department strongly discourages personnel from taking devices to foreign
  countries.



                                                 4
  Personnel should be mindful of restrictions on electronic equipment that may be brought
  aboard aircraft and that the restrictions may change without notice. The Department of
  Homeland Security and, potentially, the Department of State websites may have updated
  information about restrictions on electronic equipment. Employees can obtain security and
  threat briefings prior to traveling by following the guidance below and, when on travel with
  an official U.S. passport, by scheduling a security and threat briefing at a U.S. Embassy or
  Consulate.


5. POLICY

  a.   Government furnished desktop computers, when used remotely from international
       locations to access or store USDA information, will have the same information storage,
       configuration, operational, and sanitization requirements as laptops in this DR.

  b.   International travel locations identified as “a country of high risk” are based on:

       (1) The ISSPM, based on information about the traveler’s destination in the
           Department of State Travel Advisories or Travel to High-Risk Areas web pages;

       (2) Information provided by the ASOD Threat Intelligence team; and

       (3) Information provided by Office of Homeland Security (OHS) Personnel and
           Document Security Division (PDSD).

  c.   Agencies and staff offices whose personnel travel to a country of high risk will have a
       process with OHS PDSD to obtain a high-risk travel briefing.

       (1) Personnel with security clearances will request a high-risk travel briefing by
           sending an email to pdsd@dm.usda.gov; and

       (2) All other personnel will use the OHS Foreign Travel Information web page.

       Additional responsibilities and duties described in Departmental Manual (DM) 3440-
       001, USDA Classified National Security Information Program Manual, apply to
       Information Security Coordinators (ISC) and to personnel with national security
       clearances traveling internationally.

  d.   Agencies and staff offices will ensure their personnel have international travel security
       and threat awareness information that reflects current and relevant changes to the threat
       environment for the traveler’s foreign destinations and includes but is not limited to:

       (1) Unclassified threat information obtained from the Department of State’s Travel
           Advisories and Travel to High-Risk Areas web pages;

       (2) Cybersecurity and physical threats in the foreign countries;




                                                  5
     (3) The cybersecurity controls required for remote client devices that will be used
         during international travel;

     (4) Requirements for physical protection of remote client devices and removable media
         contained in this policy;

     (5) Requirements for protection of CUI, including restrictions on printing;

     (6) Prohibited use of public wireless networks in foreign countries; and

     (7) Restricted use of Bluetooth in foreign countries.

e.   Agencies and staff offices will provide a fully patched, securely configured USDA
     wireless router to personnel whose international permanent duty station is outside of a
     U.S. Embassy, consulate, or other U.S. Federal building. The routers will include the
     following settings:

     (1) Enable Wi-Fi Protected Access 2, often displayed as “WPA2/Enterprise;”

     (2) Disable Wi-Fi Protected Setup; and

     (3) Enable strong shared key.

f.   Agencies and staff offices will use diplomatic pouches to deliver Government furnished
     devices and removable media to personnel whose permanent duty station is in a foreign
     location or when countries prohibit travelers from hand carrying electronic devices while
     traveling.

g.   Government furnished remote client devices and removable media used domestically
     will only be taken on international travel when:

     (1) Supporting USDA business functions;

     (2) The USDA employee has obtained approval from their supervisor; or

     (3) For contract support staff, the contractor has obtained approval from the
         Contracting Officer’s Representative (COR); and

     (4) When a waiver has been submitted and approved.

h.   An approved waiver will be required to take government furnished remote client devices
     and removable media to a country of high risk.

i.   Personnel whose BYOD or third-party-controlled mobile device is provisioned in
     USDA’s BYOD program will follow the requirements in DR 35xx-xxx, Bring Your Own
     Device, prior to and upon return from international travel.

j.   Agencies and staff offices that permit client devices to be taken outside the United States
     will:


                                               6
(1) Maintain an inventory of loaner and burner client devices and basic cell phones
    (non-smartphones with only voice and text capability) to be issued and used during
    international travel, or have an alternate process to harden Government furnished
    remote client devices used domestically and authorized for use on foreign travel;

(2) Assess the risk of bringing such devices and removable media into the foreign
    country, including the risks of theft, confiscation, breach of data confidentiality and
    integrity, communications intercept, the insertion of malware into the devices, and
    unsuccessful sanitization;

(3) Have procedures to:

    (a) Assess the threat capabilities in the traveler’s destinations using threat
        intelligence from the ASOD’s threat intelligence team and, when necessary,
        their agency or staff office ISC or OHS PDSD;

         Contact ASOD, 30 days in advance of travel via email to the
         cyberthreat@asoc.usda.gov mailbox to determine whether a country to be
         visited is a country of high risk.

    (b) Ensure the devices are appropriately configured based on the threat intelligence
        about the foreign destination prior to being taken on international travel; and

    (c) Arrange shipment of Government furnished devices and removable media via
        diplomatic pouch with U.S. Embassies or U.S. consulates.

(4) Configure such devices to meet domestic security controls plus the following
    international travel requirements:

    (a) Ensure basic cell phones only have voice and text capabilities;

    (b) Disable Bluetooth and wireless networking services, and instruct the user on
        how to enable these services when needed and disable them again when not
        needed;

    (c) Instruct users to conduct remote client device data communications to USDA
        information systems over cellular networks using a Virtual Private Network
        (VPN);

    (d) Enroll mobile devices into a Mobile Device Management (MDM) solution, and
        add the provisioning profile that establishes an encrypted container;

    (e) Equip laptops without an internal storage disk, but with an external hard drive
        or bootable disk image that the user can remove and store separately from the
        PC; and

    (f) When permitted by the Authorizing Official (AO), provision such devices with
        email and file space accessible only through an encrypted container.


                                          7
     (5) Identify the remote client device and removable media returning from a country not
         of high risk and:

         (a) Quarantine them from connecting to information systems and services until the
             device and media have been assessed for and deemed free of malware,
             unauthorized executables, and other changes;

         (b) Obtain approval from the Mission Area Assistant Chief Information Security
             Officer (CISO) or Information Systems Security Program Manager (ISSPM) to
             authorize moving the information from a client device or media that has
             malware, unauthorized executable code, or other unauthorized changes to
             USDA information system;

         (c) Have techniques to securely move information from the client device or media
             to USDA information systems; and

         (d) Sanitize the client device or media as specified in SP 800-88 Revision 1 if it
             has malware, unauthorized executable code, or other unauthorized changes.

k.   Government furnished remote client devices, removable media, and cell phones
     returning from a country of high risk will:

     (1) Not be connected to USDA networks and information systems;

     (2) At the agency or staff office discretion, require a forensic image made by either:

         (a) The agency or staff office security operations team if one exists; or

         (b) The USDA forensics team with Agriculture Security Operations Division
             (ASOD) Computer Security Incident Response Team (CSIRT) by sending an
             email message to cyber.incidents@asoc.usda.gov.

     (3) Be sanitized in accordance with guidance in SP 800-88 Revision 1.

l.   Personnel on international travel will:

     (1) Obtain foreign travel security and threat awareness information from the
         Department of State website, and when necessary, from OHS PDSD when traveling
         to a country of high risk prior to departure;

     (2) Take the minimum amount of CUI and authorized applications needed to conduct
         USDA business on a loaner or burner remote client device during international
         travel;

     (3) Only use removable media purchased in the 50 states or U.S. territories;

     (4) Not connect removable media used with Government furnished client devices,
         including loaners or burners, to non-Government devices;



                                               8
       (5) Not connect Government furnished remote client devices to non-Government
           equipment, including removable media, in accordance with DR 3520-002,
           Configuration Management;

       (6) Keep remote client devices and removable media within sight at all times or stored
           in a locked office or file cabinet at a U.S. Government owned and protected
           building such as a U.S. military base, U.S. Embassy, or U.S. consulate; and

       (7) Not store remote client devices in checked baggage.

  m. Transmission, storage, and printing of CUI while on international travel is prohibited
     unless the actions take place in a pre-approved secure location such as:

       (1) In a non-public room using a Government furnished local, non-networked printer;

       (2) At a USDA in-country office location; or

       (3) At other in-country U.S. Government offices such as the U.S. Embassy, consulate,
           or approved telecommunications services locations.

  n.   To minimize the opportunity for unauthorized foreign access mobile devices, and cell
       phones will:

       (1) Be powered off when not in use. If possible, the battery and the subscriber identity
           module (SIM) card will be removed and stored separately from the device; or

       (2) Be kept in airplane mode when in use and not transmitting or receiving information.

  o.   Personal Identity Verification (PIV) cards, Government furnished remote client devices,
       or cell phones lost, stolen, or confiscated while on international travel will be reported to
       the Department, agency, or staff office incident response team and the local U.S.
       Embassy or consulate immediately upon discovery. The ASOD CSIRT 24-hour contact
       information is 1-866-905-6890 or 816-823-1068, or the Cyber mailbox
       (cyber.incidents@asoc.usda.gov).

  p.   Personnel will also report the loss or theft of their PIV card to their PIV credential
       sponsor.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO) will:

       (1) Provide ongoing funding and support for the Departmental information security
           program and resources to support international travel; and

       (2) Ensure policies and procedures governing foreign travel security are developed,
           disseminated, and implemented.



                                                  9
b.   The USDA CISO will:

     (1) Oversee and ensure compliance with Federal and Departmental policies,
         procedures, and guidance on international travel issued to agencies and staff offices;

     (2) Ensure the Department’s business continuity plans and continuity of operation plans
         take into consideration risks posed by international travel and risks to USDA
         facilities located in foreign countries and territories;

     (3) Provide guidance to USDA agencies and staff offices to ensure implementation of
         and compliance with Departmental requirements for information security while on
         international travel;

     (4) Adjudicate requests for waivers from device sanitizing requirements; and

     (5) Ensure that user training includes requirements and techniques to protect and
         properly secure remote client devices while on international travel.

c.   The Director of ASOD will:

     (1) Coordinate the necessary actions to remotely track, purge, and disable lost or stolen
         remote client devices; and

     (2) Coordinate with agencies or staff offices, or conduct forensic analysis on remote
         client devices returning from foreign countries.

d.   The Director of OHS will:

     (1) Assess all requests for High-Risk Travel Briefings, and provide information only to
         personnel with a need-to-know and who have a national security clearance; and

     (2) Have a process to ensure each agency or staff office can obtain high-risk travel
         briefings and personal safety, security, and country threat information from OHS
         PDSD.

e.   Agency and Staff Office AOs will:

     (1) Be responsible for risk-based decisions regarding use of USDA-issued remote client
         devices used on and returning from international travel; and

     (2) Adjudicate and approve, only for compelling mission and operational needs,
         requests for waivers from requirements that restrict:

         (a) Whether remote client devices will be taken on international travel;

         (b) Whether remote client devices taken on international travel will have email and
             file space access to USDA information systems; and




                                              10
         (c) Whether information may be removed from remote client devices returning
             from international travel that have malware or unauthorized configuration
             changes.

f.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs will:

     (1) Ensure CISOs and ISSPMs have adequate resources including funding, personnel,
         and training to implement and support the remote access infrastructure and remote
         client device security for international travel requirements; and

     (2) Ensure remote access architectures protect the agency or staff office computing
         environments and information resources from malicious activity.

g.   Mission Area Assistant CISOs and ISSPMs will:

     (1) Ensure a quarantine environment is available for remote client devices and
         removable media returning from international travel to ensure they have been
         scanned for malware, unauthorized executable code, and other unauthorized
         changes prior to connecting to information systems;

     (2) Determine whether remote client devices or media returning from a country of high
         risk requires a forensic image before they are destroyed;

     (3) Determine whether to approve or deny requests:

         (a) To store CUI on a remote client device prior to it being taken to a foreign
             location; or

         (b) To access or use CUI in a foreign location.

     (4) Ensure processes and procedures are developed that:

         (a) Ensure personnel traveling internationally receive information on the secure
             use and protection of remote client devices and removable media specific to
             the countries to be visited;

         (b) Require personnel to comply with access control and training requirements
             prior to taking Government furnished remote client devices on foreign travel;

         (c) Implement secure configuration baselines for remote client devices taken on
             international travel based on threat intelligence and risk assessments;

         (d) Ensure approval is obtained prior to CUI being taken to, or used in, a foreign
             location;

         (e) Ensure Government furnished remote client devices that return from
             international travel cannot connect to information systems and services without




                                             11
              having been scanned for malware, unauthorized executable code, and other
              unauthorized changes; and

         (f) Ensure Government furnished remote client devices are sanitized according to
             SP 800-88 Revision 1 requirements.

h.   System Owners of remote client devices that are used for international travel will:

     (1) Develop threat models and risk assessments based on risks of using such devices in
         foreign countries. These assessments will be:

         (a) Reviewed at least annually and updated as necessary; and

         (b) Shared with system owners of remote access methods and information systems
             that allow remote access from foreign locations.

     (2) Use the results of risk assessments to implement security controls and maintain
         secure baseline configurations for their client devices that are taken to foreign
         countries; and

     (3) Document in the system security plans (SSP) the assumptions and limitations,
         security controls, maintenance requirements, and user access and privileges
         permitted when using such devices in foreign locations. This information will be
         reviewed at least annually and updated as necessary.

i.   System, Database, and Network Administrators will:

     (1) Comply with all Federal and Departmental requirements for configuring and
         updating remote client devices prior to international travel according to security
         requirements and controls for the expected travel destinations; and

     (2) Provision remote client devices with the applicable country label and add the MDM
         profile.

j.   Supervisors will:

     (1) Ensure personnel receive appropriate specialized remote access and remote client
         device security training prior to departing on international travel; and

     (2) Approve personnel to bring Government furnished remote client devices and
         information on international travel only when necessary to meet mission
         requirements.

k.   Users will:

     (1) Comply with all Departmental requirements regarding:

         (a) The proper use and protection of remote client devices, removable media, and
             encrypted containers while on international travel;


                                              12
           (b) Obtaining approval to take and use Government furnished remote client
               devices and Government information (particularly CUI) while on international
               travel; and

           (c) The proper use, storage, and transport of Government information and CUI
               while traveling and while in foreign locations.

       (2) Obtain foreign travel security and threat awareness information prior to
           international travel; and

       (3) Promptly report lost or stolen remote client devices, as well as removable media
           containing CUI or Government information of any type.


7. PENALTIES AND DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS FOR NON-COMPLIANCE

  DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, Section 16, sets forth USDA
  policy, procedures, and standards on employee responsibilities and conduct regarding the use
  of computers and telecommunications equipment. In addition, DR 4070-735-001, Section
  21, Disciplinary or Adverse Action, states:

  a.   A violation of any of the responsibilities and conduct standards contained in this
       directive may be cause for disciplinary or adverse action; and

  b.   Disciplinary or adverse action will be affected in accordance with applicable law and
       regulations.

  Such disciplinary or adverse action will be consistent with applicable law and regulations
  such as Office of Personnel Management regulations, OMB regulations, and the Standards of
  Ethical Conduct for Federal Employees of the Executive Branch.


8. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  a.   All USDA agencies and staff offices are required to conform to this policy. If a specific
       policy requirement cannot meet a specific as explicitly stated, a waiver may be
       requested. Note that an approved waiver does not bring the system into compliance with
       policy. Requests for waivers:

       (1) Are an acknowledgement of a system’s non-compliance with policy and that an
           acceptable plan to remediate the weakness has been provided and will be
           implemented.

       (2) Must be documented as indicated in the standard operating procedure (SOP) by the
           Compliance and Policy Branch, CAPE-SOP-003, Plan of Action and Milestones
           Management Standard Operating Procedure, Revision 1.1.




                                                13
  b.   Policy waiver request memoranda will be addressed to the USDA CISO and submitted
       to ISC.Outreach@wdc.usda.gov for review and decision. Unless otherwise specified,
       agencies and staff offices must review and renew approved policy waivers every fiscal
       year.


9. INQUIRIES

  Address inquiries concerning this DR to Office of the Chief Information Officer, Information
  Security Center via email to the cscc@ocio.usda.gov mailbox.


                                             -END-




                                               14
                                     APPENDIX A

                         AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


CNSS, Committee on National Security Systems Instruction (CNSSI 4009), Committee on
National Security Systems (CNSS) Glossary, April 6, 2015

Department of State, Travel Advisories

Department of State, Travel to High-Risk Areas

Executive Order 13526, Classified National Security Information, December 29, 2009

Executive Order 13556, Controlled Unclassified Information, November 4, 2010

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 United States Code
(U.S.C.) §3551, et seq., December 18, 2014

FIPS PUB 200, Minimum Security Requirements for Federal Information and Information
Systems, March 2006

Fraud and related activity in connection with identification documents, authentication
features, and information, 18 U.S.C. 1028(d)(7), 2010

Government Accountability Office (GAO), GAO-12-757, Information Security Better
Implementation of Controls for Mobile Devices Should Be Encouraged, September 2012

NARA, CUI Registry – Categories and Subcategories

NIST, Interagency Report (IR) 7298 Revision 2, Glossary of Key Information Security
Terms, May 2013

NIST, SP 800-46 Revision 2, Guide to Enterprise Telework, Remote Access, and Bring Your
Own Device (BYOD) Security, July 2016

NIST, SP 800-53 Revision 4, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems
and Organizations, April 2013 with updates as of January 22, 2015

NIST, SP 800-83 Revision 1, Guide to Malware Incident Prevention and Handling for
Desktops and Laptops, July 2013.

NIST, SP 800-88 Revision 1, Guidelines for Media Sanitization, December 2014

NIST, SP 800-111, Guide to Storage Encryption Technologies for End User Devices,
November 2007

NIST, SP 800-114 Revision 1, User’s Guide to Telework and Bring Your Own Device
(BYOD) Security, July 2016


                                            A-1
NIST, SP 800-122, Guide to Protecting the Confidentiality of Personally Identifiable
Information (PII), April 2010

NIST, SP 800-124 Revision 1, Guidelines for Managing the Security of Mobile Devices in
the Enterprise, June 2013

NIST, SP 800-125, Guide to Security for Full Virtualization Technologies, January 2011

NIST, SP 800-171 Revision 1, Protecting Controlled Unclassified Information in Nonfederal
Information Systems and Organizations, December 2016 includes updates as of February 20,
2018

Office of Government Ethics, Standards of Ethical Conduct for Federal Employees of the
Executive Branch, 5 Code of Federal Regulations §2635, et seq., (2017)

OMB, Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource, July 28, 2016

OMB, Memorandum M-11-27, Implementing the Telework Enhancement Act of 2010:
Security Guidelines, July 15, 2011

OMB, Memorandum M-17-12, Preparing for and Responding to a Breach of Personally
Identifiable Information, January 3, 2017

OMB, Memorandum M-19-02, Fiscal Year 2018-2019 Guidance on Federal Information
Security and Privacy Management Requirements, October 25, 2018

Telework Enhancement Act of 2010, 5 U.S.C. §6501, et seq., (2010)

United States Atomic Energy Act 1954, as Amended, Public Law 114-92, Enacted November
25, 2015

USDA, CAPE-SOP-003, Plan of Action and Milestones Management Standard Operating
Procedure, Revision 1.1, November 2015

USDA, CAPE-SOP-004, USDA Six Step Risk Management Framework (RMF) Process
Guide, Revision 3.0, December 7, 2016

USDA, DM 3300-005, Policies for Planning and Managing Wireless Technologies in USDA,
November 10, 2010

USDA, DM 3440-001, USDA Classified National Security Information Program Manual,
June 9, 2016

USDA, DM 3530-005, Encryption Security Standards, February 17, 2005

USDA, DR 3300-001, Telecommunications & Internet Services and Use, March 18, 2016

USDA, DR 3505-003, Access Control for Information and Information Systems, February
10, 2015


                                            A-2
USDA, DR 3520-002, Configuration Management, August 12, 2014

USDA, DR 3540-003, Security Assessment and Authorization, August 12, 2014

USDA, DR 3580-004, Securing Remote Access to USDA Information Systems and Client
Devices, November 30, 2018

USDA, DR 35xx-xxx, Scanning and Remediation of Configuration and Patch
Vulnerabilities, forthcoming

USDA, DR 3575-002, System and Information Integrity, August 16, 2018

USDA, DR 3640-001, Identity, Credential, and Access Management, December 9, 2011

USDA, DR 35xx-xxx, Bring Your Own Device, forthcoming

USDA, DR 3xxx-xxx, Controlled Unclassified Information, forthcoming

USDA, DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007

USDA, DR 4080-811-002, Telework Program, January 4, 2018

USDA, DR 5400-007, Text Messaging While Driving, September 7, 2010

USDA, OHS, Foreign Travel Information




                                         A-3
                                      APPENDIX B

                                      DEFINITIONS


Bring Your Own Device (BYOD). A non-organization-controlled telework client device.
These client devices are controlled by the teleworker, who is fully responsible for securing
them and maintaining their security. (Source: NIST SP 800-46 Revision 2)

Clear. A method of sanitization by applying logical techniques to sanitize data in all user-
addressable storage locations for protection against simple non-invasive data recovery
techniques using the same interface available to the user; typically applied through the
standard read and write commands to the storage device, such as by rewriting with a new
value or using a menu option to reset the device to the factory state (where rewriting is not
supported). (Source: NIST SP 800-88 Revision 1)

Client Device.

a.   A system used by a remote worker to access an organization’s network and the systems
     on that network. (Source: NIST SP 800-46 Revision 2)

b.   Two categories of client devices defined by NIST and used in this policy: PCs (e.g.,
     desktops and laptops) and mobile devices (e.g., smartphones and tablets).

c.   See related terms “mobile device” and “personal computer.”

Container. The file used by a virtual disk encryption technology to encompass and protect
other files. (Source: NIST SP 800-111)

Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI). Information that requires safeguarding or
dissemination controls pursuant to and consistent with applicable law, regulations, and
Governmentwide policies but is not classified under Executive Order 13526 or the United
States Atomic Energy Act 1954, as Amended. (Source: Executive Order 13556)

Destroy. A method of sanitization that renders target data recovery infeasible using state-of-
the-art laboratory techniques and results in the subsequent inability to use the media for
storage of data. (Source: NIST SP 800-88 Revision 1)

Federal Information System. An information system used or operated by an executive
Agency, by a contractor of an executive Agency, or by another organization on behalf of an
executive Agency. (Source: NIST SP 800-53 Revision 4)

Information System. A discrete set of information resources organized for the collection,
processing, maintenance, use, sharing, dissemination, or disposition of information.
(Source: OMB Circular A-130)

Malware. A program that is covertly inserted into a system or another program with the
intent to destroy data, run destructive or intrusive programs, or otherwise compromise the


                                              B-1
confidentiality, integrity, or availability of the victim’s data, applications, or operating
system. (Source: NIST SP 800-83 Revision 1)

Mobile Device. A small mobile computer such as a smartphone or tablet. (Source: NIST SP
800-46 Revision 2)

Mobile Work. Work which is characterized by routine and regular travel to conduct work in
customer or other worksites as opposed to a single authorized alternative worksite. Examples
include site audits, site inspections, investigations, property management, and work
performed while commuting, traveling between worksites, or on temporary duty. Mobile
work is not considered telework; however, mobile workers may be eligible to participate in
telework, as applicable. (Source: DR 4080-811-02)

Need-to-Know. Decision made by an authorized holder of official information that a
prospective recipient requires access to specific official information to carry out official
duties. (Source: CNSSI 4009)

Organization-Controlled Device. A telework client device controlled by a U.S. Government
organization (e.g., Government furnished equipment, Government furnished device). Client
devices in this category are usually acquired, configured, and managed by the organization.
(Source: Adapted from NIST SP 800-46 Revision 2)

Personal Computer (PC). A desktop or laptop computer. (Source: NIST SP 800-46
Revision 2)

Personally Identifiable Information (PII). Any information about an individual maintained
by an Agency, including (1) any information that can be used to distinguish or trace an
individual’s identity, such as name, social security number, date and place of birth, mother’s
maiden name, or biometric records; and (2) any other information that is linked or linkable to
an individual, such as medical, educational, financial, and employment information. (Source:
NIST SP 800-122)

Purge. A method of sanitization by applying physical or logical techniques that renders
target data recovery infeasible using state-of-the-art laboratory techniques. (Source: NIST
SP 800-88 Revision 1)

Quarantine. Isolation for devices or files that contain, or may contain, malware for future
disinfection or examination. (Source: Adapted from NIST IR 7298 Revision 2)

Remote Access. The ability for an organization’s users to access its non-public computing
resources from external locations other than the organization’s facilities. (Source: CNSSI
4009)

Remote Access Method. Mechanisms that enable users to perform remote access. There are
four types of remote access methods: tunneling, portals, remote desktop access, and direct
application access. (Source: Adapted from NIST SP 800-46 Revision 2)




                                                B-2
Removable Media. Portable data storage medium that can be added to or removed from a
computing device or network. Examples include, but are not limited to: optical discs;
external/removable hard drives; external/removable Solid State Disk (SSD) drives;
magnetic/optical tapes; flash memory devices; flash memory cards; and other
external/removable disks. (Source: Adapted from CNSSI 4009)

Sanitize. A process to render access to target data on the media infeasible for a given level of
effort. Clear, Purge, and Destroy are actions that can be taken to sanitize media. (Source:
NIST SP 800-88 Revision 1)

Sanitization. Actions taken to render data written on media unrecoverable by both ordinary
and, for some forms of sanitization, extraordinary means. Process to remove information
from media such that data recovery is not possible. It includes removing all classified labels,
markings, and activity logs. (Source: NIST SP 800-53 Revision 4)

Target Data. The information subject to a given process, typically including most or all
information on a piece of storage media. (Source: NIST SP 800-88 Revision 1)

Telework. The term ‘telework’ or ‘teleworking’ refers to a work flexibility arrangement
under which an employee performs the duties and responsibilities of such employee’s
position, and other authorized activities, from an approved worksite other than the location
from which the employee would otherwise work. Telework may be authorized for an entire
duty day or a portion of one. Telework does not include the following:

    (1) Work performed while on official travel status;

    (2) Work performed while commuting to/from work; or

    (3) Mobile work. (Source: DR 4080-811-002)

Telework Client Device. A PC or mobile device used by a teleworker for performing
telework—sometimes referred to as telework device. (Source: NIST SP 800-46 Revision 2)

Third-Party-Controlled Device. A client device controlled by a contractor, business partner,
or vendor. These client devices are controlled by the remote worker’s employer, who is
ultimately responsible for securing the client devices and maintaining their security. (Source:
Adapted from NIST SP 800-46 Revision 2)

Virtual Disk Encryption. The process of encrypting a container, which can hold many files
and folders, and permitting access to the data within the container only after proper
authentication is provided. (Source: NIST SP 800-111)

Virtual Environment. All forms of virtual remote access components such as virtual
machine, virtual device, virtual mobile device, virtual device infrastructure, virtual mobile
infrastructure, and encrypted container that ensures Federal information is under USDA
control and encrypted when necessary.




                                              B-3
Virtual Private Network. A virtual network, built on top of existing physical networks, that
provides a secure communications tunnel for data and other information transmitted between
networks. (Source: NIST SP 800-46 Revision 2)




                                            B-4
                                  APPENDIX C

                     ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AO         Authorizing Official
ASOD       Agriculture Security Operations Division
BYOD       Bring Your Own Device
CAPE       Compliance, Audit, Policy, and Enforcement
CIO        Chief Information Officer
CISO       Chief Information Security Officer
CNSS       Committee on National Security Systems
CNSSI      Committee on National Security Systems Instruction
COR        Contracting Officer’s Representative
CSIRT      Computer Security Incident Response Team
CUI        Controlled Unclassified Information
DM         Departmental Manual
DR         Departmental Regulation
FIPS PUB   Federal Information Processing Standards Publication
FISMA      Federal Information Security Modernization Act
FOUO       For Official Use Only
GAO        Government Accountability Office
IR         Interagency Report
ISC        Information Security Coordinator
ISSPM      Information Systems Security Program Manager
MDM        Mobile Device Management
NARA       National Archives and Records Administration
NIST       National Institute of Standards and Technology
OHS        Office of Homeland Security
OMB        Office of Management and Budget
PC         Personal Computer
PDSD       Personnel and Document Security Division
PII        Personally Identifiable Information
PIV        Personal Identity Verification
RMF        Risk Management Framework
SBU        Sensitive but Unclassified
SIM        Subscriber Identity Module
SOP        Standard Operating Procedure
SP         Special Publication
SSD        Solid State Disk
SSI        Sensitive Security Information
SSP        System Security Plan
U.S.       United States
U.S.C.     United States Code
USDA       United States Department of Agriculture
VPN        Virtual Private Network
Wi-Fi      A trademark of the Wi-Fi Alliance

                                         C-1
WPA2   Wi-Fi Protected Access 2




                                  C-2
