                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                        DR 3530-004
                                                                DATE:
 SUBJECT: Firewall Security                                     June 9, 2026
 OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer,                  EXPIRATION DATE:
 Cybersecurity and Privacy Operations Center                    June 9, 2031



Section                                                                                   Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                  1
2.   Scope                                                                                    1
3.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                       2
4.   Background                                                                               2
5.   Policy                                                                                   3
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                               3
7.   Penalties and Disciplinary Actions for Noncompliance                                     5
8.   Policy Exceptions                                                                        5
9.   Inquiries                                                                                6

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                    A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                   B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                    C-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the parameters for firewall configuration and
     provides guidance for the development of associated processes and procedures within the
     United States Department of Agriculture (USDA).

     Firewalls are a key component of the defense-in-depth security strategy for all information
     technology (IT) systems, networks, servers, and applications in USDA.


2. SCOPE

     This policy applies to the USDA Enterprise perimeter, USDA managed data centers,
     Demilitarized Zone (DMZ), and cloud service gateways (CSG) to control data flow between
  USDA and external entities.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This DR supersedes Departmental Manual (DM) 3530-004, Firewall Technical Security
       Standards, dated February 17, 2005.

  b.   This DR is effective immediately when published and will remain in effect until it is
       superseded, or it expires.

  c.   This DR addresses and meets the requirements of:

       (1) the Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 United
           States Code (U.S.C.) §§ 3551-3559;

       (2) DR 3185-004, Enterprise Zero Trust Architecture;

       (3) DR 3520-002, Configuration Management;

       (4) 7 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) § 2.32, Chief Information Officer;

       (5) 44 U.S.C. § 3506(b)(2), Federal Agency Responsibilities;

       (6) National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), Special Publication (SP)
           800-53 Rev. 5, Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and
           Organizations; and

       (7) NIST, SP 800-41 Rev. 1, Guidelines on Firewalls and Firewall Policy.

  d.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their USDA-supported
       firewall specifications and procedures with this DR within 6 months of the publication
       date.


4. BACKGROUND

  a.   Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) requires Federal agencies to use
       information security protections commensurate with the risk posed to Federal
       information and information systems. Firewalls are devices or programs that restrict or
       permit the flow of specific network traffic between networks or hosts. They allow for
       the enforcement of security postures across the enterprise computing environment.
       USDA is implementing an enterprise zero trust architecture (ZTA), and firewalls are just
       one layer of a multilayer security strategy.

  b.   USDA follows the specific firewall standards established by NIST in SP 800-41
       Revision 1. USDA refers to this guidance to implement all firewall standards.


                                              2
  c.   USDA uses Managed Trusted Internet Protocol Service (MTIPS) and CSG capabilities
       to connect USDANet to external networks operated by organizations other than USDA.
       This includes the cloud service providers (CSP) and commercial networks that remote
       employees use to access USDANet. There are multiple MTIPS and CSG locations
       which host firewalls and remote access services that protect the USDANet perimeter.


5. POLICY

  a.   It is USDA policy that direct connection of agriculture networks, to or from the internet
       or extranet, must go through approved USDA firewalls.

  b.   USDA IT resources must be protected from external threats using zero trust principles
       including micro-segmentation, policy enforcement points, continuous monitoring and
       threat detection or other USDA-approved DMZ network isolation protection methods.

  c.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will only use USDA-supported
       firewalls. They will ensure USDA-supported firewalls operate according to USDA
       policies between external networks run by organizations other than the USDA and the
       USDA enterprise network.

  d.   All USDA firewalls will be configured to comply with:

       (1) SP 800-41 Rev. 1, Guidelines on Firewalls and Firewall Policy;

       (2) The applicable controls in SP 800-53 Rev. 5 (specifically, Access Control (AC)-4
           Information Flow Enforcement); and

       (3) DR 3505-003, Access Control for Information and Information Systems.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) will create, implement, and
       verify adherence to cybersecurity policies.

  b.   The USDA Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) Digital Infrastructure
       Services Center (DISC) Network Enterprise Division Director will:

       (1) Follow NIST’s technical firewall standards for USDA’s IT environment;

       (2) Review and confirm that all USDA agency firewalls standards and protocols
           comply with this DR and USDA ZTA security controls;




                                               3
     (3) Perform an annual review to find and remove any inactive or dormant firewall
         rules;

     (4) Actively engage with the OCIO Configuration Control Board (CCB) in the
         preparation of exception packages, as required; and

     (5) Coordinate with agencies or Mission Areas to promote and implement the defense-
         in-depth environment within USDA.

c.   The USDA Mission Area Assistant Chief Information Security Officers (ACISO) or
     USDA Mission Area Assistant Chief Information Officers (ACIO) will:

     (1) Ensure the provisions of this DR are implemented in all USDA agency or Mission
         Area IT environments;

     (2) Oversee that all relevant USDA IT personnel are acquainted with the provisions of
         this DR placing particular emphasis on the Information Systems Security Manager
         (ISSM) and System/Network Administrators (SA/NA);

     (3) Confirm that all USDA agency security plans and internal operating procedures
         include instructions for the secure use of approved firewall protocols;

     (4) Confirm that all network traffic is denied unless explicitly allowed;

     (5) Ensure that any changes made to firewall and gateway standards undergo review by
         the agency Configuration Control Board (CCB) and are approved by the Designated
         Approval Authority (DAA);

     (6) Ensure that USDA agency personnel promptly respond to security alerts from
         firewalls;

     (7) Prepare formal exception requests for firewalls that do not meet the requirements of
         this DR, in conformance with Section 8, Policy Exceptions; and

     (8) Actively engage with the Associate CIO responsible for CSP to establish a defense-
         in-depth strategy to protect all of USDA’s IT assets.

d.   The USDA Agency ISSMs will:

     (1) Include the requirements of this DR in USDA agency security plans and internal
         operating procedures to ensure secure use of approved firewall protocols and
         standards;

     (2) Participate, via the USDA agency CCB, in the review of changes to firewalls
         standards;




                                             4
       (3) In conjunction with the USDA agency SA/NA, ensure that all remote connections
           are centrally managed, and users of remote services are fully authenticated;

       (4) In coordination with the USDA agency SA/NA, respond promptly to high-security
           alert notifications from firewalls, taking appropriate remedial action to protect
           USDA information assets;

       (5) Conduct periodic reviews, at least quarterly, of all firewalls and gateways to
           determine compliance with protocols and standards; and

       (6) Participate in the preparation of waiver packages, as required.

  e.   USDA Agency SA/NAs will:

       (1) Include all standards and approved protocols in internal operating procedures for
           firewalls; and

       (2) Promptly respond to high-security alert notifications from USDA agency firewalls
           and, in coordination with the ISSM, take appropriate remedial action to protect
           USDA information assets.


7. PENALTIES AND DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS FOR NONCOMPLIANCE

  a.   DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, Section 16: Computers,
       sets forth USDA-developed policies, procedures, and standards on employee
       responsibilities and conduct regarding the use of computers and telecommunication
       equipment. In addition, DR 4070-735-001, Section 21: Disciplinary or Adverse Action,
       states:

       (1) Any violation of the responsibilities or standards contained in this DR may be cause
           for disciplinary or adverse action; and

       (2) Any disciplinary or adverse action taken will be consistent with the applicable laws
           and regulations.

  b.   Such disciplinary or adverse action will be consistent with applicable laws and
       regulations such as Office of Personnel Management regulations, Office of Management
       and Budget (OMB) regulations, and the Office of Government Ethics, 5 CFR §
       2635.101, et seq., Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch.


8. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will conform to this policy. Any Mission Area,
  agency, or staff office that cannot meet a specific policy requirement must request a policy
  exception.


                                               5
9. INQUIRIES

  Address inquiries concerning this DR to OCIO, CPOC via CPOC-CyberPolicy@usda.gov.


                                       -END-




                                         6
                                  APPENDIX A

                     ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AC      Access Control
CCB     Configuration Control Board
CFR     Code of Federal Regulations
CIO     Chief Information Officer
CISO    Chief Information Security Officer
CPOC    Cybersecurity and Privacy Operations Center
CSG     Cloud Service Gateway
CSP     Cloud Service Providers
DAA     Designated Approval Authority
DISC    Digital Infrastructure Services Center
DM      Departmental Manual
DMZ     Demilitarized Zone
DR      Departmental Regulation
EIS     Enterprise Infrastructure Solutions
FISMA   Federal Information Security Modernization Act
GSA     General Services Administration
IETF    Internet Engineering Task Force
ISSM    Information Systems Security Manager
IT      Information Technology
NA      Network Administrator
NIST    National Institute of Standards and Technology
MTIPS   Managed Trusted Internet Protocol Service
OCIO    Office of the Chief Information Officer
OMB     Office of Management and Budget
OPI     Office of Primary Interest (also known as the policy owner or sponsor)
RAS     Remote Access Services
RFC     Request for Comments
SA      System Administrator
SA/NA   System/Network Administrator
SP      Special Publication
TIC     Trusted Internet Connections
USDA    United States Department of Agriculture
ZTA     Zero Trust Architecture




                                       A-1
                                          APPENDIX B

                                         DEFINITIONS


Configuration Control Board (CCB). A group of qualified people with responsibility for the
process of regulating and approving changes to hardware, firmware, software, and
documentation throughout the development and operational life cycle of an information system.
(Source: NIST, SP 800-128, Guide for Security-Focused Configuration Management of
Information Systems)

Defense-in-Depth Strategy. An information security strategy that integrates people, technology,
and operations capabilities to establish variable barriers across multiple layers and missions of
the organization. (Source: NIST SP 800-53, Revision 5)

Demilitarized Zone (DMZ). An interface on a routing firewall that is similar to the interfaces
found on the firewall’s protected side. Traffic moving between the DMZ and other interfaces on
the protected side of the firewall still goes through the firewall and can have firewall protection
policies applied. (Sources: NIST, SP 1800-21C, Mobile Device Security: Corporate-Owned
Personally-Enabled (COPE); NIST, SP 800-41, Revision 1)

Designated Approval Authority (DAA). Official with the authority to formally assume
responsibility for operating a system at an acceptable level of risk. This term is synonymous
with authorizing official, designated accrediting authority, and delegated accrediting authority.
(Source: Committee on National Security Systems (CNSSI), Glossary)

Enterprise Zero Trust Architecture (Enterprise ZTA). Provides a collection of concepts designed
to minimize uncertainty in enforcing accurate, least privilege per-request access decisions in
information systems and services in the face of a network viewed as contested. (Source: NIST,
CSWP 20, Planning for a Zero Trust Architecture)

Firewall. An inter-network gateway that restricts data communication traffic to and from one of
the connected networks (the one said to be “inside” the firewall) and thus protects that
network’s system resources against threats from the other network (the one that is said to be
“outside” the firewall). (Source: NIST, SP 800-82r3, Guide to Operational Technology (OT)
Security)

Gateway. An intermediate system (interface, relay) that attaches to two (or more) computer
networks that have similar functions but dissimilar implementations and that enables either one-
way or two-way communication between the networks.

Managed Trusted Internet Protocol Service. Services under GSA’s Enterprise Infrastructure
Solutions (EIS) contract vehicle that provide TIC solutions to government clients as a managed
security service. (Source: CISA Trusted Internet Connections (TIC) 3.0)

Remote Access. The ability for an organization’s users to access its non-public computing
resources from external locations other than the organization’s facilities. (Source: NIST SP

                                                 B-1
800-46, Revision 2, Guide to Enterprise Telework, Remote Access, and Bring Your Own
Device (BYOD) Security)




                                             B-2
                                          APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


7 CFR § 2.32, Chief Information Officer

44 U.S.C. § 3506(b)(2), Federal Agency Responsibilities

Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency, Trusted Internet Connections (TIC) web page

Department of Homeland Security, Trusted Internet Connections (TIC) Reference
Architecture Document, Version 2.2, June 19, 2017

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. §§ 3551-3559

FIPS PUB, 140-3, Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules, March 22, 2019

FIPS PUB, 186-5, Digital Signature Standard (DSS), February 3, 2023

Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), Request for Comments (RFC) 6303, Locally Served
DNS Zones, July 2011

IETF, RFC 6761, Special-Use Domain Names, February 2013

NIST, SP 800-41, Revision 1, Guidelines on Firewalls and Firewall Policy, September 2009

NIST, SP 800-46, Revision 2, Guide to Enterprise Telework, Remote Access, and Bring Your
Own Device (BYOD) Security, July 2016

NIST, SP 800-53, Revision 5, Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and
Organizations, September 2020, includes updates as of December 10, 2020

NIST, SP 800-57, Revision 1, Recommendation for Key Management, Part 3: Application-
Specific Key Management Guidance, January 2015

NIST, SP 800-81-2, Secure Domain Name System (DNS) Deployment Guide, September
2013

NIST, SP 800-128, Guide for Security-Focused Configuration Management of Information
Systems, August 2011, includes updates as of October 10, 2019

Office of Government Ethics, 5 CFR § 2635.101, et seq., Standards of Ethical Conduct for
Employees of the Executive Branch

OMB, Circular A-130, Appendix III, Security of Federal Automated Information Resources,



                                             C-1
November 2000

OMB, Circular A-130, Appendix IV, Analysis of Key Sections, November 2000

OMB, Circular M-08-23, Securing the Federal Government’s Domain Name System
Infrastructure, August 22, 2008

USDA, DR 3185-004, Enterprise Zero Trust Architecture, September 9, 2024

USDA, DR 3505-003, Access Control for Information and Information Systems, July 17, 2019

USDA, DR 3520-002, Configuration Management, July 17, 2019




                                             C-2
