                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


                                                                Number:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION DR 3571-001
                                                                DATE:
                                                                June 1, 2016
 SUBJECT: Information System Contingency Planning               OPI:
 and Disaster Recovery Planning                                 Office of the Chief Information
                                                                Officer, Agriculture Security
                                                                Operations Center



Section                                                                                        Page

1.        Purpose                                                                                   1
2.        Scope                                                                                     2
3.        Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                        2
4.        Background                                                                                3
5.        Policy                                                                                    4
6.        Roles and Responsibilities                                                                8
7.        Penalties and Disciplinary Actions for Non-Compliance                                    12
8.        Policy Exceptions                                                                        13

Appendix A Definitions                                                                            A-1
Appendix B Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                             B-1
Appendix C Authorities and References                                                             C-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of
          Agriculture (USDA) policy to guide agencies and staff offices in developing,
          implementing, and maintaining Information System Contingency Plans (ISCPs) and
          facility Disaster Recovery Plans (DRPs). This contingency planning policy governs the
          activities designed to sustain or restore information system operations, possibly at
          alternate sites, in the event of disruptions. In this context, contingency planning helps
          ensure the availability of information systems and the services and business processes
          supported by information technology (IT).

     b.   This policy complies with the requirements of United States Code (U.S.C.) in the
          Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. § 3541, et
          seq.; Federal Information Processing Standards Publication (FIPS PUB) 200, Minimum
       Security Requirements for Federal Information and Information Systems; Office of
       Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130, Appendix III, Responsibilities for
       Protecting Federal Information Resources; the National Institute of Standards and
       Technology (NIST) Special Publication (SP) 800-53 Revision 4, Security and Privacy
       Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations; NIST SP 800-37 Revision
       1, Guide for Applying the Risk Management Framework to Federal Information
       Systems: A Security Life Cycle Approach; and NIST SP 800-34 Revision 1,
       Contingency Planning Guide for Federal Information Systems.


2. SCOPE

  a.   This policy applies to all USDA agencies, staff offices, employees, appointees,
       contractors, and others who work for or on behalf of USDA and are responsible for
       establishing and maintaining contingency plans or performing contingency planning
       activities, specifically for ISCPs, DRPs, or both.

  b.   This policy applies to:

       (1) Information systems owned or operated by USDA, a USDA contractor,
           subcontractor, or by another organization on behalf of or funded by USDA; and

       (2) Facilities from which these systems operate.

  c.   Nothing in this policy shall alter the requirements for the protection of information
       associated with national security systems such as those in Federal Information Security
       Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), policies and standards issued by the Committee on
       National Security Systems (CNSS), or Intelligence Community Directives (ICDs).

  d.   NIST SP 800-34 Revision 1 identifies various types of contingency plans. Of those, this
       policy applies only to ISCPs and DRPs and where ISCPs and DRPs may intersect with
       those other plans, such as during a disruption or plan testing. This document does not
       apply to:

       (1) Organizational mission continuity plans defined in National Security Presidential
           Directive-51/Homeland Security Presidential Directive-20 (NSPD-51/HSPD-20),
           National Continuity Policy, except where it is required to restore information
           systems and their processing capabilities; or

       (2) Other plans mentioned in NIST SP 800-34 Revision 1, specifically, business
           continuity plans (BCPs), continuity of operations plans (COOPs), occupant
           emergency plans (OEPs), or crisis communications plans.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS




                                              2
  a.   This policy supersedes in their entirety:

       (1) DM 3570-000, IT Contingency and Disaster Planning, dated February 17, 2005;
           and

       (2) DM 3570-001, Disaster Recovery and Business Resumption Plans, dated February
           17, 2005.

  b.   This policy is effective immediately when published and will remain in effect until
       superseded.

  c.   All agencies and staff offices shall align their policies and procedures with this DR
       within six months of the publication date.


4. BACKGROUND

  In the NIST SP 800-34 Revision 1, Executive Summary, contingency planning is described
  as “…[the] interim measures to recover information system services after a disruption.
  Interim measures may include relocation of information systems and operations to an
  alternate site, recovery of information system functions using alternate equipment, or
  performance of information system functions using manual methods.”

  This document focuses on ISCPs and DRPs. An ISCP, also known as a contingency plan,
  addresses information system disruptions, whether physical or cyber, and procedures to
  recover that system regardless of the system’s operating site or sites. The ISCP identifies
  roles and responsibilities, details inventory information, and provides established procedures
  for assessing the situation, restoring and recovering the system, and validation testing of the
  system to resume secure functions and operations.

  A DRP addresses relocation of essential information system functions and operations to an
  alternate site in the event of a major disruption or damage that renders the information
  system infrastructure (electric power, telecommunications connections, and environmental
  controls) or a facility unable to support operations. This includes physical events that make a
  facility or operating site inaccessible or uninhabitable and cyber incidents that make systems
  processing infeasible at the facility. Note a DRP does not have to address information
  systems such as radio-based telecommunications that are not housed in a facility.

  Continuity plans are related to, but distinct from, contingency plans. The focus of continuity
  planning is mission and business functions or processes, whether these functions are
  supported by information systems or not. A COOP focuses on restoration of mission
  essential functions at an alternate site. A BCP addresses sustaining mission or business
  processes according to established priorities.

  Conducting a business impact analysis (BIA) is an initial process linking continuity and
  contingency planning. The BIA associates an information system with the critical mission or



                                                   3
  business processes and services provided, which in turn characterizes the impacts of a
  disruption on those processes and services. The results of a BIA drive priorities for
  continuity and recovery and the strategies and resources needed to meet those priorities.
  Information resulting from a BIA includes the maximum tolerable downtime (MTD) for each
  mission or business process, the recovery time objective (RTO), and the recovery point
  objective (RPO); the MTD, RTO, and RPO can serve as metrics for actual disruptions and
  tests of contingency plans.

  A cyber security incident may affect availability (such as a denial of service attack), or may
  impact the confidentiality and/or integrity of cyber-based information. A cyber security
  incident response plan (IRP) provides procedures for identifying, analyzing, and categorizing
  cyber security incidents, and then containing, eradicating, and recovering from incidents. A
  cyber security incident that renders information system infrastructure at a facility unable to
  support operations may trigger activation of one or more ISCPs as well as the facility’s DRP.

  Crisis communications plans provide guidance on communicating with both internal and
  external parties in the event of a disruption or an incident. These plans also designate who is
  authorized to communicate with the public and the media or issue statements.

  Although this policy addresses only ISCPs and DRPs, all planners must collaborate to
  coordinate strategies in the various plans to ensure they are effective and efficient in ensuring
  critical information, systems, and services are maintained or recoverable in the event of an
  emergency.

  Contingency plans are tested in two ways. Tabletop exercises are discussion-based and do
  not involve deploying equipment or other resources. Functional exercises test recovery and
  restoration of system operations and processing and allow personnel to practice their roles
  and responsibilities. The complexity and scope of functional exercises vary: they may focus
  on parts of the plan, specific procedures, or teams, or they may be full-scale, in which all
  elements of the plan are exercised.


5. POLICY

  a.   All agencies and staff offices shall use the security categorization impact level (high,
       moderate, or low) from FIPS PUB 199, Standards for Categorization of Federal
       Information and Information Systems, to determine the effort and rigor of ISCP/DRP
       development, implementation, and testing.

  b.   Agencies and staff offices shall acquire and maintain sufficient funding and personnel to
       ensure viable development, implementation, testing, and maintenance of their ISCPs and
       facility DRPs.

  c.   Each contingency planning/disaster recovery planning program shall identify one or
       more ISCP/DRP Coordinators, and the ISCPs and DRPs shall include complete and




                                                4
     current contact information for the responsible coordinator(s) and any alternate
     coordinator(s).

d.   Agencies and staff offices shall assign specific ISCP/DRP responsibilities to designated
     positions or personnel and identify the personnel in a contact list with complete and
     current contact information.

e.   Annual ISCP/DRP training shall be conducted for all personnel with implementation or
     execution responsibilities identified in an ISCP or a DRP.

f.   A BIA shall be:

     (1) Created for each new information system;

     (2) Updated and revised if major changes are made to the system or to the business
         processes and functions that the system supports; and

     (3) Used to determine contingency planning requirements and priorities.

g.   All USDA information systems, including those at contractor or other facilities, owned
     or operated by or on behalf of USDA, shall be covered by a current ISCP to meet the
     needs of critical system operations in the event of a disruption.

h.   Agencies and staff offices shall use ISCP templates as follows:

     (1) For cloud-hosted systems, the current template available from the Federal Risk and
         Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP) website at
         https://www.fedramp.gov/resources/templates-3/; and

     (2) For all other systems, the current template available from the FISMA data
         management and reporting tool or the Compliance, Audit, Policy, and Enforcement
         (CAPE) Resources SharePoint page for contingency planning documentation.

i.   While cyber security incident management and incident response planning are addressed
     in other USDA documents (DR 35XX-XXX, Cyber Security Incident Management, and
     Departmental Manual (DM) 35XX-XXX, Cyber Security Incident Management), the
     scope of ISCP and DRP planning shall include cyber incidents in addition to physical
     incidents, to enable response to and recovery from major cyber incidents that render
     information system infrastructure or systems unable to support operations.

j.   The scope of the ISCP shall include:

     (1) All IT components within the system boundary, as described in the security plan for
         the information system; and




                                             5
     (2) Major cyber incidents that render the information system or its supporting
         infrastructure unable to support operations.

k.   Operators of USDA facilities that serve as the primary or alternate processing site for
     one or more moderate or high impact systems shall develop and maintain a current DRP,
     ensuring that the contents of the DRP:

     (1) Identify all systems that rely upon the DRP;

     (2) Describe response activities to be taken for physical events that could significantly
         disrupt operations, including making the site inaccessible or uninhabitable, and
         major cyber incidents that render information system infrastructure at the facility
         unable to support operations;

     (3) Reference or include the site or facility physical emergency or security plan, the
         OEP, cyber security IRP, and the COOP; and

     (4) Identify the ISCP/DRP Coordinator(s) and other personnel with significant disaster
         recovery roles.

l.   ISCPs and DRPs shall be reviewed and updated at least annually to:

     (1) Reflect system, organizational, personnel, or operating site changes, or changes to
         the mission or business functions supported;

     (2) Address problems encountered during contingency plan implementation, execution,
         or testing; and

     (3) Resolve issues noted in after-action reports.

m. ISCPs and DRPs shall be tested at least annually. The type of test (tabletop or
   functional) shall be based on the FIPS PUB 199 categorization of the system or systems
   covered by the test. Test guidance is provided in the Contingency Plan Exercise
   Handbook, available for download from the FISMA data management and reporting
   tool.

     (1) For a new system, no matter what its system categorization is, a tabletop test of the
         ISCP is acceptable.

     (2) For systems categorized as moderate or high impact, a functional test of the
         ISCP/DRP shall be conducted.

     (3) For low impact systems, the ISCP/DRP test may be a tabletop exercise or a
         functional test.




                                             6
     (4) An unscheduled disruption may serve as a test, but only if the scope of the
         disruption equals or exceeds the required type of test.

     (5) The annual test may cover multiple systems, provided that:

         (a) The type of test meets or exceeds the testing requirements for the highest
             impact system included in the test; and

         (b) The test results are documented individually for each system included in the
             test.

n.   An after-action report shall be produced for each test of an ISCP or DRP.

     (1) For ISCP tests, the Contingency Plan Exercise Handbook, Appendix A, provides a
         report template.

     (2) Protection of after action reports shall be commensurate with the sensitivity or
         classification of the contents.

     (3) The after-action reports shall identify all corrective actions needed to address
         deficiencies in the plan, associated procedures, staff training, or resources.

o.   Any corrective actions that cannot be remediated within 30 days following the
     publication of the after-action report shall be entered as plans of action and milestones
     (POA&Ms) in the FISMA data management and reporting tool, per DR 3565-003, Plan
     of Action and Milestones Policy.

p.   Current ISCPs, DRPs, test plans, test results, and after-action reports shall be uploaded
     to and maintained in the FISMA data management and reporting tool.

q.   Agencies and staff offices shall ensure each information system and its data are backed
     up with a frequency consistent with the RTO and RPO for the system, unless a waiver
     for this requirement has been approved. Backups shall be tested at least annually to
     ensure system and data recovery requirements are achieved.

r.   For all moderate and high impact level systems, agencies and staff offices shall establish
     and maintain alternate storage and alternate processing sites and ensure copies of ISCPs
     are available at the alternate processing sites.

s.   System owners shall ensure that primary and alternate telecommunications service
     agreements are in place for each facility and designed to support the RTO of essential
     mission and business functions, including priority-of-service provisions for moderate
     and high systems.




                                             7
  t.   System owners of high impact systems shall ensure that primary and alternate
       telecommunications service providers have contingency plans, test the plans at least
       annually, and train their personnel in contingency plan responsibilities.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO) shall:

       (1) Provide guidance and direction for a standardized Departmentwide process for
           contingency planning; and

       (2) Direct agencies and staff offices to take risk-reducing corrective actions to
           remediate problems found during activation of ISCPS or DRPs or when testing
           those plans.

  b.   The USDA Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) shall:

       (1) Ensure the development and maintenance of Departmental contingency planning
           policies and guidance;

       (2) Ensure dissemination of Federal and Departmental contingency planning
           requirements and guidance to agencies and staff office CIOs, CISOs, and
           Information Systems Security Program Managers (ISSPMs);

       (3) Ensure the development and maintenance of a framework for evaluating and
           reporting compliance with contingency planning policy;

       (4) Evaluate and report to the USDA CIO contingency planning compliance levels at
           least annually; and

       (5) Ensure that all ISCPs and facility DRPs are tested annually.

  c.   Agency and Staff Office CIOs shall:

       (1) Ensure agency and staff office contingency planning activities are consistent with
           Federal guidance and Departmental policy and that the NIST contingency planning
           process is integrated into system life cycle activities;

       (2) Ensure that adequate resources are budgeted for all contingency planning activities
           within their area of responsibility;

       (3) Ensure that ISCP/DRP Coordinators are designated and trained annually on their
           responsibilities; and




                                              8
     (4) Identify and align the RTO and RPO for each information system with the MTD of
         business functions and services in coordination with system owners.

d.   Agency and Staff Office System Owners shall:

     (1) Ensure that program managers:

         (a) Are provided with a copy of this policy and take annual awareness training on
             contingency planning; and

         (b) Request adequate budget funding for contingency planning activities for all
             information systems in their portfolio.

     (2) Identify and align the system RTO and RPO with the MTD of business functions
         and services in coordination with the agency CIO;

     (3) Ensure BIAs are conducted for all information systems and are reviewed and
         updated at least annually to reflect changes, including MTD, RTO, or RPO;

     (4) Designate a ISCP/DRP Coordinator for each system and ensure that each
         coordinator is trained annually on system/facility-specific contingency planning
         responsibilities;

     (5) Ensure that for all information systems in their respective portfolio:

         (a) ISCPs are developed and maintained using the current applicable templates,
             correctly implemented, and updated at least annually to reflect system,
             organizational, personnel, or operating site changes, or changes to the mission
             or business functions that the systems support;

         (b) Interconnection security agreements (ISAs), memoranda of agreement (MOAs)
             or memoranda of understanding (MOUs), and cybersecurity IRPs do not
             conflict with ISCP requirements;

         (c) ISCPs document the responsibilities of the ISCP/DRP Coordinator and their
             alternate;

         (d) ISCPs are disseminated to personnel with ISCP responsibilities, and current
             copies are kept at each primary and alternate processing sites for those
             systems;

         (e) ISCPs are tested annually with a rigor consistent with the system security
             categorization, as described in Section 5 of this policy;

         (f) An after-action report is produced for every test and that POA&Ms for
             uncorrected weaknesses are created as required in Section 5; and



                                             9
         (g) Current and approved ISCPs, test plans, test results, and after-action reports are
             uploaded to the FISMA data management and reporting tool as part of the
             required documentation for assessment and authorization.

     (6) Review and approve ISCPs for the systems for which they are responsible, ensuring
         that plans are complete, up-to-date, and compliant with this policy;

     (7) Review and approve after-action reports for ISCP activation and tests;

     (8) Provide contractors, subcontractors, or other facilities (e.g., data centers operated by
         another Federal department or a state agency) with applicable contingency planning
         documents and templates; and

     (9) Ensure personnel at primary and alternate facilities are aware of the operational
         security requirements that must be maintained when an ISCP is activated or tested.

e.   Agency and Staff Office CISOs and ISSPMs shall:

     (1) Communicate the responsibilities for managing, implementing, and maintaining
         compliance with this policy to all personnel with ISCP/DRP responsibilities;

     (2) Ensure Federal and Departmental requirements for ISCP/DRP activities are being
         met;

     (3) Review and provide security input to and guidance on the contingency planning
         process, development, and implementation of ISCPs/DRPs, testing of ISCPs/DRPs,
         and ISCP/DRP training;

     (4) Assist and support ISCP/DRP Coordinators, system owners, and program managers
         with:

         (a) Developing contingency planning strategies that support the mission or
             business functions and processes;

         (b) Identifying resources and interdependencies needed to implement and sustain
             contingency planning activities;

         (c) Identifying and resolving competing priorities and resource requirements in
             ISCPs/DRPs; and

         (d) Mitigating any issues identified in ISCPs/DRPs.

     (5) Ensure proper cross-references between different types of security documentation
         and contingency plans, including system security plans, privacy impact
         assessments, ISCPs, DRPs, and continuity plans;



                                             10
     (6) Review and approve DRPs and ensure that:

         (a) The DRPs are available to all personnel with responsibilities identified therein
             and current copies are kept at each primary and alternate processing site; and

         (b) Current DRPs, associated test plans, test results, and after-action reports are
             uploaded to the FISMA data management and reporting tool.

     (7) Ensure that an after-action report is produced after each ISCP/DRP activation or
         test and POA&Ms for uncorrected weaknesses are created as required in Section 5.

f.   ISCP/DRP Coordinators shall:

     (1) Coordinate and conduct contingency planning activities in compliance with this
         policy;

     (2) Work with system owners and other internal and external stakeholders to identify
         and validate mission or business functions and processes that support or depend on
         the information system or systems;

     (3) Work with system owners, process owners, and business managers to determine the
         MTD for each system or process and the optimum RTO and RPO for each system;

     (4) Use BIA results to define ISCP requirements, strategies, and priorities;

     (5) Understand interdependencies of infrastructure and systems and the effects of those
         interdependencies on plans;

     (6) Identify and document for system owners potential recovery strategies, recovery
         procedures, and technologies to meet recovery priorities;

     (7) Analyze identified processing methods and approaches (e.g., employing alternate
         equipment or manual means, relocating to an alternate site) to ensure that they are
         compatible with the system’s management, operational, technical, and privacy
         controls;

     (8) Analyze the selected recovery strategies, measures, and technologies to ensure they
         can:

         (a) Be implemented effectively in a timely manner with available personnel and
             financial resources: and

         (b) Provide for recovery and reconstitution of information systems to a known
             state after a disruption, compromise, or failure.




                                            11
       (9) Document the formal ISCP/DRP using the current template, describing specific
           responsibilities, facilities or alternate processing methods, and other required
           elements;

       (10) Review and update the ISCP/DRP at least annually and ensure that:

            (a) Weaknesses discovered during actual disruptions or tests have been corrected;
                and

            (b) The information is current and valid regarding procedures, resources, roles and
                responsibilities, operating sites, and alternative processing methods.

       (11) Plan and ensure annual testing is consistent with the FIPS PUB 199 categorization,
            as described in Section 5 of this document;

       (12) Coordinate recovery testing of backups, including testing of backups maintained at
            alternate sites; and

       (13) Conduct or facilitate training for personnel with responsibilities identified in the
            ISCP/DRP, including providing awareness of policies and procedures.

  g.   ISSOs shall:

       (1) Review and approve the after-action reports from ISCP/DRP testing; and

       (2) Ensure that POA&Ms for uncorrected weaknesses discovered during actual
           disruptions or tests are created as required in Section 5.


7. PENALTIES AND DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS FOR NON-COMPLIANCE

  DM 3300-005, Policies for Planning and Managing Wireless Technologies in USDA,
  Chapter 3, sets forth USDA’s policies and standards on employee responsibilities and
  conduct regarding the use of wireless technologies.

  DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, Section 16, sets forth the
  USDA’s policies, procedures, and standards on employee responsibilities and conduct
  regarding the use of computers and telecommunications equipment, with further
  delineation provided in DR 3300-001, Telecommunications and Internet Services and Use,
  Section 3. In addition, DR 4070-735-001, Section 21, Disciplinary or Adverse Action,
  states:

  a.   A violation of any of the responsibilities and conduct standards contained in this
       directive may be cause for disciplinary or adverse action.




                                               12
  b.   Disciplinary or adverse action shall be effected in accordance with applicable law and
       regulations.

  Such disciplinary or adverse action shall be effected in accordance with applicable law
  and regulations such as the Code of Ethics for Government Employees, Office of
  Personnel Management regulations, OMB regulations, and Standards of Conduct for
  Federal Employees.


8. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  a.   All USDA agencies and staff offices are required to conform to this policy; however, in
       the event that a specific policy requirement cannot be met as explicitly stated, agencies
       may submit a waiver request. The waiver request must explain the reason for the
       request, identify compensating controls/actions that meet the intent of the policy, and
       identify how the compensating controls/actions provide a similar or greater level of
       defense or compliance than the policy requirement. Agencies and staff offices shall
       address all policy waiver request memoranda to the USDA CISO and submit the request
       to asoc.outreach@asoc.usda.gov for review and decision.

  b.   Unless otherwise specified, agencies must review and renew approved policy waivers
       every fiscal year. Approved waivers must be associated with a NIST security control
       and tracked as a POA&M item in the FISMA data management and reporting tool. The
       Associate Chief Information Officer (ACIO), Agriculture Security Operations Center
       (ASOC) shall monitor and approve waivers to this policy.


                                            -END-




                                              13
                                        APPENDIX A

                                        DEFINITIONS


a.   After Action Report. A document containing findings and recommendations from an
     exercise or a test. (Source: NIST SP 800-84)

b.   Authorization. The official management decision given by a senior organizational
     official to authorize operation of an information system and to explicitly accept the risk
     to the organizational operations (including mission, functions, image, or reputation),
     organizational assets, individuals, other organizations, and the nation, based on the
     implementation of an agreed-upon set of security controls. (Source: NIST Interagency
     Report (IR) 7298 Revision 2)

c.   Contingency Plan. Management policies and procedures used to guide an enterprise
     response to a perceived loss of mission capability. The Contingency Plan is the first
     plan used by enterprise risk managers to determine what happened, why, and what to do.
     It may point to the COOP or a DRP for major disruptions. (Source: NIST IR 7298
     Revision 2)

d.   Disaster Recovery Plan. A written plan for recovering one or more information systems
     at an alternative facility in response to a major hardware or software failure or
     destruction of facilities. (Source: NIST IR 7298 Revision 2)

e.   Disruption. An unplanned event that causes an information system to be inoperable for
     a length of time (e.g., minor or extended power outage, extended unavailable network,
     or equipment or facility damage or destruction). (Source: NIST SP 800-34 Revision 1)

f.   Exercise. A simulation of an emergency designed to validate the viability of one or
     more aspects of an information technology (IT) plan. (Source: NIST SP 800-84)

g.   Functional Testing. Segment of security testing in which advertised security
     mechanisms of an information system are tested under operational conditions. (Source:
     NIST SP 800-34 Revision 1)

h.   Impact. The magnitude of harm that can be expected to result from the consequences of
     unauthorized disclosure of information, unauthorized modification of information,
     unauthorized destruction of information, or loss of information or information system
     availability. (Source: NIST SP 800-34 Revision 1)

i.   Impact Level. High, moderate, or low security categories of an information system
     established in FIPS PUB 199, which classify the intensity of a potential impact that may
     occur if the information system is jeopardized. (Source: NIST SP 800-34 Revision 1)




                                            A-1
j.   Information System. A discrete set of resources organized for the collection, processing,
     maintenance, use, sharing, dissemination, or disposition of information. (Source: NIST
     SP 800-34 Revision 1)

k.   Information System Contingency Plan (also see Contingency Plan). Management policy
     and procedures designed to maintain or restore business operations, including computer
     operations, possibly at an alternate location, in the event of emergencies, system failures,
     or disasters. (Source: NIST SP 800-34 Revision 1)

l.   Maximum Tolerable Downtime. The amount of time mission or business process can be
     disrupted without causing significant harm to the organization’s mission. (Source:
     NIST SP 800-34 Revision 1)

m. Memorandum of Understanding /Agreement. A document established between two or
   more parties to define their respective responsibilities in accomplishing a particular goal
   or mission, e.g., establishing, operating, and securing a system interconnection. (Source:
   NIST IR 7298 Revision 2)

n.   Recovery Point Objective. The point in time to which data is to be recovered after an
     outage. (Source: NIST SP 800-34 Revision 1)

o.   Recovery Time Objective. The overall length of time an information system’s
     components can be in the recovery phase before negatively impacting the organization’s
     mission or business processes. (Source: NIST SP 800-34 Revision 1)

p.   Security Controls. The management, operational, and technical controls (i.e., safeguards
     or countermeasures) prescribed for an information system to protect the confidentiality,
     integrity, and availability of the system and its information. (Source: NIST SP 800-34
     Revision 1)

q.   Significant Change. Modifications to an information system or common controls that
     may trigger an event-driven reauthorization include, but are not limited to: (i)
     installation of a new or upgraded operating system, middleware component, or
     application; (ii) modifications to system ports, protocols, or services; (iii) installation of
     a new or upgraded hardware platform; (iv) modifications to cryptographic modules or
     services; or (v) modifications to security controls. Significant changes to environments
     of operation that may trigger an event-driven authorization include, but are not limited
     to: (i) moving to a new facility; (ii) adding new missions or business functions; (iii)
     acquiring specific and credible threat information that the organization is being targeted
     by a threat source; or (iv) establishing new or modified laws, directives, policies, or
     regulations. Risk assessment results and/or the results from a security impact analysis
     may be used to help determine if changes to information systems or common controls
     are significant enough to trigger a reauthorization action. (Source: NIST Supplemental
     Guidance on Ongoing Authorization: Transitioning to Near Real-Time Risk
     Management)




                                              A-2
r.   System Development Life Cycle. The scope of activities associated with a system,
     encompassing the system’s initiation, development and acquisition, implementation,
     operation and maintenance, and ultimately its disposal that instigates another system
     initiation. (Source: NIST SP 800-34 Revision 1)

s.   Tabletop Exercise. A discussion-based exercise where personnel with roles and
     responsibilities in a particular IT plan meet in a classroom setting or in breakout groups
     to validate the content of the plan by discussing their roles during an emergency and
     their responses to a particular emergency situation. A facilitator initiates the discussion
     by presenting a scenario and asking questions based on the scenario. (Source: NIST SP
     800-34 Revision 1)

t.   Test. A type of assessment method that is characterized by the process of exercising one
     or more assessment objects under specified conditions to compare actual with expected
     behavior, the results of which are used to support the determination of security control
     effectiveness over time. (Source: NIST IR 7298 Revision 2)




                                            A-3
                       APPENDIX B

           ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ACIO       Associate Chief Information Officer
ASOC       Agriculture Security Operations Center
BCP        Business Continuity Plan
BIA        Business Impact Analysis
CAPE       Compliance, Audits, Policy and Enforcement
CIO        Chief Information Officer
CISO       Chief Information Security Officer
CNSS       Committee on National Security Systems
COOP       Continuity of Operations Plan
CP         Contingency Planning
DHS        Department of Homeland Security
DM         Departmental Manual
DR         Departmental Regulation
DRP        Disaster Recovery Plan
FCD        Federal Continuity Directive
FedRAMP    Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program
FIPS PUB   Federal Information Processing Standard Publication
FISMA      Federal Information Security Modernization Act
HSPD       Homeland Security Presidential Directive
ICD        Intelligence Community Directive
IR         Interagency Report
IRP        Incident Response Plan
ISA        Interconnection Security Agreement
ISCP       Information Security Contingency Plan
ISSPM      Information Systems Security Program Manager
IT         Information Technology
MOA        Memorandum of Agreement
MOU        Memorandum of Understanding
MTD        Maximum Tolerable Downtime
NIST       National Institute of Standards and Technology
NSPD       National Security Presidential Directive
OCD        Oversight & Compliance Division
OEP        Occupant Emergency Plan
OMB        Office of Management and Budget
POA&M      Plan of Action and Milestones
RMF        Risk Management Framework
RPO        Recovery Point Objective
RTO        Recovery Time Objective
SP         Special Publication
U.S.C.     United States Code
USDA       United States Department of Agriculture



                          B-1
                                     APPENDIX C

                          AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


ASOC, Compliance, Audits, Policy and Enforcement (CAPE) Division Standard Operating
Procedure, CAPE-SOP-004, USDA Six-Step Risk Management Framework (RMF) Process
Guide, Revision 2.44, May 2015

Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Federal Continuity Directive 1 (FCD 1), Federal
Executive Branch National Continuity Program and Requirements, October 2012

DHS, Federal Continuity Directive 2 (FCD 2), Federal Executive Branch Mission Essential
Function and Candidate Primary Mission Essential Function Identification and Submission
Process, July 2013

DHS, National Disaster Recovery Framework, September 2011

DHS, National Response Framework, 2nd edition, May 2013

DM 3300-005, Policies for Planning and Managing Wireless Technologies in USDA,
November 10, 2010

DM 35XX-XXX, Cyber Security Incident Management, forthcoming

DR 3300-001, Telecommunications and Internet Services and Use, March 23, 1999

DR 35XX-XXX, Cyber Security Incident Management, forthcoming

DR 3565-003, Plan of Action and Milestones Policy, September 25, 2013

DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007

E-Government Act of 2002, 40 U.S.C. § 11331

Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) of 2014, 44 U.S.C. § 3541, et seq.

FIPS PUB 199, Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information and
Information Systems, February 2004

FIPS PUB 200, Minimum Security Requirements for Federal Information and Information
Systems, March 2006

NSPD-51/HSPD-20, National Continuity Policy, May 9, 2007

NIST IR 7298 Revision 2, Glossary of Key Information Security Terms, May 2013



                                         C-1
NIST SP 800-34 Revision 1, Contingency Planning Guide for Federal Information Systems,
May 2010

NIST SP 800-37 Revision 1, Guide for Applying the Risk Management Framework to
Federal Information Systems: A Security Life Cycle Approach, February 2010

NIST SP 800-53 Revision 4, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems
and Organizations, April 2013 with updates as of January 22, 2015

NIST SP 800-84, Guide to Test, Training, and Exercise Programs for IT Plans and
Capabilities, September 2006

NIST, Supplemental Guidance on Ongoing Authorization: Transitioning to Near Real-Time
Risk Management, June 2014

OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III, Responsibilities for Protecting Federal Information
Resources, forthcoming

USDA Contingency Plan Template, Version 1.5, October 2014

USDA Disaster Recovery Plan Template, Version 1.0, September 2015

USDA Office of the Chief Information Officer Oversight & Compliance Division (OCD),
Contingency Plan Exercise Handbook, Version 2.0, October 2014




                                         C-2
