U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE 

WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250 

 

DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION 

Number: 

DR 3565-003 

 

 DATE: 

September 25, 2013 

SUBJECT: Plan of Action and Milestones Policy 

OPI: 

Office of the Chief Information 
Officer 



 

 

 

Section Page 
1. Purpose 1 
2. Scope 2 
3. Special Instructions/Cancellations 2 
4. Background 2 
5. Policy 2 
6. Procedures and guidance 3 
7. Roles and Responsibilities 4 
8. Penalties and Disciplinary Actions for Non-Compliance 6 
9. Policy Exceptions 6 
Appendix A Acronyms and Abbreviations A-1 
Appendix B Authorities and References B-1 
Appendix C Footnotes C-1 


 

1. PURPOSE 

 

a. This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the policy of the United States 
Department of Agriculture (USDA) for identifying, assessing, prioritizing, and 
monitoring the progress of corrective efforts for security vulnerabilities found in USDA 
programs, applications and systems. National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST) Special Publication (SP) 800-30 Revision 1, Guide for Conducting Risk 
Assessments, defines vulnerability as a weakness in an information system, system 
security procedures, internal controls, or implementation that could be exploited by a 
threat source. 


 

b. A plan of action and milestones (POA&M), also referred to as a corrective action plan, is 
a tool that identifies tasks that need to be accomplished to remediate security 
vulnerabilities. The goal of a POA&M should be to reduce the risk of the vulnerability 
identified. 


 


c. This policy adheres to the guidance identified in the NIST (SP) 800-53, Revision 3, 
Recommended Security Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations, 
August 2009. 


 

 

2. SCOPE 

 

This DR applies to all USDA Information Technology (IT) systems owned, operated, or 
maintained by, for, or on behalf of USDA. This includes contractor and cloud systems. This 
DR also applies to IT programs that provide security controls for use (inheritance) by any 
USDA IT system. 

 

 

3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS 

 

a. This regulation supersedes all references to the POA&M Process in Departmental 
Manual 3555-001, Certification and Accreditation Methodology, dated October 18, 2005. 


 

b. This policy is effective as of the publication date of this document and will remain in 
effect until superseded. 


 

 

4. BACKGROUND 

 

a. The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) directs agency Chief Information Officers 
(CIOs) and agency program officials to develop, implement, and manage POA&Ms for 
all programs and systems they operate and control as part of compliance to the Federal 
Information Security Management Act (FISMA). In addition, POA&Ms must be shared 
with the USDA Office of the Inspector General (OIG) to ensure independent evaluation 
and verification of identified vulnerabilities and proposed mitigation strategies. 


 

b. POA&Ms are used at the program level to identify and track vulnerabilities across 
enterprise-level initiatives and at the system level to identify and track system-specific 
vulnerabilities. Agencies are required to update POA&Ms to reflect the current progress 
against planned remediation efforts. 


 

 

5. POLICY 

 

a. A POA&M is an agency’s primary management tool for tracking mitigation of IT 
security program, application, and system-specific vulnerabilities. 


 

b. All identified IT security vulnerabilities which represent risk to the USDA, its programs, 
systems, and information require a planned mitigation strategy in the form of a POA&M. 
Sources of weaknesses include, but are not limited to, IT and non-IT audits, testing 
security controls, continuous monitoring, and assessment and authorization activities. 



 

c. POA&Ms shall be created in the Department’s official system of record when 
vulnerabilities are discovered during any review performed by, for, or on behalf of an 
agency, including, but not limited to, program and system audits and critical 
infrastructure vulnerability assessments. (See Appendix C: 1,2,3) 


 

d. POA&Ms shall be entered into and managed in the Department’s official system of 
record when a vulnerability is identified (and evaluated for severity) and cannot be 
remediated within 30 days; however, vulnerabilities found that can be resolved within 30 
days do not require the creation of a POA&M. (See Appendix C: 1,2,4) This record shall 
contain the resources required to accomplish the elements of the plan, any milestones in 
meeting the tasks, and scheduled completion dates for the milestones. Note: All 
vulnerabilities must have an approved POA&M before completion of Step 4 concurrency 
review. 


 

e. In the case of vulnerabilities generated by automated tools/scanners the finding, 
remediation, closure and reporting may be managed in an automated tool (such as a 
vulnerability scanner and/or trouble ticket system, etc.). This also accommodates control 
of the need to know nature of the identifying information (e.g., Internet Protocol (IP) 
address, server name), location and detailed function of the device. Utilizing a system 
other than the system of record is at the sole discretion of the USDA Chief Information 
Security Officer (CISO) and access to these tools for oversight must be provided to the 
USDA CISO. In these instances, a single POA&M should be entered into the 
Department’s official system of record identifying the location of the externally managed 
vulnerability information and should be closed/renewed at least annually. 


 

f. The agency shall determine the costs and timeframes associated with mitigating the 
vulnerabilities identified in the POA&Ms. These costs shall be captured in the 
Department’s System of Record and/or in the program’s annual OMB Exhibit 300, 
Planning, Budgeting, Acquisition, and Management of IT Capital Assets, and in the 
enterprise-wide OMB Exhibit 53, Information Technology and E-Government, which are 
the funding vehicles submitted to OMB to secure an operating budget. 


 

g. All POA&Ms shall contain a unique investment identifier (UII) which is the default 
entered for the system. If the system UII is not providing the funding for the remedial 
action then the correct one must be provided as part of the POA&M entry. 


 

h. Agencies shall add POA&Ms as vulnerabilities are discovered, and closed when 
remediated thereby reflecting the latest vulnerability mitigation status for the agency. 


 

i. In some cases, a Risk Based Decision (RBD) (i.e., a determination) may be made that the 
existence of vulnerability is an acceptable risk, hence entered into the Department’s 
official system of record as an RBD, not as a POA&M. These RBDs shall be reviewed 
and concurred with by ASOC management and documented accordingly per the 
Department’s POA&M Standard Operating Procedure (SOP). These RBDs shall be 



reviewed at least annually to ensure the associated risk remains acceptable. The CISO 
retains the right to refuse renewal of all RBDs. 


 

 

6. PROCEDURES AND GUIDANCE 

 

This DR may be further shaped by other USDA regulations, manuals, or guides that contain 
clarifying procedures. USDA Departmental regulations and manuals can be found on the 
Department’s Directives Web page. Additional information can also be found in Appendix B 
of this document. 

 

 

7. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 

 

a. The USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO) shall: 


 

(1) Develop, implement, and maintain the Department’s Information Security Program. 


 

(2) Develop and maintain information security policies and procedures to address all 
applicable requirements. 


 

(3) Ensure compliance with applicable information security requirements. 


 

(4) Report annually, in coordination with the other senior agency officials, to the 
Secretary of Agriculture on the effectiveness of the agency information security 
program, including progress of remedial actions. 


 

b. The USDA Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) shall: 


 

(1) Implement and manage the USDA Information Security Program to ensure 
compliance with applicable Federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, and 
regulations. The USDA CISO reports directly to the USDA CIO and is the principal 
advisor for information security matters. 


 

(2) Perform information security duties including, but not limited to, waiver and Risk 
Based Decision (RBD) approval/denial responsibilities reserved for USDA CISO. 


 

(3) Establish, implement, maintain and review annually the Department’s process for 
planning, implementing, evaluating, and documenting remedial actions for 
addressing deficiencies in the information security systems, policies, procedures, and 
practices of the agency. 


 

(4) Review the department’s POA&M policy annually. 


 

(5) Support the agency CIO in annual reporting to the agency head on the effectiveness 
of the agency POA&M programs. 



 

c. The Associate CIO for Agriculture Security Operations Center (ACIO-ASOC) shall: 


 

(1) Establish and implement a POA&M program and process as part of the USDA IT 
Security Program. 


 

(2) Ensure guidance, tools, and strategies to assist USDA agencies in complying with 
the requirements of this policy are in place and documented. 


 

(3) Ensure the POA&M program provides administration, technical support, and training 
in the use of the Department’s official system of record. 


 

(4) Ensure management and oversight activities related to POA&Ms are in place and 
functioning in accordance with Federal guidelines. 


 

d. The Agency and Staff Office CIOs shall: 


 

(1) Establish procedures to implement this policy. 


 

(2) Provide component-level annual assurance statements and a summary of material 
vulnerabilities, non-compliance and corrective actions to support the Secretary's 
annual assurance statements. 


 

(3) Share accountability and responsibility for corrective actions with agency Program 
Officials and Chief Financial Officers, as appropriate. 


 

(4) Maintain a POA&M management program. 


 

(5) Assess and monitor all identified vulnerabilities within their agency which include, 
but are not limited to, deficiencies identified through OIG or General Accounting 
Office audit findings; risk or self assessments; Independent Verification and 
Validation assessments; or internal or external scans. 


 

(6) Ensure corrective actions are taken to resolve all identified vulnerabilities related to 
their respective mission areas. 


 

(7) Ensure adequate resources and funding is allocated for the mitigation of identified 
security vulnerabilities. 


 

(8) Ensure that POA&Ms are tied to the agency's capital planning and investment 
control process, and identified by the system’s OMB UII. 


 

e. The Agency/Staff Office Information Systems Security Program Managers shall: 


 

(1) Ensure corrective actions are consistent with laws, regulations, and USDA policy. 


 


(2) Keep the Agency/Staff Office CIO informed of status, unresolved issues, and 
required actions through agency-level identified communication channels. 


 

(3) Ensure that POA&Ms are managed according to the USDA POA&M SOP 


 

f. The Agency/Staff Office System Owners shall: 


 

(1) Manage the prompt and proper resolution of identified material weaknesses, 
significant deficiencies, control deficiencies, and non-conformance conditions that 
exist in the official's functional area, including the development, maintenance, 
monitoring, and reporting of corrective actions. 


 

(2) Maintain accurate records of the status of the identified material vulnerabilities, 
significant deficiencies, and non-conformance throughout the entire corrective action 
process. 


 

 

8. PENALTIES AND DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS FOR NON-COMPLIANCE 

 

DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, Section 16, sets forth the 
USDA’s policies, procedures, and standards on employee responsibilities and conduct 
relative to the use of Computers and Telecommunications Equipment, with further 
delineation provided in DR 3300-001, Telecommunications and Internet Services and Use, 
Section 3. In addition, DR 4070-735-001, Section 21, Disciplinary or Adverse Action, states: 

 

a. A violation of any of the responsibilities and conduct standards contained in this directive 
may be cause for disciplinary or adverse action. 


 

b. Disciplinary or adverse action shall be effected in accordance with applicable law and 
regulations. 


 

Such disciplinary or adverse action shall be effected in accordance with applicable law and 
regulations such as the Code of Ethics for Government Employees, Office of Personnel 
Management regulations, OMB regulations, and Standards of Conduct for Federal 
Employees. 

 

 

9. POLICY EXCEPTIONS 

 

a. All USDA agencies and staff offices are required to conform to this policy; however, in 
the event that a specific policy requirement cannot be met as explicitly stated, agencies 
may submit a waiver request. The waiver request must explain the reason for the request, 
identify compensating controls/actions that meet the intent of the policy, and identify 
how the compensating controls/actions provide a similar or greater level of defense or 
compliance than the policy requirement. Agencies and staff offices shall address all 



policy waiver request memorandums to the USDA CISO and submit the request to 


 

b. Unless otherwise specified, agencies must review and renew approved policy waivers 
every fiscal year. Approved waivers must be associated with a NIST security control 
and tracked as a POA&M item in the Department’s FISMA data management and 
reporting tool. The ACIO-ASOC shall monitor and approve waivers to this policy. 


 

 

-END- 

 


APPENDIX A 

 

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 

 

 

ACIO Associate Chief Information Officer 

ASOC Agriculture Security Operations Center 

CIO Chief Information Officer 

CISO Chief Information Security Officer 

DR Departmental Regulation 

FISMA Federal Information Security Management Act 

IP Internet Protocol 

IT Information Technology 

NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology 

OCIO Office of the Chief Information Officer 

OIG Office of Inspector General 

OMB Office of Management and Budget 

POA&M Plan of Action and Milestones 

POC Point of Contact 

RBD Risk Based Decision 

SOP Standard Operating Procedure 

SP Special Publication 

UII Unique Investment Identifier 

USDA United States Department of Agriculture 

 


APPENDIX B 

 

AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES 

 

 

ASOC OCD-SOP-003, Plan of Action and Milestones Management Standard Operating 
Procedure 

 

Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002 (FISMA) , 44 U.S.C. 3531 et seq. 
(2013) 

 

NIST SP 800-100, Information Security Handbook: A Guide for Managers, October 2006 

 

NIST SP 800-137, Information Security Continuous Monitoring for Federal Information 
Systems and Organizations, September 2011 

 

NIST SP 800-30 Revision 1, Guide for Conducting Risk Assessments, September, 2012 

 

NIST SP 800-37 Revision 1, Guide for Applying the Risk Management Framework to 
Federal Information Systems: A Security Life Cycle Approach, February 2010 

 

NIST SP 800-53 Revision 3, Recommended Security Controls for Federal Information 
Systems and Organizations, August 2009 (Errata May 1, 2010) 

 

NIST SP 800-65, Integrating IT Security into the Capital Planning and Investment Control 
Process, January 2005 

 

OMB Exhibit 53, Information Technology and E-Government, as amended 

 

OMB, Exhibit 300, Planning, Budgeting, Acquisition, and Management of IT Capital Assets, 
as amended 

 

OMB M-04-25, FY 2004 Reporting Instructions for the Federal Information Security 
Management Act, August 23, 2004 

 

OMB M-11-33, FY 2011 Reporting Instructions for the Federal Information Security 
Management Act and Agency Privacy Management, September 14, 2011 

 

DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007 

 

DR 3300-001, Telecommunications and Internet Services and Use, March 23, 1999 

 

 


APPENDIX C 

 

FOOTNOTES 

 

 

1. The Department’s official system of record for management of FISMA activities is 
currently the Cyber Security and Assessment (CSAM) tool. 








 

2. If an automated tool/scanner has been approved for use in managing vulnerabilities 
the remediation, tracking and reporting protocol will be specified in the agency’s 
continuous monitoring policy and/or procedures. 









