                             U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                   WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                               NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                       DR 3540-005
                                                               DATE:
 SUBJECT: Cybersecurity Risk Management Framework              June 23, 2026
 OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer,                 EXPIRATION DATE:
 Cybersecurity and Privacy Operations Center                   June 23, 2031



Section                                                                                  Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                1
2.   Scope                                                                                  1
3.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                     2
4.   Background                                                                             3
5.   Policy                                                                                 3
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                             5
7.   Penalties and Disciplinary Actions for Noncompliance                                  13
8.   Policy Exceptions                                                                     14
9.   Inquiries                                                                             14

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                   A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                  B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                   C-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) sets the United States Department of Agriculture
     (USDA) policy for a Cybersecurity risk management framework (RMF).


2. SCOPE

     a.   This policy applies to all:

          (1) Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, and USDA personnel who work for or on
              behalf of USDA. The term “USDA personnel” encompasses USDA employees,
              appointees, contractors, partners, interns, fellows, affiliates, and volunteers;
       (2) Federal data in any medium or form the USDA, or those working on behalf of the
           USDA, generates, collects, provides, transmits, stores, maintains, or accesses;

       (3) Systems or services, including cloud-based, that the USDA or those on behalf of the
           USDA use or operate. These include connections between or among data systems
           or services; and

       (4) Facilities from which these systems operate, whether the USDA or another entity on
           behalf of the USDA uses or operates them.

  b.   Nothing in this policy alters the need to protect national security systems or data.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This DR takes effect immediately when published. It remains in effect until superseded
       or expiration.

  b.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their RMF plans within 6
       months of its publication.

  c.   This policy supersedes in their entirety:

       (1) Departmental Manual 3575-001, Security Controls in the System Life Cycle /
           Systems Development Life Cycle, May 27, 2005;

       (2) Departmental Notice 3420-001, Implementation of Requirements in Authoritative
           References, April 12, 2022;

       (3) DR 3140-001, USDA Information Systems Security Policy, May 15, 1996;

       (4) DR 3540-003, Security Assessment and Authorization, August 12, 2014; and

       (5) DR 3565-003, Plan of Action and Milestones Policy, September 25, 2013.

  d.   This DR complies with:

       (1) The Committee on National Security Systems policies, directives, and instructions;

       (2) Executive Order (E.O.) 13800, Strengthening the Cybersecurity of Federal
           Networks and Critical Infrastructure;

       (3) The Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014, 44 United States
           Code (U.S.C.) § 3551, et seq.;

       (4) Federal requirements to set, enact, and enforce risk management;



                                                   2
       (5) Intelligence community policies, directives, and instructions;

       (6) National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Federal Information
           Processing Standards Publication (FIPS PUB) 200, Minimum Security
           Requirements for Federal Information and Information Systems;

       (7) NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-37, Revision 2, Risk Management Framework
           for Information Systems and Organizations;

       (8) NIST SP 800-53, Revision 5, Security and Privacy Controls for Information
           Systems and Organizations; and

       (9) Office of Management and Budget (OMB) M-24-15, Modernizing the Federal Risk
           and Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP).


4. BACKGROUND

  FISMA directs all Federal agencies to protect Federal data and systems. Agencies must
  adopt actions to offset potential risk and harm from unauthorized access, use, disclosure,
  disruption, modification, or destruction. The USDA cybersecurity program aligns with NIST
  Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) including its CSF Core, Profiles, and Tiers, and NIST Risk
  Management Framework. USDA will use the NIST RMF 7-step process.


5. POLICY

  a.   The USDA will use its Departmental RMF, managed by the Office of the Chief
       Information Officer (OCIO) Cybersecurity and Privacy Operations Center (CPOC) to
       manage cybersecurity risk.

  b.   Each Mission Area, agency, and staff office will develop, document, and enact an RMF
       plan within 6 months of this directive’s effective date. RMF plans will:

       (1) Have clear definitions;

       (2) Document the authorization boundary for internet-connected devices, operational
           technology, and industrial control systems;

       (3) Define the roles and responsibilities for key stakeholders overseeing operations and
           maintenance of assigned data systems;

       (4) Document the operational context and environment;

       (5) Document all data system exchanges;



                                              3
     (6) Align with DR 3185-001, Enterprise Architecture;

     (7) Include written enactment statements describing how required technical,
         operational, and management security controls and associated security components
         are implemented. Write the enactment statements:

         (a) In plain language that details how someone can meet security and privacy
             requirements; and

         (b) In NIST-recommended, vendor-independent, machine-readable format and
             schemas;

     (8) Include a categorization for data the system processes, including tags to link the
         data; and

     (9) Contain all data system assessment documentation. This includes the system
         security plan (SSP) and privacy plan. It also includes enactment statements via the
         agency governance, risk, and compliance (GRC) tool.

c.   USDA will track and remediate identified cybersecurity weaknesses through the plan of
     action and milestone (POA&M) process. USDA will manage POA&Ms and risk-based
     decisions (RBDs) in accordance with the POA&M and RBD standard operating
     procedure (SOP).

d.   USDA will ensure that FedRAMP-authorized cloud service offerings maintain
     continuous monitoring and vulnerability management activities consistent with
     FedRAMP ongoing authorization requirements.

e.   OCIO will provide security and privacy common controls to Mission Areas, agencies,
     and staff offices.

f.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will maintain all assessment and authorization
     (A&A) documentation in the GRC tool.

g.   USDA will ensure that required FedRAMP authorization artifacts, including SSPs and
     assessments, comply with applicable FedRAMP requirements. USDA entities can share
     and build off other USDA entity’s approved documents. USDA entities will follow
     OMB M-24-15 to reuse another entity’s approved documents.

h.   Departmental GRC and system inventory tools will produce, transmit, and ingest
     machine readable FedRAMP-related documents. The tools will use open security
     controls assessment language or any succeeding formats FedRAMP identified.




                                             4
  i.   USDA will send a copy of the authorization letter and any FedRAMP-related documents
       to the FedRAMP Program Management Office using machine readable formats.
       Submissions will follow FedRAMP guidance.

  j.   Report the costs related to issuing FedRAMP authorizations, following OMB budget
       guidance.

  k.   Relevant contracts will include General Services Administration language incorporating
       the FedRAMP security authorization requirements.

  l.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will create lessons learned from their
       programs, control activities, procedures, and tasks. They will document and analyze
       these documents annually, or as needed on a continuous basis. They will use this
       qualitative and quantitative data to gauge effectiveness and guide process improvement.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Secretary or designee will ensure that RMF includes calculations for the potential
       magnitude of harm. Harm occurs when USDA’s data or systems suffer unauthorized
       access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or destruction of data or systems.

  b.   The Chief Information Officer (CIO) will:

       (1) Establish and oversee implementation of the Departmental cybersecurity risk
           management strategy;

       (2) Oversee information technology (IT)-related annual and multiyear plan, program,
           and budget activities;

       (3) Oversee IT-related management, governance, and oversight processes;

       (4) Take on the role of Senior Agency Official for Privacy (SAOP). As SAOP, oversee
           the conduct of privacy assessments and effective enactment of privacy controls
           during system authorizations;

       (5) Adequately fund all components of the Departmental cybersecurity program;

       (6) Develop, issue, and maintain an enterprise architecture. Ensure that it considers
           data security and collective risk across the enterprise. Apply guidance from NIST,
           OMB, and the Federal CIO Council;

       (7) Assist with USDA direction and guidance for security and privacy common
           controls. This includes other risk management strategies, programs, and
           governance bodies related to department risk, as applicable; and




                                              5
     (8) Submit an annual report on the efficacy of deployed controls in privacy and security
         programs to all oversight bodies, as required. This includes the Office of Inspector
         General (OIG), the Department of Homeland Security, OMB, and Congress.

c.   The Director of the Office of Budget & Program Analysis, serving as the Chief Risk
     Officer and Senior Accountable Official for Risk Management, will:

     (1) Provide oversight of enterprise cybersecurity risk management and reporting; and

     (2) Collaborate with the CIO to ensure cybersecurity risks are integrated into enterprise
         risk management processes.

d.   The Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) will:

     (1) Incorporate RMF into the USDA cybersecurity program;

     (2) Direct the cybersecurity program. Oversee the deployment of funds and resources
         for cybersecurity risk management across the enterprise;

     (3) Manage enterprise risk proportional to potential harm;

     (4) Perform other control-specific functions assigned in directives related to this DR;

     (5) Ensure compliance with all Federal guidance; and

     (6) Along with the SAOP, oversee USDA’s direction and guidance on risk-related
         privacy common controls in other risk management strategies, programs, and
         governance bodies.

e.   OCIO Center Associate CIOs will:

     (1) Oversee the budget and business operations for systems and services; and

     (2) Serve as authorizing official (AO) for their OCIO Centers. As the AO:

         (a) Bear sole responsibility for accepting system risk. Bear sole responsibility for
             granting authorization to operate (ATO) requests for designated time periods;

         (b) Approve, review, and update all relevant data system authorization documents.
             This will occur annually or after a significant change;

         (c) Determine whether major changes in data systems or operational environments
             impel reauthorization;

         (d) Enact a quality control process for reviewing security control assessment plans.
             The process can work on a risk-based rotation or as-needed basis. Such



                                             6
              reviews will ensure that test plans incorporate required controls for each
              application’s baseline;

         (e) If the AO changes, the new AO must review the risk documentation for each
             system under their purview. The new AO will then issue an updated
             authorization memorandum to cover the current ATO’s duration; and

         (f) Maintain and update relevant documentation in USDA’s GRC tool.

f.   The USDA Inspector General will:

     (1) Evaluate the USDA data security program annually. Do this by testing the efficacy
         of data security policies, procedures, and practices. Use a representative subset of
         USDA’s systems and services to perform the test; and

     (2) Coordinate with the CIO, the CISO, and other USDA officials, as appropriate, on
         matters of data security.

g.   The Director of the Office of Homeland Security will:

     (1) Oversee and manage physical security risks; and

     (2) Coordinate with the USDA CIO and CISO on physical cybersecurity risk
         management.

h.   The Chief Human Capital Officer of the Office of Human Resources Management will:

     (1) Assist and advise agencies on data security position designations; and

     (2) Define appropriate sanctions for personnel who violate data security policies.

i.   The Chief Privacy Officer will:

     (1) In coordination with the CISO, oversee development, approval, enactment,
         maintenance, and management of privacy policies, program plans, and procedures;

     (2) Select and enact privacy common controls and hybrid controls. Document them in
         the GRC tool;

     (3) Ensure that privacy common controls and hybrid controls undergo annual
         evaluations;

     (4) Oversee and direct the privacy program set up of continuous monitoring. The
         purpose of continuous monitoring is to assess privacy controls, maintain ongoing
         awareness, and manage privacy risks;




                                             7
     (5) Coordinate with the CISO, the Cyber Defense Operations Division (CDOD)
         Director, and Mission Area Assistant CIOs and CISOs during privacy-related
         incidents;

     (6) Advise the SAOP on privacy matters. Report on the efficacy of privacy controls
         deployed in USDA systems; and

     (7) In coordination with the CISO, oversee USDA’s direction and guidance on risk-
         related privacy common controls in other risk management strategies, programs,
         and governance bodies.

j.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs will:

     (1) Advise the CIO and CISO on any issues of potential public concern, infrastructure
         protection, or flaws;

     (2) Establish the data security program and the associated operational data resources
         plan under their purview;

     (3) Make sure IT security risk evaluation, documentation, enactment, and management
         transpire in their purview;

     (4) Ensure sufficient funding for mitigations;

     (5) Ensure compliance with all Federal and Departmental requirements;

     (6) Review and update documentation at least annually;

     (7) Designate RMF responsibilities. Ensure accountability for roles within their
         Mission Area, including any deputies or alternates, or those acting in those roles;

     (8) Ensure that Mission Area RMF roles meet requisite professional qualifications and
         appropriate security clearance levels;

     (9) Serve as AO for their Mission Area. The AO cannot delegate formal acceptance of
         risks, approval of waiver requests, or ATO issuance;

     (10) Confer with another AO for joint approval of high value assets that require two
          AOs;

     (11) Define and address data security impact, requirements, and concerns during IT gate
          reviews;

     (12) Ensure that each system’s documentation passes through a review, validation, and
          approval. Provide the documentation in reports, as required;




                                             8
     (13) Develop and maintain a security architecture aligned with the USDA enterprise
          architecture. Base it on current risk assessments and security requirements; and

     (14) Oversee the budget and business operations for systems and services in their
          purview.

k.   Mission Area Assistant CISOs will:

     (1) Along with the CISO, enact, manage, measure, and oversee all components of the
         USDA cybersecurity program at the Mission Area level;

     (2) Serve as the principal information security specialist and consultant to all personnel
         and users within their purview;

     (3) Support configuration management in alignment with enterprise architecture;

     (4) Develop, enact, annually review, and update the tailored Mission Area information
         security program plan and procedures;

     (5) Use the GRC tool to manage and measure the tailored Mission Area information
         security program efficacy;

     (6) Manage the applicable security controls for each Mission Area system;

     (7) Formally designate a System Owner and an Information System Security Manager
         (ISSM) for each system annotating the function in the agency systems;

     (8) Ensure that their critical infrastructure’s security and contingency plans incorporate
         data security;

     (9) Ensure that USDA internal and external systems and services use the same data
         security and risk management standards;

     (10) Conduct a full assessment of enacted controls and control enhancements to
          determine effectiveness;

     (11) Provide input to RMF activities and related documentation. These include system
          life cycle support plans, operational procedures, and maintenance training materials;

     (12) Participate in the risk governance process to provide security risks, mitigations, and
          input on other technical risks;

     (13) Prepare reports for security and privacy assessment findings;

     (14) Submit required compliance reports to USDA senior officials, and OIG, OMB,
          Government Accountability Office, and other oversight bodies upon request; and



                                             9
     (15) Ensure that all personnel in the Mission Area take annual information security
          awareness training. Ensure that they also take, when appropriate, role-based
          training.

l.   AO Designated Representatives will:

     (1) Assist the AO with direction and guidance on security and privacy common
         controls pertinent to Departmental risk;

     (2) Coordinate routine activities associated with RMF and A&A processes to protect
         systems and services;

     (3) Review risk-based decision requests and recommend approval or disapproval to the
         AO; and

     (4) Review SSPs and recommend approval or disapproval to the AO.

m. Mission Area Privacy Officers will:

     (1) Serve as the CPO’s main point of contact to enact the USDA Privacy Office’s
         policies and directives;

     (2) Prepare privacy compliance documentation as directed by the USDA Privacy Office
         policy or required by law;

     (3) Identify privacy issues related to Mission Area programs. Apply appropriate
         privacy policies and federal privacy laws to the relative programs;

     (4) Monitor the Mission Area’s compliance with all applicable federal privacy laws and
         regulations; and

     (5) Enact and manage the privacy incident management process for your Mission Area.

n.   The OCIO CPOC, Security Management Division (SMD) will:

     (1) Serve as the USDA FedRAMP Program Management Office;

     (2) Regularly review continuous monitoring materials that cloud service providers
         submit. Provide timely and actionable feedback as necessary to manage risk to
         USDA; and

     (3) Along with the CISO, enact, manage, and oversee the RMF activities, processes,
         practices, and tasks defined in enterprise policies.

o.   The CPOC Cybersecurity Policy & Strategy Program will:



                                            10
     (1) Support oversight of the agency’s procedural alignment with enterprise security and
         privacy policies;

     (2) Oversee development of the USDA cybersecurity risk management strategy to
         enact RMF-supporting control activities, procedures, and tasks; and

     (3) Update policies and strategies to support cybersecurity program fulfillment.

p.   The Director of CDOD will:

     (1) Respond appropriately to incidents and data breaches, coordinating with senior
         officials as needed; and

     (2) Assist with maintaining a USDA risk posture aligned with requirements.

q.   The OCIO, CPOC Cybersecurity Infrastructure Division will assist with system,
     network, and infrastructure security maintenance.

r.   Enterprise Architects will:

     (1) Enact an architecture strategy that enables effective security and privacy solutions;

     (2) Assist with integration of the USDA risk management strategy with system-level
         security and privacy requirements. Ensure alignment with program planning and
         budgeting activities, the system development life cycle (SDLC), acquisition
         processes, and systems engineering processes;

     (3) Coordinate with Mission Area security and privacy architects to determine optimal
         system or component placement in the enterprise architecture. Address security and
         privacy issues between systems and enterprise architecture;

     (4) Assist with decisions on appropriate control applications and initial configuration
         baselines as they relate to the enterprise architecture; and

     (5) In coordination with System Owners and AOs, facilitate authorization boundary
         decisions and controls allocation to system elements.

s.   Common Control Providers will:

     (1) Enact, assess, and monitor common controls from a holistic organization
         perspective;

     (2) Document organization-defined common controls in security and privacy plans (or
         equivalent documents that the USDA prescribes);




                                            11
     (3) Employ independent assessors to conduct control assessments; and

     (4) Document assessment findings in control assessment reports.

t.   ISSMs will:

     (1) Set rules for data’s acceptable use, creation, storage, processing, sharing, and
         protection within their purview;

     (2) Carry out assigned RMF-related data security planning, management, and
         operational responsibilities;

     (3) Coordinate with System Owners to set roles, privileges, access levels, and required
         controls. This work will protect the system’s generated, used, stored, transmitted,
         or otherwise processed data; and

     (4) Coordinate with and offer guidance to agency personnel on managing the life cycle
         activities and data security.

u.   System Owners will:

     (1) Manage and coordinate SDLC activities for the assigned USDA system using
         principles of criticality and sensitivity;

     (2) Coordinate with system stakeholders to furnish RMF activities;

     (3) Manage and coordinate RMF control processes, practices, and tasks when
         deploying security and privacy controls documented in an SSP;

     (4) Update SSPs to address:

         (a) System changes;

         (b) The operational environment;

         (c) Possible application problems; or

         (d) Control assessment issues;

     (5) Review SSPs annually. Distribute copies of SSPs. Communicate SSP updates to
         pertinent stakeholders;

     (6) Protect SSPs with a moderate risk rating from unauthorized disclosure or
         modification;




                                             12
(7) Clearly define their authorization boundary in SSPs and other applicable security
    documentation;

(8) Prepare authorization packages for annual AO review and for reauthorization of a
    system every 3 years;

(9) Define the roles and responsibilities of key stakeholders tasked with data systems
    operation and maintenance;

(10) Document each system’s operational context, environment, and data exchanges;

(11) Align with DR 3185-001;

(12) Include a data categorization that the system processes. Select appropriate tags to
     link the data;

(13) Develop written enactment statements. Include requisite technical, operational, and
     management security controls. Include associated security components. Write the
     enactment statements:

    (a) In plain language that details how someone can meet security requirements;
        and

    (b) In NIST-recommended, vendor-independent, machine-readable format and
        schemas;

(14) Document and analyze qualitative and quantitative data derived from lessons
     learned after deploying controls and assessments;

(15) Store and access all documentation related to the data system assessment via the
     agency’s GRC tool;

(16) Manage POA&Ms and coordinate remediation activitiesin accordance with the
     POA&M and RBD SOP;

(17) Manage the development, documentation, and dissemination of maintenance
     procedures;

(18) Schedule, document, and review records of maintenance, repair, and replacement
     on system components. Ensure that these align with manufacturer or vendor
     specifications and organizational requirements;

(19) Approve and monitor all maintenance activities. Do this whether these happen on-
     site or remotely. Do this whether the system or system components receive service
     on-site or off-site;




                                       13
       (20) Approve, control, and monitor the use of system maintenance tools; and

       (21) Review previously approved system maintenance tools.

  v.   Information System Security Officers will:

       (1) Support the System Owner in all security functions assigned in this DR. Make sure
           RMF and system life cycle activities, processes, practices and tasks undergo proper
           enactment; and

       (2) Support the System Owner in other duties assigned under other USDA directives
           and Federal guidance.


7. PENALTIES AND DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS FOR NONCOMPLIANCE

  a.   DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, Section 16, Computers, sets
       forth policies, procedures, and standards on employee responsibilities and conduct as
       regards using computers and telecommunication equipment. In addition, DR 4070-735-
       001, Section 21, Disciplinary or Adverse Action, states:

       (1) Any violation of the responsibilities or standards contained in this DR may be cause
           for disciplinary or adverse action; and

       (2) Any disciplinary or adverse action taken will be consistent with the applicable laws
           and regulations.

  b.   Such disciplinary actions will follow applicable laws and regulations. These include
       those from the Office of Personnel Management, OMB, and 5 Code of Federal
       Regulations § 2635, Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive
       Branch.


8. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will conform to this policy. Any Mission
  Area, agency, or staff office that cannot meet a specific policy requirement must request a
  policy exception. To do so, email the OCIO CPOC, SMD, Risk Management Branch at
  POAMProgram@usda.gov. Note that an approved risk-based decision is an acceptance of
  risk but does not equal compliance.


9. INQUIRIES

  Send any questions or concerns about this DR to the OCIO, CPOC, via CPOC-Cyber
  Policy@usda.gov.



                                              14
-END-




 15
                                APPENDIX A

                    ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


A&A        Assessment and Authorization
AO         Authorizing Official
ATO        Authorization to Operate
CDOD       Cyber Defense Operations Division
CIO        Chief Information Officer
CISO       Chief Information Security Officer
CPOC       Cybersecurity and Privacy Operations Center
CSF        Cyber Security Framework
DR         Departmental Regulation
E.O.       Executive Order
FedRAMP    Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program
FIPS PUB   Federal Information Processing Standards Publication
FISMA      Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014
GRC        Governance, Risk, and Compliance
ISSM       Information System Security Manager
IT         Information Technology
NIST       National Institute of Standards and Technology
NISTIR     National Institute of Standards and Technology Interagency Report
OCIO       Office of the Chief Information Officer
OIG        Office of Inspector General
OMB        Office of Management and Budget
RMF        Risk Management Framework
SAOP       Senior Agency Official for Privacy
SDLC       System Development Life Cycle
SMD        Security Management Division
SOP        Standard Operating Procedure
SP         Special Publication
SSP        System Security Plan
U.S.C.     United States Code
USDA       United States Department of Agriculture




                                      A-1
                                           APPENDIX B

                                          DEFINITIONS


Common Control Provider. An official responsible for the development, implementation,
assessment, and monitoring of common controls. Common controls can include, e.g., security
controls inherited by information systems. (Source: NIST SP 800-37, Revision 2)

Common Controls. A security control inherited by one or more organizational information
systems. (Source: NIST SP 800-37, Revision 2)

Continuous Monitoring. Maintaining ongoing awareness of information security, vulnerabilities,
and threats. This supports organizational risk management decisions. (Source: NIST SP 800-
137)

Criticality. An attribute of an asset that reflects its relative importance or necessity in achieving,
or allowing the achievement of, stated goals. (Source: NIST SP 800-160, Volume 2, Revision 1,
Developing Cyber-Resilient Systems: A Systems Security Engineering Approach)

Cyber Security Core. A taxonomy of high-level cybersecurity outcomes that can help any
organization manage its cybersecurity risks. Its components are a hierarchy of Functions,
Categories, and Subcategories that detail each outcome. (Source: NIST CSF 2.0)

Cyber Security Profile. A mechanism for describing an organization’s current and/or target
cybersecurity posture in terms of the CSF Core’s outcomes. (Source: NIST CSF 2.0)

Cyber Security Tier. A characterization of the rigor of an organization’s cybersecurity risk
governance and management practices. There are four Tiers: Partial (Tier 1), Risk Informed
(Tier 2), Repeatable (Tier 3), and Adaptive (Tier 4). (Source: NIST CSF 2.0)

Risk. The level of impact on agency operations, agency assets, or individuals resulting from
operating an information system, given the potential impact of a threat and its likelihood.
Agency operations can include mission, functions, image, or reputation. (Source: NIST SP 800-
30, Revision 1, Guide for Conducting Risk Assessments)

Risk Assessment. The process of identifying risks to agency operations, agency assets, or
individuals. This is done by determining the probability of occurrence, the resulting impact, and
additional security controls that would mitigate the impact. Agency operations can include
mission, functions, image, or reputation. Risk assessment is part of risk management. It
incorporates threat and vulnerability analyses. It is synonymous with risk analysis. (Source:
NIST SP 800-18, Revision 1, Guide for Developing Security Plans for Federal Information
Systems)

Security Controls. The management, operational, and technical controls (i.e., safeguards or
countermeasures) prescribed for a system. Their purpose is to protect the confidentiality,



                                                 B-1
integrity, and availability of the system and its components, processes, and data. (Source: NIST
SP 800-82, Revision 3)

Sensitivity. The degree to which an IT system or application requires protection to ensure
confidentiality, integrity, and availability. This is determined by evaluating the nature and
criticality of the data processed, the relation of the system to the organization’s missions, and the
economic value of the system components. (Source: NIST SP 800-16, Volume 1, Revision 1,
Information Technology Security Training Requirements: A Role- and Performance-Based
Model)




                                                B-2
                                        APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


E.O. 13800, Strengthening the Cybersecurity of Federal Networks and Critical Infrastructure,
May 11, 2017

E.O. 14028, Executive Order on Improving the Nation’s Cybersecurity, May 12, 2021

E.O. 14144, Strengthening and Promoting Innovation in the Nation's Cybersecurity, January 16,
2025

E.O. 14306, Sustaining Select Efforts To Strengthen the Nation's Cybersecurity and Amending
Executive Order 13694 and Executive Order 14144, June 6, 2025

FISMA, 44 U.S.C. §§ 3551-3559

NIST, FIPS PUB 199, Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information and
Information Systems, February 2004, as amended

NIST, FIPS PUB 200, Minimum Security Requirements for Federal Information and Information
Systems, March 9, 2006, as amended

NIST, NIST Cybersecurity Framework, website

NIST, NISTIR 7693, Specification for Asset Identification 1.1, June 2011

NIST, NIST Risk Management Framework, November 30, 2016, updated December 13, 2023,
website

NIST, SP 800-12, Revision 1, An Introduction to Information Security, June 2017

NIST, SP 800-16, Volume 1, Revision 1, Information Technology Security Training
Requirements: A Role- and Performance-Based Model, April 1998

NIST, SP 800-18, Revision 1, Guide for Developing Security Plans for Federal Information
Systems, February 2006, as amended

NIST, SP 800-30, Revision 1, Guide for Conducting Risk Assessments, September 2012, as
amended

NIST, SP 800-34, Revision 1, Contingency Planning Guide for Federal Information Systems,
May 2010, as amended



                                             C-1
E.O. 13800, Strengthening the Cybersecurity of Federal Networks and Critical Infrastructure,
May 11, 2017



E.O. 14028, Executive Order on Improving the Nation’s Cybersecurity, May 12, 2021

E.O. 14144, Strengthening and Promoting Innovation in the Nation's Cybersecurity, January 16,
2025

E.O. 14306, Sustaining Select Efforts To Strengthen the Nation's Cybersecurity and Amending
Executive Order 13694 and Executive Order 14144, June 6, 2025

FISMA, 44 U.S.C. §§ 3551-3559

NIST, FIPS PUB 199, Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information and
Information Systems, February 2004, as amended

NIST, FIPS PUB 200, Minimum Security Requirements for Federal Information and Information
Systems, March 9, 2006, as amended

NIST, NIST Cybersecurity Framework, website

NIST, NISTIR 7693, Specification for Asset Identification 1.1, June 2011

NIST, NIST Risk Management Framework, November 30, 2016, updated December 13, 2023,
website

NIST, SP 800-12, Revision 1, An Introduction to Information Security, June 2017

NIST, SP 800-16, Volume 1, Revision 1, Information Technology Security Training
Requirements: A Role- and Performance-Based Model, April 1998

NIST, SP 800-18, Revision 1, Guide for Developing Security Plans for Federal Information
Systems, February 2006, as amended

NIST, SP 800-30, Revision 1, Guide for Conducting Risk Assessments, September 2012, as
amended

NIST, SP 800-34, Revision 1, Contingency Planning Guide for Federal Information Systems,
May 2010, as amended

NIST, SP 800-37, Revision 2, Risk Management Framework for Information Systems and
Organizations: A System Life Cycle Approach for Security and Privacy, December 2018, as
amended


                                             C-2
NIST, SP 800-39, Managing Information Security Risk: Organization, Mission, and Information
System View, March 2011, as amended

NIST, SP 800-47, Revision 1, Managing the Security of Information Exchanges, July 2021, as
amended

NIST, SP 800-53, Revision 5, Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and
Organizations, September 2020,

NIST, SP 800-60, Volume 1, Revision 1, Guide for Mapping Types of Information and
Information Systems to Security Categories, August 2008, as amended

NIST, SP 800-60, Volume 2, Revision 1, Appendices to Guide for Mapping Types of Information
and Information Systems to Security Categories, August 2008, as amended

NIST, SP 800-82, Revision 3, Guide to Operational Technology (OT) Security, September 28,
2023

NIST, SP 800-137, Information Security Continuous Monitoring (ISCM) for Federal Information
Systems and Organizations, September 2011, as amended

NIST, SP 800-137A, Assessing Information Security Continuous Monitoring (ISCM) Programs:
Developing an ISCM Program Assessment, May 21, 2020

NIST, SP 800-160v1r1, Engineering Trustworthy Secure Systems, November 2022, as amended

NIST, SP 800-160, Volume 2, Revision 1, Developing Cyber-Resilient Systems: A Systems
Security Engineering Approach, December 2021

NIST, SP 800-175B, Revision 1, Guideline for Using Cryptographic Standards in the Federal
Government: Cryptographic Mechanisms, March 2020

NIST, SP 800-213, IoT Device Cybersecurity Guidance for the Federal Government:
Establishing IoT Device Cybersecurity Requirements, November 2021

NIST, SP 800-213a, IoT Device Cybersecurity Guidance for the Federal Government: IoT
Device Cybersecurity Requirement Catalog, November 2021

OMB, A-123, Management Accountability and Control, found on the Circulars web page;
updated by M-16-17; modified by M-17-26

OMB, A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource, July 28, 2016

OMB, M-02-01, Guidance for Preparing and Submitting Security Plans of Action and
Milestones, October 17, 2001



                                            C-3
OMB, M-03-22, OMB Guidance for Implementing the Privacy Provisions of the E-Government
Act of 2002, September 26, 2003

OMB, M-16-17, OMB Circular No. A-123, Management's Responsibility for Enterprise Risk
Management and Internal Control, July 15, 2016

OMB, M-24-15, Modernizing the Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program, July
25, 2024

USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System, January 4, 2018, as amended

USDA, DR 3105-001, USDA Chief Information Officers Council, October 23, 2024, as amended

USDA, DR 3130-013, Information Technology Capital Planning and Investment Control, May
24, 2021, as amended

USDA, DR 3185-001, Enterprise Architecture, April 19, 2022

USDA, DR 3185-004, Enterprise Zero Trust Architecture, September 9, 2024

USDA, DR 3520-002, Configuration Management, July 17, 2019

USDA, DR 3505-003, Access Control for Information and Information Systems, July 17, 2019

USDA, DR 3505-005, Cybersecurity Incident Management, November 30, 2018

USDA, DR 3530-006, Scanning and Remediation of Configuration and Patch Vulnerabilities,
June 5, 2019

USDA, DR 3545-001, Information Security Awareness (ISA) Program, October 25, 2023

USDA, DR 3650-001, Cloud Computing, May 24, 2023

USDA, DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007, as
amended

USDA, Information Security Continuous Monitoring Strategy Fiscal Years 2025–2028,
September 2024

USDA, Plan of Action & Milestones and Risk-Based Decisions Standard Operating Procedures,
March 19, 2026

USDA, Risk Management Framework Guide, June 10, 2025




                                           C-4
