                             U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                   WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                  NUMBER:
     DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                      DR 3505-005
                                                                  DATE:
     SUBJECT: Cybersecurity Incident Management                   November 30, 2018
     OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer, Information    EXPIRATION DATE:
     Security Center                                              November 30, 2023



Section                                                                                       Page

1.     Purpose                                                                                   1
2.     Special Instructions/Cancellation                                                         2
3.     Background                                                                                3
4.     Scope                                                                                     3
5.     Policy                                                                                    4
6.     Roles and Responsibilities                                                                7
7.     Penalties and Disciplinary Actions for Non-Compliance                                    21
8.     Policy Exceptions                                                                        21
9.     Inquiries                                                                                22

Appendix A Authorities and References                                                          A-1
Appendix B Definitions                                                                         B-1
Appendix C Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                          C-1



1. PURPOSE

      a.   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of
           Agriculture (USDA) policy for preparing for, responding to, and reporting cybersecurity
           incidents. Cybersecurity incident management governs the activities for mitigating risks
           from such incidents before substantial harm occurs and provides timely notification to
           and consultation with appropriate entities.

      b.   It is the policy of USDA to comply with Federal requirements to establish, implement,
           and enforce an incident management policy to continually manage risks to USDA
           information resources.

      c.   This policy complies with the requirements of:

           (1) The Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA);
       (2) The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130, Responsibilities for
           Protecting Federal Information Resources, Memoranda M-19-02, Fiscal Year
           2018-2019 Guidance on Federal Information Security and Privacy Management
           Requirements, and M-17-12, Preparing for and Responding to a Breach of
           Personally Identifiable Information;

       (3) The Federal Information Processing Standards Publication (FIPS PUB) 200,
           Minimum Security Requirements for Federal Information and Information Systems;
           and

       (4) The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Special Publication
           (SP) 800-53 Revision 4, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information
           Systems and Organizations, and NIST SP 800-61 Revision 2, Computer Security
           Incident Handling Guide.

  d.   This policy serves as the foundation on which USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
       offices will develop and implement their own incident management procedures that
       comply with Federal and Departmental requirements and align with USDA’s incident
       management policy.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATION

  a.   This policy supersedes DR 3505-005, USDA Cyber Security Incident Management
       Policy, dated October 31, 2013, in its entirety.

  b.   This policy is effective immediately and remains in effect until it is superseded or
       expires.

  c.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their incident management
       procedures with this policy within 6 months of the publication date.

  d.   Terminology in this policy will be used and interpreted as follows:

       (1) The term “misuse” broadly refers to improper usage of information or information
           resources in violation of rules, regulations, or policies;

       (2) The terms “potential,” “suspected,” and “imminent” with respect to threats and
           incidents are distinct. “Potential” refers to a currently unrealized ability and is
           nearly synonymous with “possible;” an example is a potential threat. “Suspected”
           implies a slight indication that something might be true or there is a reasonable
           basis for believing so; in other words, incidents may be suspected, as opposed to
           being confirmed (positively identified) or actual. “Imminent,” as explained by
           NIST SP 800-61 Revision 2, refers to a situation in which there is a factual basis for
           believing that a specific event is about to occur; attacks from a zero-day exploit of a
           vulnerability can be imminent;



                                               2
       (3) The terms “response” and “incident response” may be specific and narrow or
           general and broad in meaning. The general and broad meaning encompasses
           multiple incident management activities, including analysis, notification,
           mitigation, or application of countermeasures, containment, eradication, and
           recovery. The specific and narrow meaning is any one of these activities. NIST
           uses the terms “incident response” and “incident handling” as synonyms; and

       (4) The term “United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team” (US-CERT) will
           be used as a replacement for “the Federal information security incident center”
           identified in FISMA.


3. BACKGROUND

  OMB Circular A-130 requires Federal Agencies to undertake a set of actions to ensure they
  can react appropriately to information security incidents. The set includes implementing
  policies and procedures; establishing roles and responsibilities; maintaining incident response
  capabilities and mechanisms; reporting; periodic testing of the procedures; documenting
  lessons learned; and verifying that corrective actions are implemented.

  FISMA directs Federal Agencies to develop and implement cyber incident management
  programs. FISMA also imposes on Federal Agencies notification measures to be taken
  during major incidents and annual incident reporting requirements. FISMA assigns
  responsibility to the Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) for
  developing and overseeing the implementation of binding (i.e., compulsory) operational
  directives to Federal Agencies to implement OMB-issued policies, principles, standards, and
  guidelines on information security in general.


4. SCOPE

  a.   This policy applies to:

       (1) All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, employees, appointees,
           contractors, and others who work for, or on behalf of, USDA;

       (2) All Federal information, in any medium or form, generated, collected, provided,
           transmitted, stored, maintained, or accessed by, or on behalf of, USDA;

       (3) Information systems or services (including cloud-based services) used or operated
           by USDA, USDA contractors, or other organizations on behalf of, or funded by,
           USDA and interconnections between or among systems or services;

       (4) Cyber-based information, including electronic data, voice, and video; and




                                               3
       (5) All incidents affecting personally identifiable information (PII), whether cyber-
           related or non-cyber related.

  b.   Nothing in this policy alters the requirements for the protection of information
       associated with national security systems, such as those identified in FISMA, policies,
       directives, instructions, and standards issued by the Committee on National Security
       Systems (CNSS), or the intelligence community.


5. POLICY

  a.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will comply with all Federal laws and
       regulations, OMB policies and requirements, DHS binding operational directives, NIST
       standards and guidance, and Departmental directives and guidance on cybersecurity
       incident management.

  b.   Personnel with incident management responsibilities will be technically qualified and
       have clearances appropriate to the categorization or classification of the systems they
       support and the types of incident-related information they may receive.

  c.   The Agriculture Security Operations Division (ASOD) Cybersecurity Incident Response
       Team (CSIRT) will operate as USDA’s central cybersecurity incident management
       group to:

       (1) Serve as the contact and coordination point with internal USDA offices, including
           the USDA Privacy Office, OIG, Office of Homeland Security (OHS) Personnel and
           Document Security Division (PDSD), and the OHS Insider Threat Program;

       (2) Serve as USDA’s cybersecurity incident management operational liaison and point
           of contact with external entities such as US-CERT; and

       (3) Act as the collection point and clearinghouse for cybersecurity incident information
           and have enterprise reporting responsibility related to all cybersecurity incidents,
           including forwarding cybersecurity incident information to US-CERT.

  d.   All suspected or actual incidents will be reported to the ASOD CSIRT within 1 hour of
       discovery. Examples of reportable incidents are:

       (1) Suspected or actual spillage of classified national security information (CNSI) or
           suspected or actual cybersecurity incidents affecting classified systems, with
           concurrent reporting to OHS PDSD, the Mission Area, agency, or staff office
           Information Security Coordinator (ISC), and Mission Area, agency, or staff office
           information security support staff;

       (2) Suspected or actual unauthorized release of controlled unclassified information
           (CUI);



                                               4
     (3) Suspected or actual exposure or compromise of PII (a category of CUI) in all forms
         (e.g., cyber-based, verbal discussions of PII with unauthorized persons, loss of
         hardcopy documents that contain PII), whether the exposure is inadvertent or
         intentional;

     (4) Suspected or actual incidents related to criminal activity or misuse, in accordance
         with DR 1700-002, OIG Organization and Procedures;

     (5) Suspected or actual insider threats where an insider is using or may be using his or
         her access to do harm, wittingly or unwittingly, to the security of the United States,
         including damage to the United States through espionage, terrorism, unauthorized
         disclosure of national security information, or the loss or degradation of
         Departmental resources or capabilities; and

     (6) Suspected or actual incidents of compromise to the confidentiality, integrity, or
         availability of USDA information, information systems, or information services.

e.   Information regarding an incident and the investigation will be logged into the ASOD
     CSIRT and, if necessary, the Mission Area, agency, or staff office incident tracking
     mechanism.

f.   The ASOD CSIRT will prioritize incidents using the management process identified in
     NIST SP 800-61 and in accordance with the impact classification factors and levels
     detailed in the DHS US-CERT Federal Incident Notification Guidelines and report to
     US-CERT within 1 hour:

     (1) Suspected or actual exposure or compromise of cyber-based PII;

     (2) Suspected or actual cyber incidents related to criminal activity or misuse; and

     (3) All actual incidents of compromise to the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of
         USDA information, information systems, or information services.

g.   The Senior Agency Official for CNSI/Director of OHS and the USDA Chief
     Information Security Officer (CISO) have the authority to direct any action, including
     shutdown, with respect to any system on which CNSI is spilled.

h.   All suspected and actual breaches will be handled in accordance with Federal and
     Departmental requirements, including FISMA, OMB M-17-12, NIST SP 800-122,
     Guide to Protecting the Confidentiality of Personally Identifiable Information (PII), and
     the USDA Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Core Incident Response Group
     (CIRG) PII Breach Notification & Incident Response Plan (IRP), Revision 4.6.




                                              5
i.   Any technology used to capture, collect, store, analyze, transmit, or access sensitive
     incident information, including PII, will be properly secured to preserve confidentiality
     and integrity.

j.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will:

     (1) Regularly run automated tools that are updated with current indicators of
         compromise (IOC) supplied by ASOD; and

     (2) Promptly analyze the results and report suspected or actual incidents as stated in
         Section 5d.

k.   The ASOD CSIRT will scan for IOCs within 24 hours (i.e., 1 day) of issuance by US-
     CERT.

l.   Incident management personnel will investigate all suspected and actual incidents
     reported by US-CERT, the ASOD CSIRT, users (whether Federal employees,
     contractors, or others), system, network, or database administrators, or personnel from
     other organizations internal or external to USDA.

m. For each major incident, including cyber-related breaches, the appropriate committees of
   Congress will be notified and consulted not later than 7 days after a major incident has
   been declared. Additional information (as defined in OMB M-19-02) will be provided
   to the committees within a reasonable period of time after initial notification.

n.   An annual report describing major incidents, including cyber-related breaches, in
     unclassified form but including a classified annex if necessary will be prepared and
     provided to the Director of OMB, the Secretary of DHS, committees of Congress, and
     the Comptroller General.

o.   A plan of action and milestones (POA&M) will be created for any incident and
     associated with either an information system or service or an information security
     program if:

     (1) The incident remains open (unresolved) after 30 days or if the agency or staff office
         anticipates that it will require more than 30 days to remediate and close;

     (2) A review determines remedial actions are or were inadequate for incident closure;
         or

     (3) Required information pertaining to the incident has not been submitted.

p.   Incident management personnel will finalize the Agriculture Department (AD)-3043,
     ASOC Incident Report, or the AD-3038, Cyber Security Incident Report Personally
     Identifiable Information (PII) Incident, and submit it to close the incident with the
     ASOD CSIRT.



                                             6
  q.   Incident records (i.e., evidence pertaining to an incident) and records of reporting
       incidents both internally and externally will be destroyed 3 years after all necessary
       follow-up actions have been completed. Longer retention is authorized if required for
       business use.

  r.   Incident management plans and associated procedures will be documented and updated
       whenever significant changes affect the information in the plans or procedures.

  s.   Incident management plans will:

       (1) Define worst-case scenarios;

       (2) Include a PII section if USDA PII is generated, collected, provided, transmitted,
           stored, or maintained; and

       (3) Be tested twice annually and if necessary updated after the test.

  t.   For moderate and high systems, incident response testing will be coordinated with
       organizational elements responsible for related plans such as business continuity plans,
       contingency plans, disaster recovery plans, continuity of operations plans, crisis
       communications plans, critical infrastructure plans, and occupant emergency plans.

  u.   Disaster recovery plans and information system contingency plans will, in addition to
       physical disasters, address major cyber incidents that render information system
       infrastructure or systems unable to support operations.

  v.   Annual information security awareness training for all users will include user
       responsibilities for detecting and reporting cybersecurity incidents and breaches.

  w. All personnel with cybersecurity incident response or incident management
     responsibilities will complete annual incident response role-based training.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Secretary of Agriculture will:

       (1) Direct the heads of USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to implement
           incident management plans and procedures, and provide qualified personnel and
           other resources for incident management;

       (2) Ensure that responsible incident management personnel notify and consult with
           internal and external parties in the time periods mandated and in accordance with
           Federal and Departmental requirements as part of responding to any incident,




                                               7
         including major incidents, PII or CUI incidents, actual or suspected criminal
         activity or misuse, insider threats, and incidents affecting national security systems;

     (3) With the concurrence of the USDA CIO, the Senior Agency Official for Privacy
         (SAOP), the CIRG, and the Director of the Office of Communications (OC) provide
         notice, or designate in writing a senior-level individual to provide notice to
         individuals affected by a breach affecting USDA information resources;

     (4) Ensure that the Department provides timely notice to individuals affected by a
         USDA breach in accordance with Federal and USDA requirements;

     (5) Ensure that the Office of Congressional Relations (OCR) notifies Congress about
         each major incident within 7 days of declaration that it qualifies as a major incident;
         and

     (6) Ensure that the USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO) and USDA CISO submit
         the required annual reporting of information security and cybersecurity incident and
         cyber-related breach information on time.

b.   The Heads of Mission Areas, agencies, and Staff Offices will:

     (1) Ensure that the provisions of this policy are implemented for the information
         resources that support the operations and assets under their control; and

     (2) Ensure that personnel in their area of responsibility perform their incident
         management responsibilities, including notification and reporting, in a timely
         manner and in accordance with Federal and Departmental requirements.

c.   The USDA CIO will:

     (1) Ensure that Departmental policy, program, plans, procedures, and delegations of
         authority for incident management are developed, implemented, disseminated,
         maintained, and comply with FISMA and all other applicable Federal requirements;

     (2) Ensure that the Department’s annual information security reporting, including
         information on cybersecurity incidents and cyber-related breaches, is prepared and
         submitted on time;

     (3) Determine when an incident is a major incident in consultation with the USDA
         CISO, ASOD Director, and appropriate senior Mission Area, agency, or staff office
         officials and system owners, and, if the incident is a breach, the SAOP;

     (4) Ensure that the Secretary is informed promptly when a major incident is declared;

     (5) Collaborate with the USDA CISO and the Assistant Secretary for Congressional
         Relations to provide the appropriate committees of Congress with information



                                             8
         about major incidents mandated by FISMA or other Federal requirements in the
         required timeframes;

     (6) Determine if cybersecurity incident information may be released publicly, based on
         factors such as whether the release of information might negatively affect activities
         such as criminal investigations; and

     (7) Provide ongoing funding for the Department’s incident management program,
         including resources, user awareness training, role-based training for ASOD CSIRT
         personnel, and testing the Department’s incident management plan twice annually.

d.   The USDA CISO will:

     (1) Inform the USDA CIO of major cybersecurity incidents;

     (2) Collaborate with the USDA CIO and the Assistant Secretary for Congressional
         Relations to provide the appropriate committees of Congress with information
         about major incidents mandated by FISMA or other Federal requirements in the
         required timeframes;

     (3) Oversee and ensure compliance with Federal and Departmental policies and
         requirements for incident management and provide guidance and direction to
         Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices for:

         (a) Compliance with Federal laws and requirements pertaining to incident
             management;

         (b) Compliance with USDA incident management policy and procedure and other
             USDA guidance impacted by incident management; and

         (c) Collaboration with internal and external entities and whether such
             collaboration is of a discretionary nature or is required by law, regulation, or
             policy.

     (4) Ensure that the Department’s incident management program and its associated
         resources and capabilities are developed, implemented, and maintained;

     (5) Ensure that the Department’s incident management plan is developed, documented,
         implemented, maintained, disseminated, and approved;

     (6) Ensure that processes are in place to verify that the ASOD CSIRT, Mission Areas,
         agencies, and staff offices create POA&Ms and manage them to closure for:

         (a) Incidents that do not meet criteria for closure within 30 days; and

         (b) Corrective actions after incident management plan testing.



                                             9
     (7) Prepare USDA’s annual FISMA report to include cybersecurity incident
         information and quarterly reports to meet OMB requirements;

     (8) Notify and consult with the Inspector General (IG), the SAOP, the Senior Agency
         Official for CUI, the OHS PDSD Chief, the OHS Insider Threat Coordinator, the
         Director of the Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM), the Chief
         Financial Officer, the Assistant General Counsel of the Office of the General
         Counsel (OGC), General Law and Research Division (GLRD), the Assistant
         Secretary for Congressional Relations, and the Director of OC, as appropriate,
         regarding incidents;

     (9) Serve as the Department’s principal liaison with US-CERT;

     (10) Serve as the Department’s principal liaison with organizations outside the
          Department for cybersecurity incidents, notifying and consulting with (as
          appropriate):

         (a) Law enforcement agencies, after conferring with the IG;

         (b) An office designated by the President for any incident involving a national
             security system;

         (c) The committees of Congress described in FISMA, within the time periods
             mandated, and in collaboration with the USDA CIO and the Assistant
             Secretary for Congressional Relations in the event of a major incident; and

         (d) Any other agency or office, in accordance with law or as directed by the
             President.

     (11) Ensure that required and other relevant metrics on incident management are
          regularly collected, analyzed, reported, and used to improve all aspects of the
          Department’s incident management program; and

     (12) Ensure that information security awareness training for Mission Area, agency, and
          staff office users includes user responsibilities for detecting and reporting
          cybersecurity incidents, including incidents involving PII and CUI.

e.   The ASOD Director will:

     (1) Develop and maintain the Departmental incident management plan in accordance
         with current NIST guidelines;

     (2) Coordinate with and assist the SAOP in the development and maintenance of the
         USDA Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Core Incident Response Group
         (CIRG) PII Breach Notification & Incident Response Plan (IRP);



                                             10
(3) Disseminate the current Departmental incident management plans to the ASOD
    CSIRT and agency and staff office incident management personnel;

(4) Provide DHS with information about high value assets (HVA) and critical system
    architecture to help them understand the potential impact to those assets from a
    cyber incident and to provide assurance that robust physical and cybersecurity
    protections are in place for those assets;

(5) Implement a standing Federal Network Authorization with DHS to ensure DHS can
    rapidly access USDA’s networks and deploy on-site resources to conduct incident
    response activities when necessary, and review the authorization semi-annually;

(6) Receive, disseminate, and track Departmentwide compliance with DHS binding
    operational directives;

(7) Establish and maintain relationships with external entities with incident handling
    expertise, resources, or whose assistance may be needed for incident response, and
    establish partnerships for surge resources and special capabilities through contracts,
    memorandums of understanding (MOU), memorandums of agreement (MOA), or
    service level agreements (SLA);

(8) Ensure that there is sufficient funding for resources, including equipment, software,
    and media, and for annual role-based training for the ASOD CSIRT to effectively
    support incident management activities;

(9) Manage the ASOD CSIRT and ensure that the ASOD CSIRT documents,
    effectively implements, and maintains comprehensive incident management
    procedures;

(10) Collaborate and coordinate with USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices
     with regard to their incident management responsibilities and provide guidance for:

    (a) Compliance with Federal laws and requirements pertaining to incident
        management and reporting;

    (b) Compliance with Departmental incident management policy and procedure and
        other USDA guidance impacted by incident management; and

    (c) Collaboration with internal and external entities and whether such
        collaboration is of a discretionary nature or is required by law, regulation, or
        policy.

(11) Perform managerial oversight of all incidents ensuring that:




                                       11
    (a) All incidents affecting USDA information resources are properly documented,
        tracked, investigated, mitigated, and closed; and

    (b) ASOD CSIRT personnel provide timely notification and reporting to US-
        CERT for all reportable incidents and to senior USDA officials for major
        incidents.

(12) Ensure that records relating to incidents and incident reporting are retained for at
     least 3 years, unless longer retention is required for business use, and then properly
     destroyed;

(13) Act as or appoint a member of the ASOD CSIRT to serve as incident commander,
     to direct and manage major incidents and other incidents deemed a high priority;

(14) Coordinate with:

    (a) Internal entities such as OIG, the USDA Privacy Office, OHS PDSD, OHS
        Insider Threat Program, OHRM, Office of the Chief Financial Officer, OC, and
        the Office of the General Council (OGC) as appropriate; and

    (b) External entities such as internet service providers (ISP), law enforcement
        agencies, other incident response groups, affected external parties, and vendors
        of information technology (IT) products and services for investigation and
        mitigation of incidents.

(15) Ensure that testing of USDA’s incident management plans, procedures, and
     capabilities:

    (a) Occurs at least twice annually, and if necessary, the plans and procedures are
        updated after each test; and

    (b) Is coordinated with organizational elements responsible for related plans such
        as business continuity plans, contingency plans, disaster recovery plans,
        continuity of operations plans, crisis communications plans, critical
        infrastructure plans, and occupant emergency plans.

(16) Ensure that incident management plan test results are documented in after-action
     reports and that improvement plans are developed and implemented to address any
     weaknesses or deficiencies;

(17) Develop an annual plan for ASOD CSIRT operations, including elements such as:

    (a) Staffing and training for staff;

    (b) Resources such as equipment, software tools, and media; and




                                        12
         (c) Collection, analysis, and reporting of performance metrics.

     (18) Ensure that all ASOD CSIRT personnel are trained on USDA’s incident
          management policy and procedure and understand incident management standards
          and guidelines issued by US-CERT and NIST;

     (19) Ensure that all ASOD CSIRT personnel complete annual role-based training and
          other training as identified in the ASOD CSIRT annual operational plan and that
          records of the training are maintained; and

     (20) Develop, track, analyze, and report metrics to meet Federal requirements and
          provide other relevant internal measures of ASOD CSIRT performance on incident
          management.

f.   ASOD CSIRT Personnel will:

     (1) Serve as USDA’s central contact and coordination point for all cybersecurity
         incident management operational activities, which include notifying, consulting
         with, and coordinating with all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices
         and external entities;

     (2) Provide guidance to ensure that incident management activities at the Department,
         Mission Area, agency, and staff office levels comply with Federal and USDA
         requirements;

     (3) Provide OIG and OHS PDSD with technical guidance as needed to assist with
         activities such as cyber investigation and analysis, incident containment, and
         cleanup, as instructed by the ASOD Director;

     (4) Develop and maintain the ASOD CSIRT incident management standard operating
         procedures (SOP);

     (5) Execute the ASOD CSIRT incident management SOPs for cybersecurity incidents
         and cyber-related breaches until the incidents are resolved and closed;

     (6) Immediately perform actions to mitigate incidents or threats that have or have the
         potential to have severe functional or information impacts;

     (7) Report incidents to US-CERT within the mandated timeframes;

     (8) Ensure all incidents are thoroughly mitigated prior to incident closure;

     (9) Complete required incident response training annually and when circumstances
         such as roles and responsibilities change; and




                                            13
     (10) Develop and execute incident management testing at least twice annually, update
          the incident management plan, when necessary after each test, document the results,
          and report testing results to the ASOD Director.

g.   The Assistant Secretary for Administration serving as the SAOP will:

     (1) Develop and maintain, in coordination with the ASOD Director, the USDA
         Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Core Incident Response Group (CIRG)
         PII Breach Notification & Incident Response Plan (IRP);

     (2) Be the authority for directing the identification of PII and the level of impact or
         sensitivity of compromised PII;

     (3) Convene the USDA CIRG to coordinate USDA responses to moderate or high
         impact breaches per the USDA Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Core
         Incident Response Group (CIRG) PII Breach Notification & Incident Response
         Plan (IRP);

     (4) Provide direction and guidance to the ASOD CSIRT, Mission Areas, agencies, and
         staff offices, and privacy officers regarding PII and CUI incidents;

     (5) Advise the USDA Secretary whether and when to notify individuals potentially
         affected by a breach; and

     (6) Certify by email that an incident for which the CIRG has been convened is closed.

h.   The USDA Chief Privacy Officer will:

     (1) Direct the identification of PII and the level of impact or sensitivity of
         compromised PII;

     (2) Inform the SAOP of moderate and high breaches;

     (3) Direct the actions of the ASOD CSIRT and Mission Area, agency, and staff office
         incident management personnel for breaches; and

     (4) Approve the closure of all other breaches by email.

i.   The IG will:

     (1) Review all actual or suspected criminal activity incidents and reports of fraud,
         waste, and abuse of information resources;

     (2) Notify law enforcement agencies, after conferring with the USDA CISO; and




                                             14
     (3) Direct incident management personnel on methods to obtain and secure incident
         evidence to comply with the rules of preservation of evidence.

j.   The OHS Director serving as the Senior Agency Official for CUI will consult with the
     Director of OC, the IG, and others, as appropriate, to determine if cybersecurity incident
     information pertaining to CUI may be released publicly.

k.   The OHS PDSD Chief will:

     (1) Be responsible for managing the security of information for incidents affecting
         CNSI and classified systems; and

     (2) Submit final reports on CNSI incidents with recommendations to the Senior
         Agency Official for CNSI/Director of OHS, the USDA CISO, and the data owner.

l.   The OHS Special Security Officer will:

     (1) Conduct official investigations of CNSI spillage and classified system incidents,
         coordinating with the data owner, the ASOD CSIRT, and others as necessary; and

     (2) Provide the final determination to close CNSI incidents.

m. The OHS Insider Threat Coordinator will:

     (1) Implement an insider threat detection and prevention program consistent with
         guidance and standards outlined in Executive Order 13587, Structural Reforms To
         Improve the Security of Classified Networks and the Responsible Sharing and
         Safeguarding of Classified Information, and the Office of the Director of National
         Intelligence (ODNI), National Counterintelligence and Security Center, National
         Insider Threat Policy and Minimum Standards for Executive Branch Insider Threat
         Programs;

     (2) Conduct inquiries on all potential insider threat incidents;

     (3) Coordinate with appointed stakeholders and the Office of the Chief Information
         Officer (OCIO) to obtain information necessary to identify, analyze, and resolve
         insider threat matters; and

     (4) Serve as the USDA liaison to the intelligence community for insider threat within
         the Department, to include referrals to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
         under the Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1995, 50 United States
         Code (U.S.C.) §3381, Coordination of Counterintelligence Activities.




                                             15
n.   The Assistant General Counsel, OGC GLRD will:

     (1) Review and approve any communications to individuals impacted by a breach in
         which the individuals are or were litigants; and

     (2) Provide legal advice for incidents involving other government entities at the
         Federal, State, local, tribal, and territorial levels.

o.   The Director of OC will coordinate activities regarding public notification outside
     USDA about cyber incidents with the USDA CIO, the SAOP, the IG, and others, as
     appropriate.

p.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs will:

     (1) Fund, establish, implement, and maintain the Mission Area, agency, and staff office
         incident management program to include resources, capabilities, incident
         management plan testing, and training of incident management personnel;

     (2) Ensure that management support and resources are provided and assigned to the
         agency and staff office incident management personnel to effectively support
         incident management activities;

     (3) Ensure that their organization develops, documents, implements, reviews, and
         updates an incident management plan and associated procedures that align with
         Departmental policies, programs, and procedures, and comply with Federal
         policies, regulations, standards, and guidelines for incident reporting and
         management;

     (4) Approve their organization’s incident management plan;

     (5) Provide direction and guidance to Mission Area, agency, and staff office personnel
         for:

         (a) Compliance with Federal laws and requirements pertaining to incident
             management and reporting;

         (b) Compliance with Departmental incident management policy and procedure and
             other USDA policies and procedures impacted by incident management; and

         (c) Collaboration with internal and external entities (e.g., ASOD CSIRT, USDA
             Privacy Office, OIG, others as appropriate) to investigate, mitigate, and close
             incidents.

     (6) Ensure that USDA’s enterprise inventory system has a current and accurate
         inventory of all IT devices and systems in the scope of their responsibility and
         identify those that are HVAs, to support incident management;



                                            16
     (7) Ensure that their organization reports incidents to the ASOD CSIRT in the required
         timeframe and provides updates until incidents are closed;

     (8) Formally designate one or more technically qualified points of contact with
         appropriate clearances to function as the CSIRT for the agency or staff office; the
         designee(s) may serve in a dual role such as the CISO or Information Systems
         Security Program Manager (ISSPM); and

     (9) Ensure that Mission Area, agency, and staff office personnel with incident
         management responsibilities complete annual role-based training and that the
         training is documented and tracked.

q.   Mission Area Assistant CISOs, and Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office ISSPMs
     will:

     (1) Ensure that this policy, all USDA incident management procedures, and binding
         operational directives from DHS are disseminated, implemented, enforced, and
         integrated within their Mission Area, agencies, and staff offices;

     (2) Develop, document, disseminate, implement, and maintain the agency and staff
         office incident management plan for cybersecurity incidents, including incidents
         affecting PII;

     (3) Ensure that agency and staff office incident management procedures are developed,
         documented, implemented, and maintained;

     (4) Disseminate procedures and requirements for reporting actual and suspected
         incidents to users, service providers, contractors, and other organizations that own
         or operate information systems or services on behalf of USDA;

     (5) Ensure that incidents are promptly reported to the ASOD CSIRT, properly
         responded to, and adequately documented;

     (6) Act as the point of contact for all suspected or actual criminal activity or misuse
         incidents related to an OIG investigation;

     (7) Inform the Mission Area, agency, and staff office head, Mission Area Assistant
         CIO, and USDA CIO of major incidents, including breaches or ongoing, unresolved
         adverse events and incidents;

     (8) Verify containment, mitigation, and closure of incidents; and

     (9) Plan and conduct incident management plan testing twice annually, update the plan
         if necessary after each test, document the results, and create POA&Ms for identified




                                             17
         weaknesses in accordance with DR 3565-003, Plan of Action and Milestones
         Policy.

r.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office CSIRTs will:

     (1) Comply with all Federal and Departmental policies, regulations, standards,
         guidelines, and procedures for incident management and reporting, including
         incidents involving PII, CUI, CNSI spillage, criminal activity, misuse, or insider
         threats;

     (2) Develop and maintain agency and staff office procedures for incident management
         and reporting, including incidents involving PII, CUI, CNSI spillage, criminal
         activity, misuse, and insider threats, ensuring that the procedures comply and align
         with Federal and Departmental policies, regulations, standards, guidelines, and
         procedures;

     (3) Inform the Mission Area Assistant CIO, the Mission Area Assistant CISO, and
         Mission Area, agency, and staff office ISSPM of major incidents, including
         breaches or ongoing, unresolved adverse events and incidents;

     (4) Keep the Mission Area Assistant CISO, and Mission Area, agency, and staff office
         ISSPM informed of incident management activities, from discovery through
         closure;

     (5) Refrain from contacting or reporting to US-CERT directly, unless specifically
         requested to do so by the ASOD Director or ASOD CSIRT personnel with
         delegated authority;

     (6) Implement the Mission Area, agency, and staff office incident management
         procedures, including coordinating activities with their Mission Area Assistant
         CISO, Mission Area, agency, and staff office ISSPM, system administrators,
         network managers, or other personnel, until the incident is resolved and the ASOD
         CSIRT validates that it is closed;

     (7) Immediately perform actions to mitigate incidents or threats that have or have the
         potential to have severe functional or information impacts;

     (8) Ensure that PII and CUI related to actual or suspected incidents are handled
         properly and minimized to the greatest extent possible during incident response;

     (9) Create a POA&M for any incident that meets criteria described in Section 4o of this
         policy;

     (10) Complete annual role-based training; and




                                            18
     (11) Participate in incident response testing and provide input into documenting the
          results.

s.   System, Network, and Database Administrators will:

     (1) Promptly report suspected and actual incidents according to the criteria defined in
         this policy to the ASOD CSIRT and the agency and staff office incident
         management personnel;

     (2) Follow the directions of the ASOD CSIRT, Mission Area, agency, and staff office
         incident management personnel, and other authorized incident management
         personnel during incident response, containment, eradication, and recovery;

     (3) Ensure that PII and CUI related to actual or suspected incidents is handled properly
         and minimized to the greatest extent possible during incident response;

     (4) Document the steps taken to contain and clean up a CNSI spillage and provide that
         documentation to OHS PDSD as proof that the actions were taken;

     (5) Take annual role-based incident management training, if required; and

     (6) Participate in incident response testing and after-action reports, if requested.

t.   All employees, contractors, service providers, and others working for, or on behalf of,
     USDA will:

     (1) Promptly report actual or suspected incidents of all types to the ASOD CSIRT and
         properly handle PII until authorized personnel are notified and assume custody of
         the information;

     (2) Comply with Departmental policies and procedures to safeguard PII and properly
         handle PII until authorized personnel are notified and assume custody of the
         information;

     (3) Not delete, forward, or transmit any spilled information, including CNSI, CUI, or
         PII in any format, whether an email, an attachment, or a hyperlink, unless instructed
         by OHS PDSD, personnel managing CUI or breaches, or other authorized officials;
         and

     (4) Protect all communication and limit sharing when reporting a classified or
         suspected classified incident, including spillage of CNSI, to minimize further
         exposure of the incident and damage to CNSI.

u.   System Owners will establish a document (i.e., contract, SLA, MOA, or MOU)
     requiring contractors, service providers, and other organizations that own or operate
     information systems or services for, or on behalf of, USDA to:



                                             19
     (1) Protect USDA information resources with automated detection tools that are run
         regularly using updated indicators from the tool vendors or whenever requested by
         the ASOD CSIRT using indicators provided by the ASOD CSIRT and/or US-
         CERT, review the results, and provide the results to USDA or other authorized
         parties;

     (2) Report all suspected and actual incidents in the required timeframe via methods
         indicated in the document governing the relationship (e.g., contract, SLA, MOA, or
         MOU) to the ASOD CSIRT, the system owner, the Privacy hotline number or email
         address if PII is affected, the contracting officer (when operating under a contract),
         and additional appropriate points of contact;

         Note: The governing document must indicate to contractors and others working
         for, or on behalf of, USDA, when Mission Area, agency, or staff office points of
         contact are notified about a suspected or actual incident.

     (3) Develop, maintain, and implement an incident management plan if they generate,
         collect, provide, transmit, store, or maintain USDA PII;

     (4) Have and share with the system owner an incident management plan that:

         (a) Integrates fully with the incident management plan of the contracting agency or
             staff office;

         (b) Is tested twice annually, with all test results shared with the contracting agency
             or staff office; and

         (c) Requires creating an associated POA&M for each weakness found during
             testing in accordance with DR 3565-003.

v.   Contractors, service providers, or others acting for, or on behalf of, USDA will:

     (1) Comply with all Federal and Departmental incident management policies,
         regulations, guidelines, and procedures indicated in the document governing the
         relationship (e.g., a contract, SLA, MOA, or MOU);

     (2) Protect USDA information resources with automated detection tools that are run
         regularly using updated indicators or whenever requested by the ASOD CSIRT
         using indicators provided by the ASOD CSIRT and/or US-CERT, review the
         results, and provide the results to USDA or other authorized parties;

     (3) Report all suspected and actual incidents in the required timeframe via methods
         indicated in the document governing the relationship (i.e., a contract, SLA, MOA,
         or MOU);




                                            20
       (4) Develop and maintain an incident management plan if USDA PII is generated,
           collected, provided, transmitted, stored, or maintained;

       (5) Have a current incident management plan for the system or service, when required
           in the document governing the relationship (i.e., a contract, SLA, MOA, or MOU),
           share it with the responsible Mission Area, agency, or staff office, test the plan,
           share the test results with the responsible Mission Area, agency, or staff office, and,
           if authorized, create an associated POA&M for each weakness found during testing
           in accordance with DR 3565-003;

       (6) Where non-Federal information systems or organizations process, store, or transmit
           USDA CUI, comply with the incident response security requirements identified in
           NIST SP 800-171 Revision 1, Protecting Controlled Unclassified Information in
           Nonfederal Information Systems and Organizations;

       (7) Ensure its personnel take annual role-based incident management training, if
           required; and

       (8) Participate in incident response testing and after-action reports, if required.


7. PENALTIES AND DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS FOR NON-COMPLIANCE

  DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, Section 16, sets forth USDA
  policy, procedures, and standards on employee responsibilities and conduct regarding the use
  of computers and telecommunications equipment. In addition, DR 4070-735-001, Section
  21, Disciplinary or Adverse Action, states:

  a.   A violation of any of the responsibilities and conduct standards contained in this
       directive may be cause for disciplinary or adverse action.

  b.   Disciplinary or adverse action will be affected in accordance with applicable law and
       regulations.

  Such disciplinary or adverse action will be consistent with applicable law and regulations
  such as Office of Personnel Management regulations, OMB regulations, and the
  Standards of Ethical Conduct for Federal Employees of the Executive Branch.


8. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  a.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are required to conform to this
       policy. If a specific policy requirement cannot be met as explicitly stated, a waiver may
       be requested. Note that an approved waiver does not bring the system into compliance
       with policy. Requests for waivers:




                                               21
       (1) Are an acknowledgement of a system’s non-compliance with policy and that an
           acceptable plan to remediate the weakness has been provided and will be
           implemented.

       (2) Must be documented as indicated in the standard operating procedure by the
           Compliance and Policy Branch, CAPE-SOP-003, Plan of Action and Milestones
           Management Standard Operating Procedure, Revision 1.1.

  b.   Policy waiver request memoranda will be addressed to the USDA CISO and submitted
       to ISC.Outreach@wdc.usda.gov for review and decision. Unless otherwise specified,
       approved policy waivers must be reviewed and renewed every fiscal year.


9. INQUIRIES

  Address inquiries concerning this DR to OCIO Information Security Center via email to the
  cscc@ocio.usda.gov mailbox.


                                          -END-




                                            22
                                       APPENDIX A

                           AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


DHS, NCCIC National Cyber Incident Scoring System

DHS, US-CERT Federal Incident Notification Guidelines, April 1, 2017

Executive Order 12958, Classified National Security Information, April 17, 1995

Executive Order 13292, Further Amendment To Executive Order 12958, as Amended,
Classified National Security Information, March 28, 2003

Executive Order 13526, Classified National Security Information, December 29, 2009

Executive Order 13556, Controlled Unclassified Information, November 4, 2010

Executive Order 13587, Structural Reforms to Improve the Security of Classified Networks
and the Responsible Sharing and Safeguarding of Classified Information, October 7, 2011

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 United States Code
(U.S.C.) §3551, et seq., December 18, 2014

Fraud and related activity in connection with identification documents, authentication
features, and information, 18 U.S.C. 1028(d)(7), (2010)

Government Accountability Office (GAO), GAO Report 08-536, Privacy: Alternatives Exist
for Enhancing Protection of Personally Identifiable Information, May 2008

Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1995, 50 U.S.C. §3381, Coordination of
Counterintelligence Activities, December 17, 2004

Office of Government Ethics, Standards of Ethical Conduct for Federal Employees of the
Executive Branch, 5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) §2635, et seq., (2017)

National Archives and Records Administration, Information Systems Security Records,
General Records Schedule (GRS) 3.2, September 2016

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), Controlled Unclassified
Information (CUI) Registry - Categories and Subcategories

NARA, CUI Registry

NIST, FIPS PUB 200, Minimum Security Requirements for Federal Information and
Information Systems, March 2006


                                          A-1
NIST, Interagency Report (IR) 7298 Revision 2, Glossary of Key Information Security
Terms, May 2013

NIST, SP 800-53 Revision 4, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems
and Organizations, April 2013 with updates as of January 22, 2015

NIST, SP 800-61 Revision 2, Computer Security Incident Handling Guide, August 2012

NIST, SP 800-122, Guide to Protecting the Confidentiality of Personally Identifiable
Information (PII), April 2010

NIST, SP 800-150, Guide to Cyber Threat Information Sharing, October 2016

NIST, SP 800-171 Revision 1, Protecting Controlled Unclassified Information in Nonfederal
Information Systems and Organizations, December 2016

ODNI, National Counterintelligence and Security Center, National Insider Threat Policy and
Minimum Standards for Executive Branch Insider Threat Programs, November 21, 2012

OMB, Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource, July 28, 2016

OMB, Memorandum M-16-04, Cybersecurity Strategy and Implementation Plan (CSIP) for
the Federal Civilian Government, October 30, 2015

OMB, Memorandum M-17-12, Preparing for and Responding to a Breach of Personally
Identifiable Information, January 3, 2017

OMB, Memorandum M-19-02, Fiscal Year 2018-2019 Guidance on Federal Information
Security and Privacy Management Requirements, October 25, 2018

Presidential Policy Directive (PPD) - 41, United States Cyber Incident Coordination, July 26,
2016

Annex to PPD - 41, Federal Government Coordination Architecture for Significant Cyber
Incidents, July 26, 2016

Protected Critical Infrastructure Information, 6 CFR Part 29, January 1, 2012

Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. 552a, December 31, 1974, as amended

USDA, AD-3038, Cyber Security Incident Report Personally Identifiable Information (PII)
Incident, June 2016

USDA, AD-3043, ASOD Incident Report, June 2016




                                          A-2
USDA, CAPE-SOP-003, Plan of Action and Milestones Management Standard Operating
Procedure, Revision 1.1, November 2015

USDA, Minimum Safeguards for Protecting Personally Identifiable Information (PII),
August 5, 2016

USDA, Personally Identifiable Information (PII) Core Incident Response Group (CIRG) PII
Breach Notification & Incident Response Plan (IRP), Revision 4.6, November 23, 2017

USDA, Departmental Manual (DM) 3300-005, Policies for Planning and Managing Wireless
Technologies in USDA, November 10, 2010

USDA, DM 3440-001, USDA Classified National Security Information Program Manual,
June 9, 2016

USDA, DM 3505-005, Cybersecurity Incident Management Procedures, November 30, 2018

USDA, DR 1700-002, OIG Organization and Procedures, June 17, 1997

USDA, DR 3300-001, Telecommunications & Internet Services and Use, March 18, 2016

USDA, DR 3440-001, USDA Classified National Security Information Program, June 9,
2016

USDA, DR 3565-003, Plan of Action and Milestones Policy, September 25, 2013

USDA, DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007

USDA, DR 4600-003, USDA Insider Threat Program, June 30, 2014




                                        A-3
                                        APPENDIX B

                                        DEFINITIONS


a.   Breach. The loss of control, compromise, unauthorized disclosure, unauthorized
     acquisition, unauthorized access, or any similar occurrence where (1) a person other than
     an authorized user accesses or potentially accesses personally identifiable information or
     (2) an authorized user accesses or potentially accesses personally identifiable
     information for an other than authorized purpose. (Source: OMB M-17-12)

b.   Classified Information. See “Classified National Security Information.”

c.   Classified National Security Information. Information that has been determined
     pursuant to Executive Order 13526 or any predecessor order to require protection
     against unauthorized disclosure and is marked to indicate its classified status when in
     documentary form. (Source: NIST IR 7298 Revision 2)

d.   Compromise. Disclosure of information to unauthorized persons, or a violation of the
     security policy of a system in which unauthorized intentional or unintentional disclosure,
     modification, destruction, or loss of an object may have occurred. (Source: NIST IR
     7298 Revision 2)

e.   Computer Security Incident. See “Incident.”

f.   Controlled Unclassified Information. Information the Government creates or possesses,
     or that an entity creates or possesses for or on behalf of the Government, that a law,
     regulation, or Government-wide policy requires or permits an agency to handle using
     safeguarding or dissemination controls. However, CUI does not include classified
     information (see definition above) or information a non-executive branch entity
     possesses and maintains in its own systems that did not come from, or was not created or
     possessed by or for, an executive branch agency or an entity acting for an agency. Law,
     regulation, or Government-wide policy may require or permit safeguarding or
     dissemination controls in three ways: Requiring or permitting agencies to control or
     protect the information but providing no specific controls, which makes the information
     CUI Basic; requiring or permitting agencies to control or protect the information and
     providing specific controls for doing so, which makes the information CUI Specified; or
     requiring or permitting agencies to control the information and specifying only some of
     those controls, which makes the information CUI Specified, but with CUI Basic controls
     where the authority does not specify. (Source: NARA, CUI Registry)

g.   Cybersecurity Incident. See “Incident.”

h.   Event. Any observable occurrence in a network or system. (Source: NIST SP 800-61
     Revision 2)



                                            B-1
     Note: Events with negative consequences are referred to as adverse events.

i.   Exploit. A technique to breach the security of a network or information system in
     violation of security policy.

j.   Federal Information. Information created, collected, processed, maintained,
     disseminated, or disposed of by or for the Federal Government, in any medium or form.
     (Source: OMB Circular A-130)

k.   Functional Impact. A measure of the impact to business functionality or ability to
     provide services. (Source: US-CERT Federal Incident Notification Guidelines.) Also,
     see related terms “information impact” and “recoverability.”

l.   Harm. Any adverse effects that would be experienced by an individual (i.e., that may be
     socially, physically, or financially damaging) or an organization if the confidentiality of
     PII were breached. (Source: NIST SP 800-122)

m.   High Value Asset. Those assets, systems, facilities, data and datasets that are of
     particular interest to potential adversaries. These assets, systems, and datasets may
     contain sensitive controls, instructions or data used in critical Federal operations, or
     house unique collections of data (by size or content) making them of particular interest
     to criminal, politically-motivated, or state-sponsored actors for either direct exploitation
     of the data or to cause a loss of confidence in the U.S. Government. (Source: OMB M-
     16-04)

n.   Improper Usage. Any incident resulting from a violation of an organization’s acceptable
     use policies by an authorized user. (Source: NIST SP 800-61 Revision 2)

o.   Incident. An occurrence that (1) actually or imminently jeopardizes, without lawful
     authority, the integrity, confidentiality, or availability of information or an information
     system; or (2) constitutes a violation or imminent threat of violation of law, security
     policies, security procedures, or acceptable use policies. (Source: FISMA)

     Note: An occurrence may be identified as an incident, but later identified as a breach
     once it is determined that PII is involved. Also, “incident” encompasses more specific
     terms such as “cybersecurity incident,” “information security incident,” “computer
     security incident,” spillage of CNSI, or exposure of controlled unclassified information
     (CUI).

p.   Incident Handling. The mitigation of violations of security policies and recommended
     practices. (Source: NIST SP 800-61 Revision 2)

q.   Incident management personnel. Personnel who are part of a CSIRT, those who manage
     CSIRT personnel, and potentially other personnel with incident handling
     responsibilities. Examples include Assistant CISOs, ISSPMs, privacy office personnel




                                             B-2
     at the Departmental or agency and staff office levels, and audit or investigations
     personnel from the OIG.

r.   Incident Management Plan. Provides a roadmap for implementing an incident response
     program based on the organization’s policy. The plan indicates both short- and long-
     term goals for the program, including metrics for measuring the program. The incident
     response plan should also indicate how often incident handlers should be trained and the
     requirements for incident handlers. (Source: Adapted from NIST, SP 800-61 Revision
     2.) See Section 3dError! Reference source not found. for additional information.

     Note: The term “incident management plan” is used in this DR instead of “incident
     response plan,” unless the title of a referenced source specifically uses the latter term.
     An incident management plan is different from an “incident response plan” or “cyber
     incident response plan,” which are contingency planning procedures for systems.

s.   Indicator. A sign that an incident may have occurred or may be currently occurring.
     (Source: NIST SP 800-61 Revision 2)

t.   Indicator of Compromise. See related term “Indicator.”

u.   Information Impact. Describes the type of information lost, compromised, or corrupted.
     (Source: US-CERT Federal Incident Notification Guidelines.) Also, see related terms
     “Functional Impact” and “Recoverability.”

v.   Information resources. Encompasses information, information systems, and information
     services.

w. Information Security Incident. See “Incident.”

x.   Insider Threat. The threat that an insider will use her/his authorized access, wittingly or
     unwittingly, to do harm to the security of United States. This threat can include damage
     to the United States through espionage, terrorism, unauthorized disclosure of national
     security information, or through the loss or degradation of Departmental resources or
     capabilities. (Source: NIST SP 800-53 Revision 4)

y.   Major Incident. Is either:

     (1) Any incident that is likely to result in demonstrable harm to the national security
         interests, foreign relations, or the economy of the United States or to the public
         confidence, civil liberties, or public health and safety of the American people.
         Using the DHS NCCIC National Cyber Incident Scoring System this includes Level
         3 events (orange), defined as those that are “likely to result in a demonstrable
         impact to public health or safety, national security, economic security, foreign
         relations, civil liberties, or public confidence”; Level 4 events (red), defined as
         those that are “likely to result in a significant impact to public health or safety,
         national security, economic security, foreign relations, or civil liberties”; and Level



                                             B-3
         5 events (black), defined as those that “pose an imminent threat to the provision of
         wide-scale critical infrastructure services, national government stability, or the lives
         of US persons”. Agencies should determine the level of impact of the incident by
         using the existing incident management process established in NIST SP 800-61
         Revision 2; or

     (2) A breach that involves personally identifiable information (PII) that, if exfiltrated,
         modified, deleted, or otherwise compromised, is likely to result in demonstrable
         harm to the national security interests, foreign relations, or the economy of the
         United States, or to the public confidence, civil liberties, or public health and safety
         of the American people. (Source: OMB M-19-02)

     (3) Note: A major incident determination is required for any unauthorized
         modification of, unauthorized deletion of, unauthorized exfiltration of, or
         unauthorized access to the PII of 100,000 or more people. (Source: OMB M-19-
         02)

z.   National Security System. Any information system (including any telecommunications
     system) used or operated by an agency or by a contractor of an agency, or other
     organization on behalf of an agency (1) the function, operation, or use of which involves
     intelligence activities; involves cryptologic activities related to national security;
     involves command and control of military forces; involves equipment that is an integral
     part of a weapon or weapons system; or is critical to the direct fulfillment of military or
     intelligence missions (excluding a system that is to be used for routine administrative
     and business applications, for example, payroll, finance, logistics, and personnel
     management applications); or (2) is protected at all times by procedures established for
     information that have been specifically authorized under criteria established by an
     Executive Order or an Act of Congress to be kept classified in the interest of national
     defense or foreign policy. (Source: NIST IR 7298 Revision 2)

aa. Personally Identifiable Information. Any information about an individual maintained by
    an agency, including (1) any information that can be used to distinguish or trace an
    individual’s identity, such as name, social security number, date and place of birth,
    mother’s maiden name, or biometric records; and (2) any other information that is linked
    or linkable to an individual, such as medical, educational, financial, and employment
    information. (Source: NIST SP 800-122)

bb. Protected Critical Infrastructure Information. Information not customarily in the public
    domain and related to the security of critical infrastructure or protected systems that has
    been validated and voluntarily submitted, directly or indirectly, to DHS for its use
    regarding the security of critical infrastructure and protected systems, analysis, warning,
    interdependency study, recovery, reconstitution, or other appropriate purpose, and any
    information, statements, compilations or other materials reasonably necessary to explain
    the critical infrastructure information (CII), put the CII in context, describe the
    importance or use of the CII, when accompanied by an express statement indicating an
    expectation of protection from disclosure as provided by the provisions of the Critical



                                             B-4
      Infrastructure Information Act of 2002. (Source: Adapted from Protected Critical
      Infrastructure Information, 6 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 29)

cc. Recoverability. Identifies the scope of resources needed to recover from the incident.
    (Source: US-CERT Federal Incident Notification Guidelines.) Also, see related terms
    “functional impact” and “information impact.”

dd. Sensitive Information; also, Sensitive Incident Information. Information where the loss,
    misuse, or unauthorized access or modification could adversely affect the national
    interest or the conduct of Federal programs, or the privacy to which individuals are
    entitled under the Privacy Act of 1974; that has not been specifically authorized under
    criteria established by an Executive Order or an Act of Congress to be kept classified in
    the interest of national defense or foreign policy. (Source: NIST SP 800-53 Revision 4)

ee. Spillage. Security incident that results in the transfer of classified or CUI onto an
    information system not authorized for the appropriate security level. (Source: NIST IR
    7298 Revision 2)

ff. Threat. The potential source of an adverse event. (Source: NIST SP 800-61 Revision
    2)

gg. Unauthorized Access. The act or process of logical or physical access without
    permission to a Federal agency information, information system, application, or other
    resource. (Source: OMB M-19-02)

hh. Unauthorized Deletion. The act or process of removing information from an
    information system without authorization or in excess of authorized access. (Source:
    OMB M-19-02)

ii.   Unauthorized Exfiltration. The act or process of obtaining, without authorization or in
      excess of authorized access, information from an information system without modifying
      or deleting it. (Source: OMB M-19-02)

jj.   Unauthorized Modification. The act or process of changing components of information
      and/or information systems without authorization or in excess of authorized access.
      (Source: OMB M-19-02)

kk. Vulnerability. A weakness in a system, application, or network that is subject to
    exploitation or misuse. (Source: NIST SP 800-61 Revision 2)




                                           B-5
                              APPENDIX C

                  ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AD         Agriculture Department
ASOD       Agriculture Security Operations Division
CFR        Code of Federal Regulations
CII        Critical Infrastructure Information
CIO        Chief Information Officer
CIRG       Core Incident Response Group
CISO       Chief Information Security Officer
CNSI       Classified National Security Information
CNSS       Committee on National Security Systems
CPB        Compliance and Policy Branch
CSIP       Cybersecurity Strategy and Implementation Plan
CSIRT      Cybersecurity Incident Response Team
CUI        Controlled Unclassified Information
DHS        Department of Homeland Security
DM         Departmental Manual
DR         Departmental Regulation
FBI        Federal Bureau of Investigation
FIPS PUB   Federal Information Processing Standards Publication
FISMA      Federal Information Security Modernization Act
GAO        Government Accountability Office
GLRD       General Law and Research Division
GRS        General Records Schedule
HVA        High Value Asset
IG         Inspector General
IOC        Indicator of Compromise
IR         Interagency Report
IRP        Incident Response Plan
ISC        Information Security Coordinator
ISP        Internet Service Provider
ISSPM      Information Systems Security Program Manager
IT         Information Technology
MOA        Memorandum of Agreement
MOU        Memorandum of Understanding
NARA       National Archives and Records Administration
NCCIC      National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center
NIST       National Institute of Standards and Technology
OC         Office of Communications
OCIO       Office of the Chief Information Officer
OCR        Office of Congressional Relations
ODNI       Office of the Director of National Intelligence
OGC        Office of the General Counsel


                                 C-1
OHRM      Office of Human Resources Management
OHS       Office of Homeland Security
OIG       Office of the Inspector General
OMB       Office of Management and Budget
PDSD      Personnel and Document Security Division
PII       Personally Identifiable Information
POA&M     Plan of Action and Milestones
PPD       Presidential Policy Directive
SAOP      Senior Agency Official for Privacy
SLA       Service Level Agreement
SOP       Standard Operating Procedure
SP        Special Publication
U.S.C.    United States Code
US-CERT   United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team
USDA      United States Department of Agriculture




                               C-2
