U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE 
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250 

DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION 

NUMBER: 
DR 3530-007 

SUBJECT: Encryption Security and Public Key 
Infrastructure 

DATE: 
August 5, 2024 

OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer, 
Cybersecurity & Privacy Operations Center 

EXPIRATION DATE: 
August 5, 2029 

Section Page 

1. Purpose 1 
2. Scope 1 
3. Special Instructions/Cancellations 2 
4. Background 2 
5. Policy 3 
6. Roles and Responsibilities 7 
7. Penalties and Disciplinary Actions for Noncompliance 9 
8. Policy Exceptions 9 
9. Inquiries 9 
Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations A-1 
Appendix B – Definitions B-1 
Appendix C – Authorities and References C-1 


1. PURPOSE 

This Departmental Regulation (DR) provides guidance for the secure use of approved 
cryptography and public key infrastructure (PKI). These are mandatory for systems and 
communications protection. They work through signing, user authentication, and encryption. 
The use of encryption and PKI protects United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) 
information, communication, and data while in use, at rest, or during transmission. This 
policy will comply with Federal and Departmental requirements for encryption and PKI. 

2. SCOPE 

a. This DR applies to all: 



(1) USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, and personnel who work for or on 
behalf of USDA. The term “USDA personnel” includes USDA employees, 
appointees, contractors, partners, interns, fellows, affiliates, and volunteers; 
(2) Federal information, per Link open Records Management web page in Browser
, Records Management, in any medium or 
form generated, collected, provided, transmitted, stored, maintained, or accessed by 
or on behalf of USDA; 
(3) Information systems, devices, or services (including cloud-based services) used or 
operated by USDA, contractors and subcontractors, or other organizations on behalf 
of USDA, and interconnections between or among systems or services; and 
(4) Facilities from which these systems, devices, services, and interconnections operate. 
USDA, a contractor, a subcontractor, or another organization may own or operate 
these facilities. 



b. Nothing in this DR alters the requirements for the protecting national security systems or 
information. This includes those identified in the Federal Information Security 
Modernization Act of 2014 ( Link open TITLE 44—PUBLIC PRINTING and DOCUMENTS
) and the Committee on National Security Systems 
( Linkl open CNNS.GOV web page in browser
) policies, directives, instructions, and standards, and Intelligence Community 
policies, directives, and instructions. 


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS 

a. This DR supersedes: 
(1) Departmental Manual (DM) 3530-003, USDA Use of Public Key Infrastructure, 
July 15, 2004; and 
(2) DM 3530-005, Encryption Security Standards, February 17, 2005. 



b. This DR is effective immediately when published and will remain in effect until it is 
superseded or it expires. 
c. All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their procedures with this DR 
within 6 months of the publication date. 


4. BACKGROUND 

a. Links open Presidential Documents 
, Improving the Nation’s Cybersecurity, requires the 
encryption of data at rest and in transit. USDA requires systems, information, 
communications, and data to use cryptography to ensure confidentiality and integrity of 
information. 



b. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Link open NIST Special Publication 800-175B
Revision 1 PDF document
, Revision 1, Guideline for Using Cryptographic Standards in the Federal 
Government: Cryptographic Mechanisms, guides Federal agencies on the use of 
cryptography, encryption, and PKI. 
c. Cryptography relies upon two basic components: an algorithm and a key. The 
algorithm and key are used together to protect data (e.g., to encrypt the data or generate 
a digital signature). They are also used together to remove or check the protection (e.g., 
to decrypt the encrypted data or verify the digital signature). 
d. The security of the cryptographic protection relies on the secrecy of the PKI (e.g., the 
public key and private key). The users’ private key is safeguarded. Their public key 
links to a digitally signed public key certificate. This certificate proves their ownership 
of both public and private keys. In systems and applications, the certificate and keys 
represent the user or individual identified by the certificate. A user must have one 
current key pair for encryption and decryption and a second key pair for digital signature 
and signature verification. 


5. POLICY 

Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will encrypt all data at rest and in transit through 
cryptography and PKI: 

a. USDA conforms to NIST encryption standards and criteria for USDA networks, 
endpoints, and user credentials. 
b. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will discontinue the use of encryption 
standards unapproved by NIST within 6 months of the publication of this document. 
c. This policy will apply to hardware modules, firmware modules, software modules, 
hybrid-software modules, and hybrid-firmware modules. 
d. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will adopt and transition to algorithms 
approved in link open FEDERAL INFORMATION PROCESSING STANDARDS PUBLICATION pdf documents
, 
Security Requirements For Cryptographic Modules. This requirement is in accordance 
with NIST Link open Transitioning the Use of 
Cryptographic Algorithms and 
Key Lengths pdf documents
, Revision 2, Transitioning the Use of Cryptographic 
Algorithms and Key Lengths. 
e. When procuring a private certificate authority (CA) platform, Mission Areas, agencies, 
and staff offices will: 
(1) Determine its applicability to business strategies within USDA; 
(2) Outline and justify the total cost of developing a PKI, including any associated 
information technology development costs; 






(3) Determine the appropriate level of security; and 
(4) Identify risks, benefits, legal and regulatory compliance constraints, and 
alternatives. 



f. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will ensure interoperability of USDAapproved 
cryptographic, encryption, and PKI standards when procuring new hardware, 
software, or contracted services. 
g. To protect devices and information used to conduct USDA business and mission 
functions, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will: 
(1) Implement full-disk encryption on all portable devices using compliant algorithms; 
(2) Encrypt connection traffic for offsite users. This includes portable devices such as 
smart phones, tablets, and storage devices. 



h. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will only use PKI certificates issued with a 
Department-approved CA: 
(1) PKI certificates requiring external or public trust (e.g., transport layer security 
(TLS) certificate for public-facing websites) must use an approved commercial CA 
with trust configured by major platform providers (e.g., Microsoft, Google, Apple, 
Adobe); and 
(2) PKI certificates not requiring external trust must be issued from the USDA. 



i. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will use Federal Information Processing 
Standards (FIPS)-validated, National Security Agency-approved cryptography. 
j. Commercial products that USDA uses, and USDA-developed applications that enable 
the use of PKI, will support the following cryptographic algorithms and associated key 
size, at a minimum: 
(1) Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA)-2 family (SHA-224, SHA-256, SHA-384, SHA-512, 
SHA-512/224 and SHA-512/256) or SHA-3 family (SHA3-224, SHA3-256, SHA3- 
384, and SHA3-512); 
(2) Rivest-Shamir-Adleman (RSA) 2048 or greater; 
(3) Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) 128, 192, and 256; 
(4) Elliptic Curve 224, 256, and 384; and 
(5) Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA) 224 and 256. 






k. Only use SHA-1 and RSA 1024 if required to validate digital signatures executed in the 
past and to decrypt objects encrypted in the past using the older algorithms and key 
sizes. 
l. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will exercise control over cryptographic keys. 
They will ensure: 
(1) Protection of all keys against modification, substitution, and destruction; 
(2) Protection of secret or private keys against unauthorized disclosure; 
(3) Replacement or retirement of cryptographic keys when they reach their expirations 
or have weak or compromised integrity; 
(4) Physical protection of equipment used to synchronize, store, and archive keys; and 
(5) Documentation of key escrow procedures, including an electronic key management 
and recovery system. 



m. For high-impact systems, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will take measures, 
including escrowing of cryptographic keys, to make information available in case of a 
lost or corrupted key. 
n. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will apply encryption key management 
services to ensure: 
(1) Fully automated key management; 
(2) Private key confidentiality; and 
(3) Encryption of both stored keys and keys in transit. 



o. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will select an appropriate cryptographic key 
size from Federal standards. They will base the selection on: 
(1) The strength of security required; 
(2) The amount of data processed with the key; and 
(3) The cryptographic period of the key. 



p. During remote login sessions, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will use 
approved encryption protocols to transmit data. 





q. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will update their local encryption procedures 
to align with this directive. They will address the following requirements: 
(1) Encrypt all USDA data to protect its confidentiality and integrity; and 
(2) Control and protect cryptographic keys used for encrypted transmission. 



r. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will write encryption key management plans 
with instructions to: 
(1) Generate the key for different cryptographic systems and applications; 
(2) Obtain and issue public key certificates; 
(3) Distribute keys to approved users, including a description of how users should 
activate keys when received; 
(4) Store keys and access stored keys; 
(5) Change or update keys, including issuing guidance on when, how, and why to do 
so; 
(6) Manage compromised keys; 
(7) Revoke keys, including deactivating compromised keys or keys of an approved user 
who leaves or changes responsibilities; 
(8) Archive changed or unnecessary keys, noting the use of archived keys only for 
decryption or data verification; 
(9) Recover lost or corrupted keys; 
(10) Back up keys; 
(11) Destroy keys; and 
(12) Track and review key management activities. 



s. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will use assurance levels defined by General 
Services Administration (GSA), Federal Public Key Infrastructure Policy Authority 
(FPKIPA), Federal Bridge Certification Authority (FBCA) Link open X.509 Certificate Policy for the
Federal Bridge Certification Authority PDF documents
, Version 3.3, 
Certificate Policy for the Federal Bridge Certification Authority, based on the processed 
data sensitivity for the corresponding certificates: 
(1) Rudimentary Assurance Digital Certificate (will not support non-repudiation); 






(2) Basic Assurance Digital Certificate (will not support non-repudiation); 
(3) Medium Assurance Digital Certificate; 
(4) Personal Identity Verification Interoperable Card Authentication; and 
(5) Medium Hardware. 



t. Only individuals who have an ongoing business need will have access to PKI 
technology. 
u. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will require all personnel with access to the 
CA to obtain the required level of security clearance. 
v. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will remediate weak cryptographic protocols 
and ciphers identified by the Department of Homeland Security. 
w. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will document and analyze lessons learned on 
their programs, control activities, procedures, and tasks. They will use this qualitative 
and quantitative data to assess effectiveness and guide process improvement. 


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 

a. The Chief Information Officer (CIO) will: 
(1) Serve as the final approving authority Departmentwide for IT requirements, to 
include cryptographic, encryption, and PKI Federal standards adoption; 
(2) Serve as the Senior Agency Official for Privacy (SAOP) per DR 3515-002, Privacy 
Policy and Compliance for Personally Identifiable Information (PII); and 
(3) Serve as the final approving authority for Mission Areas, agencies, or staff offices 
requesting policy waivers. 



b. The Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) will: 
(1) Ensure development of a USDA PKI strategy and implementation plan; 
(2) Provide technical policies and standards for encryption employed by the USDA; 
(3) Ensure periodic reviews of the technical policies and standards; 
(4) Ensure development of a USDA encryption strategy and encryption plan for all 
systems and networks; 






(5) Ensure compliance with cryptographic, encryption, and PKI Federal standards; 
(6) Make risk-based decisions (RBD) when reviewing requests for policy exceptions by 
Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices. Make waiver request recommendations 
to the USDA CIO; and 
(7) Ensure the periodic review of Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices for 
compliance with encryption requirements. 



c. The Director of the Office of Contracting and Procurement will ensure that contract 
language meets the requirements of this DR. 
d. Mission Area Assistant CIOs will: 
(1) Oversee the management of Mission Area principal certification and registration 
authorities; 
(2) Develop a key management plan for all PKI instances under their purview; 
(3) Consult with the SAOP as appropriate when assessing exceptions to policy 
requests; 
(4) Ensure that personnel maintain awareness of the provisions in this DR. 
(5) Ensure that all system security plans and procedures include encryption among the 
technical controls; and 
(6) Create and update procedures for the secure use of approved encryption protocols. 



e. Mission Area Assistant CISOs will: 
(1) Ensure authentication and encryption on all connections; and 
(2) Conduct periodic oversight reviews to determine compliance with encryption 
requirements detailed in this DR. Receive reports on any noncompliant encryption 
algorithms and methods. 



f. The Director of the Cybersecurity & Privacy Operations Center (CPOC), Identity 
Credential & Access Management Division (ICMD), will: 
(1) Manage the list of all approved CAs for the USDA environment; 
(2) Ensure that the PKI solution goes through a formal security assessment and 
authorization (A&A) process before its deployment. The PKI solution will also 
undergo annual risk assessments; and 






(3) Approve PKI authorizations. 



g. Information Systems Security Managers (ISSM) will remediate noncompliance or 
submit a waiver request to the Mission Area Assistant CISO for approval. The request 
will demonstrate the use of the RBD process. 
h. The System Administrators and Network Administrators will: 
(1) Ensure that encryption complies with this DR and approved Federal standards; 
(2) Ensure that encryption of systems that process, store, or transmit operational 
information, data, and communication on the use of cryptography meet Federal 
standards; and 
(3) Participate in the central management of all Department virtual private network 
(VPN) connections. Ensure validation of VPN users. 





7. PENALTIES AND DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS FOR NONCOMPLIANCE 

a. Link open Employee Responsibilities and Conduct web page in browser
, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, Section 16, Computers, sets 
forth USDA policy, procedures, and standards on employee responsibilities and conduct 
regarding the use of computers and telecommunications equipment. In addition, DR 
4070-735-001, Section 21, Disciplinary or Adverse Action, states: 
(1) Any violation of the responsibilities or standards contained in this DR may be cause 
for disciplinary or adverse action; and 
(2) Any disciplinary or adverse action taken will be consistent with the applicable laws 
and regulations. 



b. Such disciplinary or adverse action will be consistent with applicable laws and 
regulations such as Office of Personnel Management regulations, OMB regulations, and 
the Office of Government Ethics, Linkopen Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch PDF document
. 


8. POLICY EXCEPTIONS 

All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will conform to this policy. If any Mission 
Area, agency, or staff office cannot meet a specific policy requirement, contact the OCIO 
CPOC Security Management Division, Risk Management Branch via email at Links open POAMProgram@usda.gov outrlook email 
to request a policy exception. An approved policy exception is 
an acceptance of risk but does not constitute compliance. 


9. INQUIRIES 

Address any inquiries concerning this DR to the OCIO, CPOC via email to Link open SMD-PCB-plolicy @USDA,GOV outlook email
. 

-END- 


APPENDIX A 
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 

A&A Assessment and Authorization 

AES Advanced Encryption Standard 

CA Certificate Authority 

CFR Code of Federal Regulations 

CIO Chief Information Officer 

CISO Chief Information Security Officer 

CNSS Committee on National Security Systems 

CNSSI Committee on National Security Systems Instruction 

CPOC Cybersecurity and Privacy Operations Center 

DM Departmental Manual 

DR Departmental Regulation 

DSA Digital Signature Algorithm 

DSS Digital Signature Standard 

ECDSA Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm 

E.O. Executive Order 

FBCA Federal Bridge Certification Authority 

FIPS Federal Information Processing Standards 

FIPS PUB Federal Information Processing Standards Publication 

FISMA Federal Information Security Modernization Act 

FPKIPA Federal Public Key Infrastructure Policy Authority 

GSA General Services Administration 

ICMD Identity Credential & Access Management Division 

ISSM Information Systems Security Manager 

MAC Message Authentication Code 

NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology 

NISTIR National Institute of Standards and Technology Interagency Report 

OCIO Office of the Chief Information Officer 

OMB Office of Management and Budget 

PII Personally Identifiable Information 

PKI Public Key Infrastructure 

RBD Risk-Based Decision 

RSA Rivest-Shamir-Adleman 

SAOP Senior Agency Official for Privacy 

SHA Secure Hash Algorithm 

SP Special Publication 

TLS Transport Layer Security 

USDA United States Department of Agriculture 

VPN Virtual Private Network 


APPENDIX B 
DEFINITIONS 

Advanced Encryption Standard (AES). Developed as a replacement for data encryption 
standard. The preferred block cipher algorithm for new products. AES is specified in NIST Link open Advanced Encryption Standard pdf
, Advanced Encryption Standard (AES). AES operates on 128-bit blocks of data, 
using 128-, 192-, or 256-bit keys. (Source: adapted from NIST SP 800-175B, Revision 1) 

Algorithm. A clearly specified mathematical process for computation. A set of rules that, if 
followed, will give a prescribed result. (Source: NIST Link open Guideline for Using
Cryptographic Standards in the 
Federal Government pdf documents
, Revision 1) 

Cryptographic Key. A parameter used in conjunction with a cryptographic algorithm that 
determines its operation in such a way that an entity with knowledge of the key can reproduce or 
reverse the operation, while an entity without knowledge of the key cannot. Examples include: 

a. The transformation of plaintext data into ciphertext data; 
b. The transformation of ciphertext data into plaintext data; 
c. The computation of a digital signature from data; 
d. The verification of a digital signature; 
e. The computation of a message authentication code (MAC) from data; 
f. The verification of a MAC received with data; and 
g. The computation of a shared secret that is used to derive keying material. 


(Source: NIST SP 800-175B, Revision 1) 

Cryptographic Period. The time span during which each key setting remains in effect. (Source: 
NIST SP 800-175B, Revision 1) 

Cryptography. The discipline that embodies the principles, means, and methods for the 
transformation of data in order to hide their semantic content, prevent their unauthorized use, or 
prevent their undetected modification. (Source: NIST Link open Guideline for Identifying an 
Information System as a 
National Security System pdf documents
, Guideline for Identifying an 
Information System as a National Security System) 

Data. A representation of information as stored or transmitted. (Source: NIST Link open Foundations of a Security Poiicy
for Use of the- Nationai Research
and Educationai Network pdf documents
Foundations of a 
Security Policy for Use of the National Research and Educational Network) 


Decryption. The process of changing ciphertext into plaintext using a cryptographic algorithm 
and key. (Source: NIST SP 800-175B, Revision 1) 

Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA). A digital signature algorithm (DSA) that 
is an analog of DSA using elliptic curves. (Source: NIST SP 800-175B, Revision 1) 

Encryption. The process of changing plaintext into ciphertext using a cryptographic algorithm 
for the purpose of security or privacy. (Source: NIST SP 800-175B, Revision 1) 

High-Impact System. An information system in which at least one security objective (i.e., 
confidentiality, integrity, or availability) is assigned a FIPS 199 potential impact value of high. 
(Source: FIPS PUB 200) 

Identity, Credential, and Access Management (ICAM). Programs, processes, technologies, and 
personnel used to do several things. First, create trusted digital identity representations of 
individuals and nonperson entities. Second, bind those identities to credentials that may serve as 
a proxy for the individual or nonperson entity in access transactions. Third, leverage the 
credentials to provide authorized access to an agency’s resources. (Source: CNSS Link open Committee on
National Security Systems page in web browser
Committee on National Security 
Systems (CNSS) Glossary) 

Information. Any communication or representation of knowledge such as facts, data, or opinions 
in any medium or form. This includes textual, numerical, graphic, cartographic, narrative, 
electronic, or audiovisual forms. (Source: Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular link open Whitehouse,gov TO THE HEADS OF EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES pdf documents
, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource) 

Key Management. The activities involved in the handling of cryptographic keys and other 
related security parameters (e.g., initialization vectors and counters) during the entire lifecycle of 
the keys. This includes their generation, storage, establishment, entry and output, and 
destruction. (Source: NIST SP 800-175B, Revision 1) 

Key Size. The length of a key in bits. This term is used interchangeably with “key length.” 
(Source: NIST Link open Recommendation for
Key Management pdf documents
, Revision 5, Recommendation for Key Management: Part 1 – 
General) 

Network. A system implemented with a collection of interconnected components. Such 
components may include routers, hubs, cabling, telecommunications controllers, key distribution 
centers, and technical control devices. (Source: NIST Link open Security and Privacy Controlsfor
Information Systems and Organizations pdf document
, Revision 5, Security and 
Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations) 

Public Key Infrastructure (PKI). A framework established to issue, maintain, and revoke public 
key certificates. (Source: NIST SP 800-175B, Revision 1) 

Rivest-Shamir-Adleman (RSA). A public-key algorithm used for key establishment. It is also 
used for the generation and verification of digital signatures. (Source: NIST SP 800-175B, 
Revision 1) 


APPENDIX C 
AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES 

Link open part 2635—STANDARDS OF ETH ICAL CONDUCT FOR EMPLOYEES 
OF THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH pdf documents
, Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of 
the Executive Branch 

Chief Information Officer, Link open Office of the Secretary, USDA pdf documents
, as amended 

CNSS, Link open Committee on
National Security Systems in web browser
, Committee on National Security Systems (CNSS) Glossary, March 2, 2022 

Link open Presidential PDF Documents
, Classified National Security Information, December 29, 2009 

Link open Presidential PDF Documents
, Improving the Nation’s Cybersecurity, May 12, 2021 

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), link open TITLE 44—PUBLIC PRINTING AND DOCUMENTs
, et seq., 

December 18, 2014, as amended 

General Services Administration (GSA), Federal Public Key Infrastructure Policy Authority 
(FPKIPA), FBCA, Link open X.509 Certificate Policy for the
Federal Bridge Certification Authority pdf document
, Version 3.3, Certificate Policy for the Federal Bridge Certification 
Authority, November 3, 2023 

GSA, FPKIPA, Link open X.509 Certificate Policy
for the
U.S. Federal PKI
Common Policy Framework pdf documents
, Version 2.6, Certificate Policy for the U.S. Federal PKI Common Policy 
Framework, November 3, 2023 

NIST, Link open SECURITY REQUIREMENTS FOR CRYPTOGRAPHIC 
MODULES pdf document
, Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules, March 22, 2019 

NIST, Link open FEDERAL INFORMATION PROCESSING STANDARDS PUBLICATIOn pdf document
, Digital Signature Standard (DSS), February 3, 2023, as amended 

NIST, Link open Advanced Encryption Standard pdf documents
, Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), November 26, 2001, updated May 
9, 2023, as amended 

NIST, Link open minimum Security Requirements for Federal 
Information and Information Systems pdf document
, Minimum Security Requirements for Federal Information and Information 
Systems, March 9, 2006, as amended 

NIST, Link open foundations of a Security Poiicy
for Use of the- Nationai Research
and Educationai Network pdf documents
, Foundations of a Security Policy for Use of the National Research and 
Educational Network, February 1992 

NIST, Link open Status Report on the Second Round of 
the NIST Lightweight Cryptography 
Standardization Process pdf documents
, Status Report on the Second Round of the NIST Lightweight Cryptography 
Standardization Process, July 2021 

NIST, Link open Guidelines on Electronic Mail 
Security pdf documents
, Version 2, Guidelines on Electronic Mail Security, February 2007, as 
amended 

NIST, Link open Guidelines for the Selection, 
Configuration, and Use of Transport 
Layer Security (TLS) Implementations pdf documents
, Revision 2, Guidelines for the Selection, Configuration, and Use of Transport 
Layer Security (TLS) Implementations, August 2019, as amended 


NIST, Link open security and Privacy Controlsfor
Information Systems and Organizations pdf documents
, Revision 5, Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and 
Organizations, September 2020, includes updates as of December 10, 2020, as amended 

NIST, Link open Recommendation for Pair-Wise 
Key Establishment Using Integer 
Factorization Cryptography pdf documents
, Revision 2, Recommendation for Pair-Wise Key Establishment Using 
Integer Factorization Cryptography, March 2019, as amended 

NIST, Link open Recommendation for
Key Management: pdf documents
, Revision 5, Recommendation for Key Management: Part 1 – General, 
May 2020, as amended 

NIST, Link open Recommendation for
Key Management pdf documents
, Revision 1, Recommendation for Key Management: Part 2 – Best 
Practices for Key Management Organizations, May 2019, as amended 

NIST, Link open Recommendation for
Key Management pdf documents
, Revision 1, Recommendation for Key Management: Part 3 – 
Application-Specific Key Management Guidance, January 2015, as amended 

NIST, link openNational institute of standards and technilogy PDF documnts
, Guideline for Identifying an Information System as a National Security 
System, August 2003 

NIST, Link open Guide to IPsec VPNs pdf documents
, Revision 1, Guide to IPsec VPNs, June 2020, as amended 

NIST, Link open Guide to Storage Encryption 
Technologies for End User 
Devices pdf documents
, Guide to Storage Encryption Technologies for End User Devices, November 
2007, as amended 

NIST, Link open Transitioning the Use of 
Cryptographic Algorithms and 
Key Lengths pdf documents
, Revision 2, Transitioning the Use of Cryptographic Algorithms and Key 
Lengths, March 2019 

NIST, Link open Recommendation for Cryptographic
Key Generation pdf documents
, Revision 2, Recommendation for Cryptographic Key Generation, June 2020, 
as amended 

NIST, Link open Guide to Cyber Threat 
Information Sharing pdf documents
, Guide to Cyber Threat Information Sharing, October 2016 

NIST, link open Guideline for Using 
Cryptographic Standards in the 
Federal Government pdf documents
, Guideline for Using Cryptographic Standards in the Federal Government: 
Directives, Mandates and Policies, August 2016, as amended 

NIST, Link open Guideline for Using
Cryptographic Standards in the 
Federal Government pdf documents
, Revision 1, Guideline for Using Cryptographic Standards in the Federal 
Government: Cryptographic Mechanisms, March 2020, as amended 

Office of Government Ethics, Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch, Link open PART 2635—STANDARDS OF ETH ICAL CONDUCT FOR EMPLOYEES 
OF THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH pdf documents
, et seq. 

OMB, Circular link open TO THE HEADS OF EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES pdf documents
, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource, July 28, 2016 

OMB, Memorandum Link open MEMORANDUM FOR THE HEADS OF EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES pdf documents
, Preparing for and Responding to a Breach of Personally 
Identifiable Information, January 3, 2017 

OMB, Memorandum Link open MEMORANDUM FOR THE HEADS OF EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES pdf documents
, Migrating to Post-Quantum Cryptography, November 18, 2022 


USDA, link open Records Management web page in browser
, Records Management, May 16, 2016, as amended 

USDA, Link open Media Protection web page in browser
, Media Protection, October 30, 2019, as amended 

USDA, Link open Privacy Policy and Compliance for Personally Identifiable Information web page in browser
, Privacy Policy and Compliance for Personally Identifiable Information 
(PII), October 30, 2020, as amended 

USDA, Link open Plan of Action and Milestones Policy web page in browser
, Plan of Action and Milestones Policy, September 25, 2013, as amended 

USDA, link open Information Technology Security Baselines and Security Control Tailoring web page in browser
, Information Technology Security Baselines and Security Control 
Tailoring, November 21, 2023 

USDA, Link open Employee Responsibilities and Conduct web page in browser
, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007, as 
amended 

USDA, Link open USDA
Standard Operating 
Procedures on Risk Based Decision 
Management pdf documents
, USDA Standard Operating Procedures on Risk-Based Decision 
Management, September 2021, as amended 

USDA, Link open Encryption-Related Controls pdf documents 


The White House, Links open National Security Memorandum on Promoting United States Leadership in Quantum Computing While Mitigating Risks to Vulnerable Cryptographic Systems web page in browser
, National Security Memorandum on 
Promoting United States Leadership in Quantum Computing While Mitigating Risks to 
Vulnerable Cryptographic Systems, May 4, 2022 


 