                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                        DR 3650-001
                                                                DATE:
 SUBJECT: Cloud Computing                                       January 22, 2025
 OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer, Digital          EXPIRATION DATE:
 Infrastructure Services Center                                 January 22, 2030



Section                                                                                Page

1.   Purpose                                                                              1
2.   Scope                                                                                2
3.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                   2
4.   Policy                                                                               2
5.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                           6
6.   Policy Exceptions                                                                   12
7.   Inquiries                                                                           12

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                               B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                C-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of Agriculture
     (USDA) policy for cloud computing and supports modern approaches, guidance, and
     requirements for cloud computing, as outlined by:

     a.   Applicable laws enacted by the United States Congress;

     b.   Executive Orders (E.O.) issued by the President of the United States;

     c.   Office of Management and Budget (OMB) cloud policies, including OMB
          memorandums such as, M- 19-13, Category Management: Making Smarter Use of
          Common Contract Solutions and Practices;

     d.   The cloud service standards authored by the National Institute of Standards and
          Technology (NIST) and the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA);
  e.   The 2019 Cloud Smart Federal cloud computing strategy;

  f.   All applicable USDA directives, such as those in Appendix C; and

  g.   USDA Strategic Plan Fiscal Years 2022-2026, Objective 6.3: Promote USDA
       Operational Excellence Through Better Use of Technology and Shared Solutions.


2. SCOPE

  a.   This DR applies to any USDA information system operated by the Office of the Chief
       Information Officer (OCIO), Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, and any entity or
       person working for or on behalf of USDA.

  b.   This DR applies to all USDA cloud-capable information systems in USDA’s
       information systems portfolio.

  c.   All USDA cloud-capable information systems fall under the NIST definition of “cloud
       computing” as outlined in NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-145, The NIST Definition
       of Cloud Computing.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This DR supersedes DR 3650-001, Cloud Computing, dated May 24, 2023.

  b.   This DR does not apply to classified national security information.

  c.   This DR adheres to the guidance in NIST SP 800-53, Revision 5, Security and Privacy
       Controls for Information Systems and Organizations. It also adheres to the guidance in
       NIST Federal Information Processing Standards Publication (FIPS PUB) 199, Standards
       for Security Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems.

  d.   In December 2022, the FedRAMP Authorization Act was signed as part of the James M.
       Inhofe National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023, Public Law (P.L.) 117-
       263, as amended through P.L. 118-31. The FedRAMP Authorization Act codifies the
       Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP) as the authoritative
       standardized approach to security assessment and authorization for cloud computing
       products and services that process unclassified federal information.




                                              2
4. POLICY

  a.   Cloud computing is the primary approach to transforming how the USDA delivers,
       protects, and manages access to data and applications across all Mission Areas,
       agencies, and staff offices. Cloud computing will be implemented to maximize
       advantages including but not limited to cyber compliance, increased administrative
       efficiency, elasticity and scalability, central access, and transparent cost.

  b.   The USDA cloud computing environment ensures effective support for the full range of
       missions and data classifications with a purposefully orchestrated multi-cloud, multi-
       vendor strategy. This strategy focuses on limiting duplication, reducing inefficiencies,
       and accelerating digital modernization efforts.

  c.   All new software and software development will leverage the inherent characteristics of
       cloud computing services, maximize use of cloud services, and support continuous
       integration and continuous delivery to the maximum extent possible that both mission
       requirements and technical capabilities allow.

  d.   USDA will adopt the Cloud Smart strategies.

  e.   Cloud computing services must comply with all current Federal laws and USDA
       information technology (IT) security, privacy, and risk management policies.

  f.   Cloud computing service acquisition vehicles must include service level agreements
       (SLA). These SLAs must have clear, concise, and detailed language identifying the
       cloud computing source responsibilities for accommodating the reporting and privacy
       management requirements of the Federal Information Security Modernization Act of
       2014 (FISMA), 44 United States Code (U.S.C.) § 3551, et seq. This must be done per
       OMB M-24-04, Fiscal Year 2024 Guidance on Federal Information Security and
       Privacy Management Requirements.

  g.   As directed by E.O. 14028, Improving the Nation’s Cybersecurity, Federal Agencies
       migrating to cloud deployments must apply zero trust principles and transition their
       environments to Zero Trust architectures commensurate with their risk tolerance. For
       more information on zero trust, see NIST Cybersecurity White Paper (CSWP) 20,
       Planning for a Zero Trust Architecture: A Planning Guide for Federal Administrators.

  h.   Cloud computing services must comply with DR 3180-001, Information Technology
       Standards.

  i.   Cloud computing services must comply with NIST SP 800-37, Revision 2, Risk
       Management Framework (RMF) for Information Systems and Organizations: A System
       Life Cycle Approach for Security and Privacy. Cloud computing services must also
       comply with the associated OCIO Cybersecurity and Privacy Operations Center (CPOC)
       Risk Management Framework 2.0, as amended.




                                              3
  j.   Cloud computing services must comply with DR 3540-003, Security Assessment and
       Authorization.

  k.   Cloud computing services must comply with policy and procedures in DR 3520-002,
       Configuration Management.

  l.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must register and report all existing and
       new cloud systems and services to the USDA Enterprise Architecture Vision
       Environment (EAVE). To do this, please contact your Mission Area Assistant Chief
       Information Officer (CIO) or Mission Area, agency, or staff office enterprise architect.


5. SECURITY

       (1) All new application development efforts will bring security to the application and
           data layer by incorporating modern software development best practices, such as
           continuous monitoring and zero trust.

       (2) All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must abide by DR 3640-001, Identity,
           Credential, and Access Management, pursuant to OMB M-19-17, Enabling Mission
           Delivery through Improved Identity, Credential, and Access Management, to
           employ identity, credential, and access management policies where applicable.

       (3) USDA will expand its continuous diagnostic capabilities for cloud environments
           per the Department of Homeland Security’s (DHS) Continuous Diagnostics and
           Mitigation Program.

       (4) As stated in E.O. 14028, Section 3(c): “As [Federal] agencies continue to use cloud
           technology, they shall do so in a coordinated, deliberate way that allows the Federal
           Government to prevent, detect, assess, and remediate cyber incidents. To facilitate
           this approach, the migration to cloud technology will adopt Zero Trust Architecture,
           as practicable.”

       (5) USDA cloud authorizations to operate (ATO) based on FedRAMP have two types:

           (a) FedRAMP ATOs that are specific to Mission Areas, agencies, or staff offices
               that support a single USDA Mission Area, agency, or staff office under the
               Associate Chief Information Officer (ACIO) as the Authorizing Official and
               System Owner; and

           (b) Enterprise FedRAMP ATOs that support two or more Mission Areas, agencies,
               or staff offices under the OCIO Digital Infrastructure Services Center (DISC)
               ACIO as the Authorizing Official and System Owner.




                                               4
6. ACQUISITION

  a.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must comply with Section 834(c) of the
       Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), P.L. 113-291, Title
       VIII, Subtitle D, Sections 831-837. They must comply with this by adhering to DR
       3145-001, Oversight and Management of the Federal Information Technology
       Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), and OMB M-15-14 (CTO) need to give documented
       approval of an IT purchase to remain compliant with the guidance on the GSA
       Technology Transformation Service (TTS) Handbook’s web page Federal Information
       Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA).

  b.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must comply with DR 3130-009, Non-
       Major Information Technology (IT) Investments, for non-major investments. They must
       comply with DR 3130-010, United States Department of Agriculture Enterprise
       Information Technology Governance, for major investments. This will ensure
       successful outcomes that align with business needs while meeting approved costs,
       schedule, and performance goals.

  c.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must employ high-quality IT cost
       estimation practices per DR 3130-012, Information Technology Cost Estimating.

  d.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must comply with IT capital planning and
       investment control (CPIC) practices per DR 3130-013, Information Technology Capital
       Planning and Investment Control. They must embrace the Technology Business
       Management (TBM) framework per the introduction and Sections 7, 11, and 13 of
       OMB’s FY 2021 IT Budget – Capital Planning Guidance.

  e.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will refer to the Federal CIO Council’s
       The Application Rationalization Playbook for best practices in evaluating existing
       Departmental contracts and cloud computing solutions before acquiring or developing
       new acquisition strategies or acquisition plans for services.

  f.   For any acquisitions related to cloud services, USDA personnel must evaluate and
       consider the available USDA STRATUS cloud acquisition vehicles. They must
       incorporate this evaluation into the cloud abbreviated acquisition plan. They will
       generate an analysis of alternatives and make it available to the STRATUS program
       office. The order of precedence for procuring authorized cloud services is as follows:

       (1) A FedRAMP-authorized cloud service provider (CSP);

       (2) An existing USDA authorization to operate (ATO) for commercial cloud services;
           and

       (3) Sponsorship of a CSP for FedRAMP authorization through the initial Federal
           Agency authorization process.



                                              5
  g.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must coordinate with the Director of the
       Office of Contracting and Procurement (OCP) to include the appropriate SLAs and
       language in acquisition vehicles. For example, acquisition vehicles must comply with
       USDA policy, as well as Section 508, E.O.s, and other Federal guidance. Using
       appropriate language protects the interests of USDA and allows for adequate
       administrative control, security monitoring, reporting, continuous visibility of assets,
       vendor performance measurements, clearly defined roles and responsibilities,
       remediation for noncompliance, and risk mitigation.

  h.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must follow the practice of category
       management and adhere to DR 3160-001, Licensed Information Technology (IT)
       Software, to procure common goods and services. Where possible, seek to eliminate
       redundancies, increase efficiency, and deliver more value and savings, per M-19-13,
       M-22-03, and DR 3107-001, Management of USDA IT Enterprise Initiatives.


7. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA CIO will:

       (1) Serve as the chief policy advisor to the Secretary on cloud computing policy;

       (2) Develop and maintain Departmentwide policy for USDA information systems
           operating on CSP offerings;

       (3) Direct the USDA enterprise private cloud service development;

       (4) Enforce compliance with the provisions of this policy;

       (5) Review and be the final decision authority for all policy waiver requests (as
           explained in Section 6: Policy Exceptions);

       (6) Collaborate with the Director of the Office of Human Resource Management
           (OHRM), who serves as the Chief Human Capital Officer (CHCO), and the Chief
           Financial Officer (CFO) to periodically update the training and hiring practices;

       (7) Provide to the Federal CIO annually a written list of all cloud services that the
           Department has determined cannot meet or are not required to meet FedRAMP
           security authorization requirements, and ensure that the list is jointly signed by the
           USDA CIO and CFO;

       (8) Ensure that the General Counsel is engaged for advice and counsel with respect to
           the acquisition and offering of cloud services, when appropriate; and



                                               6
     (9) Work with other parts of the Department, namely the CFO, the Director of OHRM,
         and the Director of OCP, to best align procurement and workforce management
         practices to cloud computing.

b.   The USDA CTO will:

     (1) Review policy waiver requests and provide recommendations to the CIO; and

     (2) Give documented approval of an IT purchase, in agreement with the CIO, to remain
         compliant with the guidance of GSA TTS Handbook’s web page Federal
         Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA).

c.   The DISC ACIO will:

     (1) Serve as the Departmental Cloud Broker as described in NIST SP 500-291, Version
         2, NIST Cloud Computing Standards Roadmap, Section 4.5: Cloud Broker;

     (2) Serve as the cloud computing policy coordinator and technical advisor to the USDA
         CIO;

     (3) Develop and maintain the process for exceptions to this policy;

     (4) Review policy waiver requests and provide recommendations to the CIO;

     (5) Be the delegated signature authority for cloud computing correspondence from the
         CIO to Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices;

     (6) Partner with Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to ensure the effective and
         efficient use of cloud services;

     (7) Maintain oversight and report to the CIO on the program compliance status of
         USDA in commercial cloud deployments;

     (8) Authorize and maintain for use enterprise FedRAMP commercial CSP ATOs;

     (9) Direct the Security Governance Division to maintain USDA cybersecurity
         assessment and management activities as necessary, ensuring the inheritance of
         security controls from enterprise FedRAMP commercial CSP ATOs; and

     (10) Engage in continuous monitoring of enterprise FedRAMP commercial CSPs as
          prescribed by FedRAMP.

d.   The DISC Enterprise Architect will:




                                            7
     (1) Be responsible for the design and architecture of USDA’s cloud program services
         and infrastructure;

     (2) Ensure that cloud services align with the requirements of the USDA Information
         Technology Strategic Plan 2022-2026;

     (3) Ensure that cloud services comply with USDA’s enterprise architecture
         requirements;

     (4) Select CSPs;

     (5) Facilitate collaboration through USDA’s Cloud Working Group between the Cloud
         Broker, Cloud Carrier, and System Owners; and

     (6) Ensure that cloud services are integrated with USDA’s existing infrastructure.

e.   The Director of DISC’s Enterprise Network Division will:

     (1) Serve as Cloud Carrier, per NIST SP 500-291, Version 2, Section 4.6: Cloud
         Carrier;

     (2) Design, develop, and implement networking architectures that provide CSPs with
         the necessary connectivity, availability, bandwidth, and latency to deliver cloud
         services to Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices;

     (3) Require CSPs to meet the requirements of Trusted Internet Connection (TIC) 3,
         consistent with DHS guidance and Zero Trust Architecture;

     (4) Manage all domain name systems (DNS) as required by DR 3300-025, Secure
         Domain Name System, and any domain name system security extensions
         (DNSSEC) for the CSPs as part of the USDA enterprise network.

f.   The Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) and CPOC’s ACIO will:

     (1) Review policy waiver requests and provide recommendations to the CIO;

     (2) Advise the CIO about cybersecurity strategies and methodologies for securing
         USDA commercial cloud services;

     (3) Maintain oversight and report to the CIO on the cybersecurity compliance status of
         USDA in commercial cloud deployments; and

     (4) Lead the USDA cybersecurity risk management program and serve as a deciding
         official for enterprise wide, cybersecurity risk-based decisions per Risk Based
         Decision (RBD) Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) RBD-SOP-3540-003B,



                                            8
         Revision 1.6, USDA Standard Operating Procedures on Risk-Based Decision
         Management.

g.   The Branch Chief of CPOC’s Risk Management Branch will:

     (1) Determine whether CSP offerings have an acceptable risk level under the Impact-
         Level Prioritization web page of USDA’s Risk Management Framework 2.0
         website;

     (2) Approve plans of action and milestones (POA&M) for the CSP offerings
         determined not to have an acceptable risk level under USDA’s Impact-Level
         Prioritization web page;

     (3) Ensure that Departmental CSPs complete security monitoring, security auditing,
         and remediation of security concerns in accordance with Federal and Departmental
         guidelines;

     (4) Ensure continuous monitoring, continuous security operations, and disaster
         recovery of USDA IT systems and networks, where possible; and

     (5) Monitor policy compliance and policy exception waivers and report cloud policy
         deviations to the CIO within 10 business days of discovery for resolution.

h.   The Chief Privacy Officer will ensure that cloud service offerings comply with Federal
     and Departmental privacy requirements, regulations, and policies, including
     DR 3445-001, Media Protection.

i.   The ACIO of OCIO’s Information Resource Management Center (IRMC) will:

     (1) Ensure that cloud service investments comply with Departmental enterprise IT
         governance and CPIC policies, including DR 3130-010, DR 3130-013, and
         DR 3145-001;

     (2) Ensure that cloud service investments comply with the requirements of acquisition
         approval requests (AAR), FITARA, OMB’s PortfolioStat (see CIO.gov’s web page
         6.2 PortfolioStat), and OMB’s TechStat (see CIO.gov’s web page 6.3 TechStat);

     (3) Ensure that cloud service deployments comply with the standards, requirements,
         regulations, and policies of Federal and Departmental Section 508 and Web Content
         Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG; see the World Wide Web Consortium [W3C]
         website WCAG 2 Overview). This must occur per DR 4030-001, Section 508
         Program;

     (4) Ensure that cloud service deployments comply with Federal and Departmental
         enterprise architecture regulations, policies, standards, and requirements. USDA
         requirements include DR 3185-001, Enterprise Architecture; DR 3185-002,


                                            9
         Enterprise Architecture IT Asset Definitions; and DR 3185-003, Enterprise
         Architecture IT Asset Data Element Requirements; and

     (5) Ensure that cloud service deployments comply with Federal and Departmental
         controlled unclassified information (CUI) regulations, policies, standards, and
         requirements per DR 3440-003, Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI)
         Program.

j.   Mission Area Assistant CIOs will:

     (1) Ensure that their Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices comply with this DR
         and other applicable Federal and USDA policies, regulations, and guidance
         regarding cloud computing;

     (2) Ensure that staff working for or on behalf of USDA understand their responsibilities
         when implementing cloud computing services as the Cloud Consumer, per NIST SP
         500-291, Version 2, Section 4.2: Cloud Consumer;

     (3) Identify Mission Area, agency, and staff office personnel who are Information
         Systems Security Managers, and task them with ensuring that CSPs are in full
         compliance with FISMA; NIST FIPS PUB 199; and NIST SP 800-60, Revision 1,
         Volume I: Guide for Mapping Types of Information and Information Systems to
         Security Categories;

     (4) Ensure that actions are taken to secure USDA information and information systems
         as required under Federal and USDA policies and guidance;

     (5) Ensure that contract language for acquiring services addresses security monitoring,
         security auditing, and remediation of security concerns in accordance with Federal
         and USDA regulations and standards;

     (6) Record, track, and resolve all POA&Ms for CSP deployments in the USDA FISMA
         data management and reporting tool;

     (7) Provide the CIO with a written analysis each fiscal year (FY) on the progress of
         moving IT systems into compliance with this policy. The analysis will identify,
         prioritize, and provide rationale for each production environment system as to its
         viability to move to the cloud within 2 to 5 years or not at all; and

     (8) Authorize and maintain Mission-Area-specific FedRAMP commercial cloud
         provider ATOs, along with associated security control inheritance.




                                            10
k.   System Owners in the Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will:

     (1) Ensure through the Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Enterprise Architects
         that all existing and new cloud systems are registered in the USDA EAVE system;

     (2) Ensure that statements of work, SLAs, and procurement requests for all cloud
         acquisition contracts include requirements for providing USDA with the proper
         level of performance and continuous accountability, availability, awareness, policy
         compliance, confidentiality, and integrity of the IT assets and data hosted on cloud
         services;

     (3) Ensure adequate budgeting for operating, managing, and securing the cloud services
         as needed; and

     (4) Document the configuration management and inventory management activities for
         cloud services.

l.   The Director of OHRM, who serves as the CHCO, will collaborate with the CIO and
     CFO to periodically update the training and hiring practices to ensure that the IT
     workforce has the skill sets needed to efficiently use cloud services.

m. The CFO will:

     (1) Annually, provide the Federal CIO with a written list of all cloud services that the
         Department has determined either cannot meet FedRAMP security authorization
         requirements or are not required to meet them according to the USDA CISO
         through the USDA Risk Management Framework. The USDA CIO and CFO must
         jointly sign this list; and

     (2) Collaborate with the USDA CIO, the Director of OCP, and the CHCO to
         periodically update the procurement and acquisition practices to ensure that the
         Department has capital planning and talent acquisition strategies suitable for
         effective cloud adoption and services.

n.   The Director of OCP will:

     (1) Ensure that all cloud contracts include cloud-appropriate acquisition language and
         SLAs to comply with Federal and Departmental regulations and policies; and

     (2) Ensure that the General Counsel is engaged, when appropriate, for advice and
         counsel with respect to the acquisition and offering of cloud services.

o.   The Departmental Records Officer, within the Office of the General Counsel, Office of
     Information Affairs, will ensure that cloud service offerings comply with Federal and
     Departmental records management, eDiscovery, litigation hold, and National Archives


                                            11
       and Records Administration requirements, regulations, and policies. This includes
       compliance with the following USDA policies:

       (1) DR 3080-001, Records Management;

       (2) DR 3085-001, Vital Records Management Program;

       (3) DR 3090-001, Litigation Retention Policy for Documentary Materials including
           Electronically Stored Information; and

       (4) DR 3099-001, Records Management Policy for Departing Employees, Contractors,
           Volunteers and Political Appointees.

  p.   The General Counsel will provide legal services, legal oversight advice, and counsel
       with respect to the acquisition and offering of cloud services and policy covered in this
       DR.

  q.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Enterprise Architects will assist Mission Areas,
       agencies, and staff offices in registering and reporting all existing and new cloud
       systems and services to the USDA EAVE.


8. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  a.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must conform to this regulation.
       However, if a specific regulation requirement cannot be met as explicitly stated, Mission
       Areas, agencies, and staff offices may submit a waiver request. The waiver request must
       explain the reason for the request, identify compensating controls and actions that meet
       the intent of the regulation, and identify how the compensating controls and actions
       provide a similar or greater level of defense or compliance than the regulation
       requirement. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will address all policy waiver
       request memoranda to the USDA OCIO DISC ACIO at usda-cloud-policy@usda.gov.

  b.   Policy waiver requests will be reviewed by the DISC ACIO, the CISO, and the CTO.
       Each may provide recommendations to the USDA CIO for consideration. The CIO will
       make the final waiver approval decision.

  c.   Waivers granted approval by the USDA CIO must be associated with a NIST control
       and recorded and tracked as a POA&M item in the USDA FISMA data management and
       reporting tool. Waivers will expire at the end of the FY or 6 months from the date of
       approval, whichever is longer. Unless otherwise specified, Mission Areas, agencies, and
       staff offices must review and renew approved policy waivers every FY.




                                              12
9. INQUIRIES

  Direct inquiries about this policy to the USDA OCIO DISC ACIO at usda-cloud-
  policy@usda.gov.


                                        -END-




                                          13
                                  APPENDIX A

                      ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AAR           Acquisition Approval Request
ACIO          Associate Chief Information Officer
ATO           Authorization to Operate
CDM           Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation
CFO           Chief Financial Officer
CHCO          Chief Human Capital Officer
CIO           Chief Information Officer
CISA          Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency
CISO          Chief Information Security Officer
Cloud Smart   The Federal Cloud Computing Strategy
CONOPS        Concept of Operations
CPIC          Capital Planning and Investment Control
CPOC          Cybersecurity and Privacy Operations Center (OCIO component)
CSP           Cloud Service Provider
CSWP          Cybersecurity White Paper
CTO           Chief Technology Officer
CUI           Controlled Unclassified Information
DHS           Department of Homeland Security
DISC          Digital Infrastructure Services Center (OCIO Component)
DNS           Domain Name System
DNSSEC        Domain Name System Security Extension
DR            Departmental Regulation
EAVE          Enterprise Architecture Vision Environment
E.O.          Executive Order
FedRAMP       Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program
FIPS PUB      Federal Information Processing Standards Publication
FISMA         Federal Information Security Modernization Act
FITARA        Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
FY            Fiscal Year
GSA           General Services Administration
IP            Internet Protocol
IRMC          Information Resource Management Center (OCIO component)
ISCM          Information Security Continuous Monitoring
IT            Information Technology
NIST          National Institute of Standards and Technology
OCIO          Office of the Chief Information Officer
OCP           Office of Contracting and Procurement
OHRM          Office of Human Resource Management
OMB           Office of Management and Budget
PII           Personally Identifiable Information
P.L.          Public Law



                                       A-1
POA&M    Plan of Action and Milestones
RBD      Risk Based Decision
SLA      Service Level Agreement
SOP      Standard Operating Procedure
SP       Special Publication
TBM      Technology Business Management
TIC      Trusted Internet Connection
TTS      Technology Transformation Service
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture
WCAG     Web Content Accessibility Guidelines




                                   A-2
                                         APPENDIX B

                                        DEFINITIONS


Cloud Broker. An entity that manages the use, performance, and delivery of cloud services and
negotiates relationships between cloud providers and cloud consumers. (Source: NIST SP 500-
292, NIST Cloud Computing Reference Architecture)

Cloud Carrier. An intermediary that provides connectivity and transport of cloud services from
cloud providers to cloud consumers. (Source: NIST SP 500-292)

Cloud Computing. A model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand network access to a
shared pool of configurable computing resources (i.e., networks, servers, storage, applications,
and services) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management effort or
service provider interaction. (Source: NIST SP 800-145)

Cloud Consumer. A person or organization that maintains a business relationship with and uses
service from cloud providers. (Source: NIST SP 500-292)

Cloud Provider. A person, organization, or entity responsible for making a service available to
cloud consumers. (Source: NIST SP 500-292)

Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM). The Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation
Program is a dynamic approach to fortifying the cybersecurity of government networks and
systems. CDM provides Federal Departments and Agencies with capabilities and tools that
identify cybersecurity risk on an ongoing basis, prioritize these risks based upon potential
impacts, and enable cybersecurity personnel to mitigate the most significant problems first.
(Source: DHS Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) Program)

Continuous Monitoring. Maintaining ongoing awareness to support organizational risk decisions.
(Source: NIST SP 800-137, Information Security Continuous Monitoring (ISCM) for Federal
Information Systems and Organizations)

Contractor Support. Contractor support encompasses on-site or off-site contractor technical or
other support staff. (Source: M-24-04)

Domain Name System (DNS). DNS is a distributed computing system that enables access to
Internet resources by user-friendly domain names rather than Internet Protocol (IP) addresses, by
translating domain names to IP addresses and back. (Source: NIST SP 800-81-2, Secure
Domain Name System (DNS) Deployment Guide)

Executive Agency. An executive department specified in 5 U.S.C. § 101, Executive
Departments; a military department specified in 5 U.S.C. § 102, Military Departments; an
independent establishment as defined in 5 U.S.C. § 104(1), Independent Establishment; and a




                                              B-1
wholly owned Government corporation fully subject to the provision of 31 U.S.C. § 91,
Government Corporations.

Federal Information System. An information system used or operated by an executive agency,
by a contractor of an executive agency, or by another organization on behalf of an executive
agency. (Source: 40 U.S.C. § 11331, Responsibilities for Federal Information Systems
Standards)

Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA). As of December 2014,
FITARA is a historic law that represented the first major overhaul of Federal IT in almost 20
years. Since FITARA’s enactment, OMB published guidance to Federal agencies to ensure that
this law is applied consistently Governmentwide in a way that is both workable and effective.
This guidance is now available as OMB M-15-14. FITARA does the following:

   1.   Enhances the authority of the CIO;

   2.   Enhances transparency and risk management in IT investments;

   3.   Requires savings through IT portfolio review;

   4.   Expands training and use of IT cadres;

   5.   Consolidates Federal data centers;

   6.   Maximizes the benefit of the Federal Strategic Sourcing Initiative; and

   7.   Expands Governmentwide software purchasing programs.

(Sources: CIO.gov Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA);
FITARA)

Information. Information is categorized according to its information type. An information type
is a specific category of information (e.g., privacy, medical, proprietary, financial, investigative,
contractor sensitive, security management) defined by an organization or, in some instances, by a
specific law, E.O., directive, policy, or regulation. (Source: NIST FIPS PUB 199)

Information Resources. Information and related resources, such as personnel, equipment, funds,
and IT. (Source: Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, 44 U.S.C. § 3501, et seq., SUBCHAPTER
I—FEDERAL INFORMATION POLICY)

Information System Operated by a Contractor on Behalf of an Agency. An information system
operated by a contractor on behalf of an agency must be treated in the same way as an agency-
operated information system. The level of effort required for security authorization depends on
the impact level of the information contained in the system. The security authorization boundary
for these systems must be carefully mapped to ensure that:




                                                B-2
   1.   Federal information is adequately protected;

   2.   Federal information is logically segregated from the contractor, state, or grantee
        corporate infrastructure; and

   3.   There is an interconnection security agreement in place to address connections from the
        contractor, state, or grantee system containing the agency information to systems
        external to the security authorization boundary. (Source: OMB M-12-20)

Information Systems. A discrete set of information resources organized for the collection,
processing, maintenance, use, sharing, dissemination, or disposition of information. (Source:
Paperwork Reduction Act)

Information Technology (IT). Any equipment or interconnected system or subsystem of
equipment that is used in the automatic acquisition, storage, manipulation, management,
movement, control, display, switching, interchange, transmission, or reception of data or
information by the executive agency. For the purposes of the preceding sentence, equipment is
used by an executive agency if the equipment is used by the executive agency directly or is used
by a contractor under a contract with the executive agency which:

   1.   Requires the use of such equipment; or

   2.   Requires the use, to a significant extent, of such equipment in the performance of a
        service or the furnishing of a product.

The term “information technology” includes computers, ancillary equipment, software,
firmware, and similar procedures, services (including support services), and related resources.
(Source: Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, 40 U.S.C. § 11101, et seq., Subtitle III—Information
Technology Management)

PortfolioStat. A tool that agencies use to assess the current maturity of their IT portfolio
management process, make decisions on eliminating duplication, augment current CIO-led CPIC
processes, and move to shared solutions to maximize the return on IT investments across the
portfolio. (Source: CIO.gov 6.2 PortfolioStat)

Private Cloud. The cloud infrastructure is provisioned for exclusive use by a single organization
comprising multiple cloud consumers (e.g., business units). It may be owned, managed, and
operated by the organization, a third party, or some combination of them, and it may exist on or
off premises. (Source: NIST SP 800-145)

Service Provider. A service provider encompasses the typical outsourcing of system or network
operations, telecommunication services, or other managed services (including those provided by
another agency or subscribing to software services). (Source: OMB M-12-20)

TechStat. A face-to-face, evidence-based accountability review of an IT investment for Federal
agencies. (Source: CIO.gov 6.3 TechStat)


                                               B-3
Zero Trust Architecture. Provides a collection of concepts designed to minimize uncertainty in
enforcing accurate, least privilege per-request access decisions in information systems and
services in the face of a network viewed as contested. (Source: NIST CSWP 20)




                                              B-4
                                        APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


5 U.S.C. § 101, Executive Departments

5 U.S.C. § 102, Military Departments

5 U.S.C. § 104, Independent Establishment

31 U.S.C. § 91, Government Corporations

40 U.S.C. § 11331, Responsibilities for Federal Information Systems Standards

CIO.gov, 6.2 PortfolioStat web page

CIO.gov, 6.3 TechStat web page

CIO.gov Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA) web page

Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, 40 U.S.C. § 11101, et seq., Subtitle III—Information Technology
Management

DHS, Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) Program website

DHS, Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation Program document

E.O. 14028, Improving the Nation’s Cybersecurity, May 12, 2021

FISMA, 44 U.S.C. § 3551, et seq., Subchapter II—Information Security

FITARA, P.L. 113-291, Title VIII, Subtitle D, Sections 831-837, December 19, 2014

GSA, FedRAMP, Program Basics web page

GSA, TTS Handbook, Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA) web
page

NIST, CSWP 20, Planning for a Zero Trust Architecture: A Planning Guide for Federal
Administrators, May 6, 2022

NIST, FIPS PUB 199, Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information and
Information Systems, February 2004

NIST, Glossary website



                                             C-1
NIST, SP 500-291, Version 2, NIST Cloud Computing Standards Roadmap, July 2013

NIST, SP 500-292, NIST Cloud Computing Reference Architecture, September 2011

NIST, SP 800-37, Revision 2, Risk Management Framework for Information Systems and
Organizations: A System Life Cycle Approach for Security and Privacy, December 2018

NIST, SP-800-53, Revision 5, Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and
Organizations, September 2020, includes updates as of December 10, 2020

NIST, SP 800-60, Revision 1, Volume I: Guide for Mapping Types of Information and
Information Systems to Security Categories, August 2008

NIST, SP 800-81-2, Secure Domain Name System (DNS) Deployment Guide, September 2013

NIST, SP 800-137, Information Security Continuous Monitoring (ISCM) for Federal Information
Systems and Organizations, September 2011

NIST, SP 800-145, The NIST Definition of Cloud Computing, September 2011 (errata as of April
27, 2012)

OMB, CIO Council, The Application Rationalization Playbook, June 2019

OMB, Cloud Smart web site

OMB, FY 2021 IT Budget - Capital Planning Guidance, June 27, 2019

OMB, M-12-20, FY 2012 Reporting Instructions for the Federal Information Security
Management Act and Agency Privacy Management, September 27, 2012

OMB, M-15-14, Management and Oversight of Federal Information Technology, June 10, 2015

OMB, M-19-02, Fiscal Year 2018-2019 Guidance on Federal Information Security and Privacy
Management Requirements, October 25, 2018

OMB, M-19-13, Category Management: Making Smarter Use of Common Contract Solutions
and Practices, March 20, 2019

OMB, M-19-17, Enabling Mission Delivery through Improved Identity, Credential, and Access
Management, May 21, 2019

OMB, M-24-04, Fiscal Year 2024 Guidance on Federal Information Security and Privacy
Management Requirements, December 4, 2023




                                            C-2
Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, 44 U.S.C. § 3501, et seq., Subchapter I—Federal Information
Policy

USDA, DR 3080-001, Records Management, August 16, 2016

USDA, DR 3085-001, Vital Records Management Program, August 19, 2011

USDA, DR 3090-001, Litigation Retention Policy for Documentary Materials including
Electronically Stored Information, May 28, 2008

USDA, DR 3099-001, Records Management Policy for Departing Employees, Contractors,
Volunteers and Political Appointees, July 2, 2012

USDA, DR 3107-001, Management of USDA IT Enterprise Initiatives, May 12, 2016

USDA, DR 3130-009, Non-Major Information Technology (IT) Investments, September 28, 2020

USDA, DR 3130-010, United States Department of Agriculture Enterprise Information
Technology Governance, April 20, 2021

USDA, DR 3130-012, Information Technology Cost Estimating, March 4, 2016

USDA, DR 3130-013, Information Technology Capital Planning and Investment Control, May
24, 2021

USDA, DR 3145-001, Oversight and Management of the Federal Information Technology
Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), May 7, 2021

USDA, DR 3160-001, Licensed Information Technology (IT) Software, May 16, 2019

USDA, DR 3180-001, Information Technology Standards, January 5, 2021

USDA, DR 3185-001, Enterprise Architecture, April 19, 2022

USDA, DR 3185-002, Enterprise Architecture IT Asset Definitions, September 22, 2020

USDA, DR 3185-003, Enterprise Architecture IT Asset Data Element Requirements, February
23, 2021

USDA, DR 3300-025, Secure Domain Name System, March 18, 2016

USDA, DR 3440-003, Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) Program, September 13, 2021

USDA, DR 3445-001, Media Protection, October 30, 2019




                                            C-3
USDA, DR 3515-002 Privacy Policy and Compliance for Personally Identifiable Information
(PII), October 30, 2020

USDA, DR 3520-002, Configuration Management, July 17, 2019

USDA, DR 3540-003, Security Assessment and Authorization, August 12, 2014

USDA, DR 3640-001, Identity, Credential, and Access Management, June 8, 2021

USDA, DR 4030-001, Section 508 Program, September 8, 2014

USDA, EAVE website

USDA, Information Technology Strategic Plan 2022-2026, June 2022

USDA, RBD-SOP-3540-003B, Revision 1.6, USDA Standard Operating Procedures on Risk-
Based Decision Management, September 2021

USDA, Risk Management Framework 2.0, Impact-Level Prioritization web page

USDA, Risk Management Framework 2.0 website

W3C, Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI), WCAG 2 Overview website, March 7, 2024




                                           C-4
