                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                        DR 3600-003
                                                                DATE:
 SUBJECT: Robotic Process Automation (RPA) Policy               May 16, 2022
 OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer, Digital          EXPIRATION DATE:
 Infrastructure Services Center                                 May 16, 2027



Section                                                                                    Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                  1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                       2
3.   Scope                                                                                    2
4.   Policy                                                                                   2
5.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                               5
6.   Policy Exceptions                                                                        9
7.   Inquiries                                                                               10

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                    A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                   B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                    C-1



     PURPOSE

          This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of
          Agriculture (USDA) policy for implementing the Office of Management and Budget
          (OMB) Memorandum M-18-23, Shifting From Low-Value to High-Value Work across
          the USDA. It addresses the establishment of Robotic Process Automation (RPA)
          through the Center of Excellence (CoE) within the USDA Office of the Chief
          Information Officer (OCIO).

          RPA tools are software programs designed to interact with existing applications and
          automate routine rules-based tasks by mimicking user interactions. RPA tools reduce
          the burden of repetitive, simple tasks on employees, and have the potential to save time
          and taxpayer dollars, improve accuracy and productivity, ensure standardization and
          consistency of service, and free Federal employees to focus on more meaningful and
          analytical work.
SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

    This policy creates the basic framework for RPA at USDA.

    This policy may reference and mandate compliance with other directives. Compliance
    with such policies must defer to, and be superseded by, any prevailing or more recent
    Acts of Congress, Executive Orders, Presidential Policy Directives (PPD), and OMB
    memoranda, circulars, and guidance.

    This policy supports the OMB, The President’s Management Agenda (PMA), which
    focuses on the modernization of the Federal workforce.


SCOPE

This policy applies to all USDA RPA capable processes and systems in USDA, and to
Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, contractors, grantees, and others working for or on
behalf of USDA.


POLICY

    All USDA RPA development systems must adopt the RPA CoE development model.

    USDA RPA services must comply with all current Federal laws, USDA Information
    Technology (IT) security and risk management policies, and OCIO acquisition approval.

    USDA RPA services must comply with all Federal and Departmental privacy
    requirements, regulations, and policies, which will be reviewed periodically to align
    with changing the IT landscape and incorporate process and policy improvements.

    USDA RPA service acquisition vehicles must include Service Level Agreements (SLA)
    with clear, concise, and detailed language identifying the Service Provider
    responsibilities for accommodating Federal Information Security Modernization Act
    (FISMA 2014), and reporting and privacy management requirements per OMB
    Memorandum M-21-02, Fiscal Year 2020-2021 Guidance on Federal Information
    Security and Privacy Management Requirements.

    USDA RPA services must comply with DR 3180-001, Information Technology
    Standards.

    USDA RPA services must comply with the OCIO Information Security Center (ISC)
    Compliance and Policy Branch (CPB) standard operating procedure (SOP), CPB-SOP-
    004, USDA Seven-Step Risk Management Framework (RMF) Process Guide (USDA
    RMF).




                                             2
USDA RPA services must comply with DR 3540-003, Security Assessment and
Authorization [A&A], and the CPB Guidance Memo, Fiscal Year (FY) 2020 Security
Assessment and Authorization (A&A) Guidance.

USDA RPA services, including applications and functions residing on local computers
and Departmental, Mission Area, agency, and staff office infrastructure, must use
mature agile methodology as well as development, security, and operations
(DevSecOps) best practices per USDA RPA CoE strategy.

USDA RPA CoE strategy further provides that Mission Area, agency, and staff office IT
staff should become familiar with lean product management, agile development,
continuous delivery, and automated infrastructure at the team and program level as part
of any modernization plan. Additionally, non-IT staff supporting privacy, security, and
procurement should receive training in the multiple core disciplines outlined above.
Sustained progress in these staff training areas is foundational to the successful
implementation of new automation (RPA) efforts.

USDA RPA Program Office governs both Centralized and Federated Center of
Excellence (CoE) operational models. In the Centralized Model, the RPA CoE owns
and manages the entire process for bot (a computer program that performs automatic
repetitive tasks) intake, development, and production in coordination with the business
area process owners. The Federated Model business area manages their intake,
development, and production with RPA CoE touchpoints at strategic integrals.

All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must contact the CoE at
SMORPA@usda.gov for all new RPA adoption efforts.

All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must report all existing and new RPA
solutions and services to the CoE , including Pilot Projects, Proof-of-Concept projects,
training, and learning activities.

All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must develop RPA solutions using the
Department’s approved automation software suite.

All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must acquire the Department approved
RPA licenses and operating environments via the OCIO Digital Infrastructure Service
Center (DISC).

All USDA RPA development projects must include the involvement of a Qualified
Service Provider (QSP). Whether using the Federated or Centralized CoE model,
developers must meet the following QSP criteria to ensure quality products to the
Department. The following language must be part of any procurement for RPA
Services:

(1) The vendor or contractor must demonstrate that at least one member of the contract
    development team working directly on USDA automation, possesses an RPA



                                        3
    Developer Advanced Certificate of Completion from the Department’s approved
    software vendor to be considered a QSP. Note: Formal Federal Regulatory
    authority or industry standards have yet to establish a baseline for accreditation or
    competency.

(2) The Certificate of Completion proves that the user has successfully passed the
    Department’s approved software vendor’s RPA Developer Exam. It demonstrates
    that the graduate has been tested on the Department’s approved software vendor
    best practices and demonstrated their ability to develop a functional software robot.

(3) The Certified Developer must be part of the development team. Managers and
    supervisors from the developer’s employer do not satisfy this requirement.

Security

(1) All new application development efforts will bring security to the application and
    infrastructure by incorporating modern software development best practices, such as
    continuous monitoring and accredited platforms.

(2) All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must abide by DR 3640-001, Identity,
    Credential, and Access Management [ICAM], according to OMB, M-19-17,
    Enabling Mission Delivery through Improved Identity, Credential, and Access
    Management, to employ ICAM policies where applicable.

(3) All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will comply with the security
    requirements of the DISC.

(4) USDA will expand its continuous diagnostic capabilities for RPA solutions.

Acquisition

(1) All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must comply with DR 3130-009,
    Non-Major Information Technology (IT) Investments for non-major investments and
    DR 3130-010, United States Department of Agriculture Enterprise Information
    Technology Governance, and DR 3130-008, Definition of Major Information
    Technology Investments for major investments to ensure successful outcomes that
    align with business needs while meeting approved costs, schedule, and performance
    goals.

(2) All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must employ high-quality IT cost
    estimation practices per DR 3130-012, Information Technology Cost Estimating.

(3) All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must comply with IT capital planning
    and investment control (CPIC) practices per DR 3130-013, Information Technology
    Capital Planning and Investment Control, and embrace Technology Business
    Management (TBM) framework per the Introduction and Section 7, What is the



                                        4
       Agency IT Portfolio Summary; Section 11, What is the Major IT Business Case; and
       Section 13, How do IT Infrastructure, IT Security, and IT Management Standard
       Investments differ from Major Business Cases, of the OMB, FY 2021 IT Budget –
       Capital Planning Guidance.

   (4) All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will improve the Authorization to
       Operate (ATO) process to modernize and adapt the process to the RPA landscape,
       eliminate duplication of efforts, take advantage of inheritable security controls, and
       innovate Departmental approaches to security authorization within RPA solutions.

   (5) All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must refer to the Federal Chief
       Information Officer (CIO) Council guidance, The Application Rationalization
       Playbook, for best practices to evaluate existing Departmental contracts and RPA
       solutions for applicability before acquiring or developing new services.

   (6) All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must notify the RPA CoE for all RPA
       related acquisitions.

   (7) All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must coordinate with the Office of
       Contracting and Procurement (OCP), USDA Contracting Desk Book 3.2, to include
       clear, detailed SLAs and language in acquisition vehicles that protect the interests of
       USDA and allow for adequate administrative control, security monitoring,
       reporting, continuous visibility of assets, vendor performance measurements,
       clearly defined roles and responsibilities, remediation for non-compliance, and risk
       mitigation.

   (8) All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must employ the practice of category
       management to, where possible, procure common goods and services as a
       Department to eliminate redundancies, increase efficiency, and deliver more value
       and savings per OMB, M-19-13, Category Management: Making Smarter Use of
       Common Contract Solutions and Practices, and DR 3107-001, Management of
       USDA IT Enterprise Initiatives.


ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

   The USDA CIO will:

   (1) Serve as the chief policy advisor to the Secretary on RPA policy;

   (2) Develop and maintain Departmentwide RPA policy for USDA; and

   (3) Ensure the Office of the General Counsel (OGC) is engaged for advice and counsel
       concerning the acquisition and offering of RPA services, when appropriate.




                                           5
The Associate Chief Information Officer (ACIO), DISC will:

(1) Serve as Director of the USDA RPA CoE;

(2) Direct the USDA enterprise-class RPA service development;

(3) Implement and execute the necessary internal controls to proactively monitor,
    measure, audit, report, and enforce compliance with the provisions of the directive;

(4) Establish a Department-level RPA CoE to monitor, guide, and report all RPA
    activity at USDA;

(5) Design, develop, and implement networking architectures that provide DISC
    customers with the secure, multi-tenant, Platform as a Service (PaaS) infrastructure
    to deliver RPA services with 99.9% availability to Mission Areas, agencies, and
    staff offices;

(6) Use the RPA CoE to serve the Department for all day-to-day RPA adoption efforts;

(7) Ensure all new USDA RPA adoption efforts go through the RPA CoE to establish
    proper awareness and handling of enterprise RPA solutions;

(8) Serve as the RPA policy coordinator and technical advisor to the USDA CIO;

(9) Administer any certifications regarding RPA services and automation-based
    information systems that are required;

(10) Provide signature authority for routine RPA correspondence to Mission Areas,
     agencies, and staff offices from the OCIO; and

(11) Partner with Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to ensure the effective and
     efficient use of RPA services.

The USDA Chief Information Security Officer (CISO), OCIO-ISC, will:

(1) Advise the USDA CIO about strategies and methodologies for securing RPA
    services;

(2) Advise policy exception waiver requestors and reviewers on matters related to
    cybersecurity; and

(3) Improve the ATO process for RPA per DR 3540-003.

The Departmental Chief Privacy Officer (CPO), OCIO-ISC-CPO, will ensure RPA
service offerings comply with Federal and Departmental privacy requirements,




                                        6
regulations, and policies, including DR 3515-002, Privacy Policy and Compliance for
Personally Identifiable Information (PII).

The ACIO, Information Resource Management Center (IRMC) will:

(1) Ensure RPA service offerings comply with Departmental Enterprise Information
    Technology Governance (EITG) and CPIC policies;

(2) Ensure RPA service offerings comply with Acquisition Approval Request (AAR)
    process, the Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA);
    OMB M-12-10, Implementing PortfolioStat; and OMB M-15-14, Management and
    Oversight of Federal Information Technology, Section C, Transparency, Risk
    Management, Portfolio Review, and Reporting for TechStat requirements;

(3) Ensure RPA service offerings comply with Federal and Departmental Section 508
    requirements, regulations, and policies; and

(4) Ensure RPA service offerings comply with Federal and Departmental enterprise
    architecture (EA) regulations, policies, standards, and requirements.

The USDA General Counsel will:

(1) Serve as the Departmental Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Officer; and

(2) Ensure RPA service offerings comply with Federal 5 United States Code (U.S.C.) §
    552, DR 3450-002, Freedom of Information Act Implementing Regulations
    requirements and policies, and the regulations at 7 Code of Federal Regulations
    (CFR) Part 1, Administrative Regulations.

Mission Area Assistant CIOs will:

(1) Ensure that their Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices comply with this
    directive and other applicable Federal and USDA policies, regulations, and
    guidance regarding RPA;

(2) Ensure IT entities working for, or on behalf of, USDA understand their
    responsibilities when implementing RPA services;

(3) Ensure actions are taken to secure USDA information and information systems as
    required under Federal and USDA policies and guidance;

(4) Ensure that contract language for acquiring services addresses security monitoring,
    security auditing, and remediation of security concerns in accordance with Federal
    and USDA regulations and standards;




                                       7
(5) Record, track, and resolve all plans of action and milestones (POA&M) USDA CIO
    DR 3565-003, Plan of Action and Milestones Policy, and CAPE-SOP-003, Plan of
    Action and Milestones Management Standard Operating Procedure, Revision 1.1,
    November 2015, for RPA offerings in the USDA FISMA data management and
    reporting tool per DR 3540-003, Security Assessment and Authorization;

(6) Provide the USDA CIO with a written analysis annually on the progress of assuring
    IT systems to comply with this policy;

(7) Be responsive to RPA data calls and certifications as required; and

(8) Track and contain total cost of ownership expenditures for USDA RPA information
    systems.

Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office System Owners will:

(1) Use the RPA CoE as the intake point for all RPA efforts including pilot projects and
    proof-of-concept projects;

(2) Ensure statements of work, SLAs, and procurement requests for all RPA acquisition
    contracts include requirements for providing USDA with a proper level of
    performance and continuous accountability, availability, awareness, policy
    compliance, confidentiality, and integrity of the IT assets and data handled by
    automation services per DR 3520-002, Configuration Management;

(3) Ensure adequate budgeting for operating, managing, and scaling RPA as needed;
    and

(4) Document the configuration management and inventory management activities for
    RPA solutions.

The Director, Office of Human Resource Management (OHRM), serving as the Chief
Human Capital Officer (CHCO), will:

(1) Collaborate with the USDA CIO and Chief Financial Officer (CFO) to periodically
    update the training and hiring practices to ensure the IT workforce has the skillsets
    needed to efficiently use RPA, and

(2) Work jointly with the USDA CIO to identify two top positions or skill segment
    priorities and incorporate them into the Department’s Human Capital Operating
    Plan per 5 CFR Part 250, Personnel Management in Agencies, Federal CIO Council
    actions, and be consistent with the PMA.




                                        8
    The USDA CFO will:

    (1) Develop and implement strategies for shifting resources to high-value activities to
        eliminate unnecessary or obsolete compliance requirements and reduce the cost of
        mission-support operations, as required by OMB M-18-23; and

    (2) Collaborate with the CIO and CHCO to periodically update the procurement and
        acquisition practices to ensure the Department has the capital planning and talent
        acquisition strategies suitable for effective RPA adoption.

    The Director, OCP, will ensure all RPA contracts align with the Federal Acquisition
    Regulations (FAR), FAR Part 39, Acquisition of Information Technology.

    The Departmental Records Officer in the Office of Information Affairs in in the Office
    of the General Counsel (OGC), will ensure RPA service offerings comply with Federal
    and Departmental records management, eDiscovery, litigation hold, and electronically
    stored information records retention requirements, regulations, and policies.

    Information Systems Security Managers (ISSM) will safeguard and maintain
    information systems within each Mission Area that RPA integrates, as required by
    Departmental Manual (DM) 3545-002, USDA Information Systems Security Program
    (ISSP).


POLICY EXCEPTIONS

All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are required to conform to this policy.
The Mission Area Assistant CIOs, and Agency and Staff Office IT Directors, must submit a
waiver request to the ACIO DISC for internal coordination and review on behalf of the
USDA CIO if:

    A policy requirement cannot be met as explicitly stated; or

    Current USDA RPA CoE standards and offerings do not meet the mission needs;

    The waiver request must explain the reason for the request, identify compensating
    controls or actions that meet the policy’s intent, and identify how the compensating
    controls or actions provide a comparable or greater level of defense or compliance than
    required by the policy; and

    Waivers approved by the USDA CIO must be associated with a National Institute of
    Standards and Technology (NIST), Special Publication (SP) 800-53 (Rev. 5), Security
    and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations, control, recorded, and
    tracked as a POA&M item in the USDA FISMA data management and reporting tool.
    Waivers will expire at the end of the FY or 6 months from the date of approval,




                                           9
    whichever is longer. Unless otherwise specified, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
    offices must review and renew approved policy waivers every FY.


INQUIRIES

Inquiries about this policy must be directed to the ACIO DISC. Contact the ACIO DISC at
SMORPA@usda.gov.


                                        -END-




                                          10
                               APPENDIX A

                    ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


A&A         Assessment and Authorization
AAR         Acquisition Approval Request
ACIO        Associate Chief Information Officer
ATO         Authorization to Operate
CDM         Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation
CFO         Chief Financial Officer
CFR         Code of Federal Regulations
CHCO        Chief Human Capital Officer
CIO         Chief Information Officer
CISO        Chief Information Security Officer
CoE         Center of Excellence
CPB         Compliance and Policy Branch (OCIO-ISC Component)
CPIC        Capital Planning and Investment Control
CPO         Chief Privacy Officer
DevSecOps   Development, Security, and Operations
DHS         Department of Homeland Security
DISC        Digital Infrastructure Services Center (OCIO Component)
DM          Departmental Management
DR          Departmental Regulation
EA          Enterprise Architecture
EITG        Enterprise Information Technology Governance
FAQ         Frequently Asked Question
FAR         Federal Acquisition Regulations
FIPS PUB    Federal Information Processing Standards Publication
FISMA       Federal Information Security Modernization Act
FITARA      Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
FOIA        Freedom of Information Act
FY          Fiscal Year
GSA         General Services Administration
ICAM        Identity, Credential, and Access Management
IRMC        Information Management Resource Center (OCIO Component)
ISC         Information Security Center (OCIO Component)
ISSM        Information Systems Security Manager
IT          Information Technology
NIST        National Institute of Standards and Technology
OCFO        Office of the Chief Financial Officer
OCIO        Office of the Chief Information Officer
OCP         Office of Contracting and Procurement
OGC         Office of the General Counsel
OHRM        Office of Human Resource Management
OMB         Office of Management and Budget



                                    A-1
PaaS     Platform as a Service
P.L.     Public Law
PMA      President’s Management Agenda
POA&M    Plan of Action and Milestones
PPD      Presidential Policy Directive
QSP      Qualified Service Provider
RMF      Risk Management Framework
RPA      Robotic Process Automation
SLA      Service Level Agreement
SOP      Standard Operating Procedure
SP       Special Publication
TBM      Technology Business Management
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                                   A-2
                                           APPENDIX B

                                           DEFINITIONS


Agile. An alternative approach to traditional project management or product development. It is
a value-based, iterative approach under which requirements and solutions evolve through the
collaborative effort of self-organizing cross-functional teams. Agile advocates adaptive
planning, evolutionary development, early delivery, and continuous improvement, and it
encourages rapid and flexible response to change. (Source: General Services Administration
(GSA), GSA Tech Guides, Agile Guides website)

Bot. A computer program that performs automatic repetitive tasks. (Source: Merriam-Webster,
Dictionary website, retrieved May 11, 2022)

Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM). A CDM program is a dynamic approach to
fortifying the cybersecurity of Government networks and systems. CDM provides Federal
departments and agencies with capabilities and tools that identify cybersecurity risk on an
ongoing basis, prioritize these risks based upon potential impacts, and enable cybersecurity
personnel to mitigate the most significant problems first. (Source: Department of Homeland
Security (DHS), Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), Continuous
Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) website)

Contractor Support. Contractor support encompasses on-site or off-site contractor technical or
other support staff. (Source: OMB, M-12-20, FY 2012 Reporting Instructions for the Federal
Information Security Management Act and Agency Privacy Management)

Development, Security, and Operations (DevSecOps). A cultural and engineering practice that
breaks down barriers and opens collaboration between development, security, and operations
organizations using automation to focus on rapid, frequent delivery of secure infrastructure and
software to production. It encompasses intake to release of software and manages those flows
predictably, transparently, and with minimal human intervention and effort. (Source: GSA,
Tech Guides, DevSecOps Guide)

Executive Agency. An executive department specified in 5 U.S.C. § 101, Executive
departments; a military department specified in 5 U.S.C. § 102, Military departments; an
independent establishment as defined in 5 U.S.C. § 104(1), Independent establishment; and a
wholly owned Government corporation fully subject to the provision of 31 U.S.C. Chapter 91,
Government Corporations. (Source: 41 U.S.C. § 133, Executive Agency)

Federal Information System. An information system used or operated by an executive agency,
by a contractor of an executive agency, or by another organization on behalf of an executive
agency. (Source: 40 U.S.C. § 11331, Responsibilities for Federal information system standards)

Information. Information is categorized according to its information type. An information type
is a specific category of information (e.g., privacy, medical, proprietary, financial, investigative,



                                                 B-1
contractor sensitive, security management) defined by an organization or, in some instances, by a
specific law, Executive order, directive, policy, or regulation. (Source: NIST, Federal
Information Processing Standards Publication (FIPS PUB) 199, Standards for Security
Categorization of Federal information and Information Systems)

Information Resources. Information and related resources, such as personnel, equipment, funds,
and information technology. (Source: 44 U.S.C. § 3502, Definitions)

Information Systems. A discrete set of information resources organized for the collection,
processing, maintenance, use, sharing, dissemination, or disposition of information. (Source: 44
U.S.C. § 3502)

Information System Operated by a Contractor on Behalf of an Agency. An information system
operated by a contractor on behalf of an agency must be treated in the same way as agency-
operated information systems. The level of effort required for security authorization depends on
the impact level of the information contained in the system. The security authorization boundary
for these systems must be carefully mapped to ensure that Federal information (Source: OMB,
M-12-20):

        Is adequately protected;

        Is segregated from the contractor, state, or grantee corporate infrastructure; and

        There is an interconnection security agreement in place to address connections from the
        contractor, state, or grantee system containing the agency information to systems
        external to the security authorization boundary.

Information Technology (IT). Any equipment or interconnected system or subsystem of
equipment that is used in the automatic acquisition, storage, manipulation, management,
movement, control, display, switching, interchange, transmission, or reception of data or
information by the executive agency. For purposes of the preceding sentence, equipment is used
by an executive agency if the equipment is used by the executive agency directly or is used by a
contractor under a contract with the executive agency which:

        Requires the use of such equipment; or

        Requires the use, to a significant extent, of such equipment in the performance of a
        service or the furnishing of a product.

The term information technology includes computers, ancillary equipment, software, firmware,
and similar procedures, services (including support services), and related resources. (Source: 40
U.S.C. § 11101, Definitions)

PortfolioStat 2.0. Is a tool that agencies use to assess the current maturity of their IT portfolio
management process, make decisions on eliminating duplication, augment current CIO-led CPIC
processes, and move to shared solutions in order to maximize the return on IT investments across



                                               B-2
the portfolio. (Source: OMB, PortfolioStat 2.0: Driving Better Management and Efficiency in
Federal IT)

Robotic Process Automation (RPA). RPA tools are software programs designed to interact with
existing applications and automate routine rules-based tasks by mimicking user interactions.
RPA tools reduce the burden of repetitive, simple tasks on employees, and have the potential to
save time and taxpayer dollars, improve accuracy and productivity, ensure standardization and
consistency of service, and free Federal employees to focus on more meaningful and analytical
work. Additionally, RPA tools operate on existing information systems so agencies do not have
to invest time and resources redesigning systems or refactoring applications. Therefore, RPA
solutions tend to have lower implementation costs and lower risk than large IT transformations.
(Source: Federal CIO Council, Robotic Process Automation in Federal Agencies)

TechStat. Is a face-to-face, evidence-based accountability review of an IT investment for
Federal agencies. (Source: OMB, TechStat: Improving Government Performance)




                                              B-3
                                        APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


5 CFR Part 250, Personnel Management in Agencies

7 CFR Part 1, Administrative Regulations

5 U.S.C. § 101, Executive departments

5 U.S.C. § 102, Military departments

5 U.S.C. § 104(1), Independent establishment

31 U.S.C. Chapter 91, Government Corporations

40 U.S.C. § 11101, Definitions

40 U.S.C. § 11331, Responsibilities for Federal information system standards

41 U.S.C. § 133, Executive Agency

44 U.S.C. § 3502, Definitions

Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, 40 U.S.C. § 11101, et seq., February 10, 1996

Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency
(CISA), Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) website

Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR), FAR Part 39, Acquisition of Information Technology

Federal Chief Information Officer (CIO) Council, The Application Rationalization Playbook,
Version 1.1, June 18, 2019

Federal CIO Council, Management and Oversight of Federal Information Technology
Implementation Guide website

Federal CIO Council, Robotic Process Automation in Federal Agencies

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. §3551, et seq.,
December 18, 2014

Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), P.L. 113-291, 128 Stat.
3292, Title VIII, Subtitle D, § 831-837, December 19, 2014




                                               C-1
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), 5 U.S.C. § 552

GSA, GSA Tech Guides, Agile Guides website

GSA, GSA Tech Guides, DevSecOps Guide website

Merriam-Webster, Dictionary website

NIST, FIPS PUB 199, Standards for Security Categorization of Federal information and
Information Systems, February 2004

NIST, SP 800-53 Revision 5, Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and
Organizations, September 2020, includes updates as of December 10, 2020

OMB, FY 2021 IT Budget - Capital Planning Guidance, June 28, 2019, Technical Business
Management

OMB, M-12-10, Implementing PortfolioStat, March 30, 2012

OMB, M-12-20, FY 2012 Reporting Instructions for the Federal Information Security
Management Act and Agency Privacy Management, September 27, 2012

OMB, M-15-14, Management and Oversight of Federal Information Technology, June 10, 2015

OMB, M-18-23, Shifting From Low-Value to High-Value Work, August 27, 2018

OMB, M-19-02, Fiscal Year 2018-2019 Guidance on Federal Information Security and Privacy
Management Requirements, October 25, 2018

OMB, M-19-13, Category Management: Making Smarter Use of Common Contract Solutions
and Practices, March 20, 2019

OMB, M-19-17, Enabling Mission Delivery through Improved Identity, Credential, and Access
Management, May 21, 2019

OMB, M-21-02, Fiscal Year 2020-2021 Guidance on Federal Information Security and Privacy
Management Requirements, November 9, 2020

OMB, PortfolioStat 2.0: Driving Better Management and Efficiency in Federal IT, March 27,
2013

OMB, The President’s Management Agenda webpage

OMB, TechStat: Improving Government Performance, February 24, 2010

USDA, DM 3545-002, Information Systems Security Program, March 31, 2006



                                             C-2
USDA, DR 3107-001, Management of USDA IT Enterprise Initiatives, May 12, 2016

USDA, DR3130-008, Definition of Major Information Technology Investments, August 13, 2020

USDA, DR 3130-009, Non-Major Information Technology (IT) Investments, September 28, 2020

USDA, DR 3130-010, United States Department of Agriculture Enterprise Information
Technology Governance, April 20, 2021

USDA, DR 3130-012, Information Technology Cost Estimating, March 4, 2016

USDA, DR 3130-013, Information Technology Capital Planning and Investment Control, May
24, 2021

USDA, DR 3145-001, Oversight and Management of the Federal Information Technology
Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), May 7, 2021

USDA, DR 3180-001, Information Technology Network Standards, January 5, 2021

USDA, DR 3440-003, Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) Program, September 13, 2021

USDA, DR 3445-001, Media Protection, October 30, 2019

USDA, DR 3450-002, Freedom of Information Act Implementing Regulations, February 7, 2003

USDA, DR 3515-002, Privacy Policy and Compliance for Personally Identifiable Information
(PII), October 30, 2020

USDA, DR 3520-002, Configuration Management, August 14, 2014

USDA, DR 3540-003, Security Assessment and Authorization, August 12, 2014

USDA, DR 3565-003, Plan of Action and Milestones Policy, September 25, 2013

USDA, DR 3640-001, Identity, Credential, and Access Management, June 8, 2021

USDA, DR 4030-001, Section 508, September 8, 2014

USDA, Integrated Information Technology Governance Framework

USDA, OCIO, ISC, CAPE-SOP-003, Plan of Action and Milestones Management Standard
Operating Procedure, Revision 1.1, November 2015

USDA, OCIO, ISC, CPB Guidance Memo, Fiscal Year (FY) 2020 Security Assessment and
Authorization (A&A) Guidance, September 2020



                                           C-3
USDA, OCIO, ISC, CPB-SOP-004, Revision 4, USDA Seven Step Risk Management Framework
(RMF) Process Guide (USDA RMF), September 2019

USDA, OCP, Contracting Desk Book 3.2, April 4, 2022




                                          C-4
