                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                              NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                      DR 3640-001
                                                              DATE:
 SUBJECT: Identity, Credential, and Access Management         June 8, 2021
                                                              EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer
                                                              June 8, 2026



Section                                                                                 Page

1.   Purpose                                                                               1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                    2
3.   Scope                                                                                 3
4.   Background                                                                            4
5.   Policy                                                                                4
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                            8
7.   Penalties And Disciplinary Actions For Non-Compliance                                14
8.   Policy Exceptions                                                                    14
9.   Inquiries                                                                            15

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                 A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                 C-1



1. PURPOSE

          This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of
          Agriculture (USDA) Identity, Credential, and Access Management (ICAM) policy for
          unclassified systems. This DR defines the authority for ICAM governance, policy,
          procedure, and technology.

          This DR complies with the requirements of the following:

              Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act, Public Law 106-229;

              Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Memorandum M-19-17, Enabling
              Mission Delivery through Improved Identity, Credential, and Access Management;

              National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), Special Publication (SP)
              800-47, Security Guide for Interconnecting Information Technology Systems;
         NIST, SP 800-53 Revision 5, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal
         Information Systems and Organizations;

         NIST, SP 800-63-3, Digital Identity Guidelines;

         NIST, SP 800-157, Guidelines for Derived Personal Identity Verification (PIV)
         Credentials;

         NIST, Federal Information Processing Standards Publication (FIPS PUB) 186-4,
         Digital Signature Standard (DSS); and

         NIST, FIPS PUB 201-2, Personal Identity Verification (PIV) of Federal Employees
         and Contractors.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     This DR supersedes DR 3640-001, Identity, Credential, and Access Management, dated
     December 9, 2011.

     This DR is effective immediately when published and remains in effect until superseded
     or expired.

     This DR aligns with DR 4620-002, Common Identification Standard for U.S.
     Department of Agriculture.

     Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their processes with this DR within
     6 months of the publication date.

     If any provision of this DR is superseded by another Departmental Regulation or
     otherwise invalidated by external laws, directives, or standards, it does not invalidate nor
     affect other provisions of this DR.

     In case of reorganization, the USDA must ensure each of the roles and responsibilities
     described in this DR are assigned to another official, executive, or responsible
     individual.

     In this DR, the term “employee” or “USDA employee” refers to a Federal civil servant
     employed by, detailed or assigned to, the USDA, including members of the Armed
     Forces.

     In this DR, the term “personnel” or “USDA personnel” encompasses USDA employees,
     appointees, contractors, partners, affiliates, interns, fellows, and volunteers who work
     for, or on behalf of, the USDA, and whose work is overseen by USDA employees.




                                              2
3. SCOPE

     This DR applies to all the following:

           USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices, including USDA personnel;

           Federal information, in any medium or form; generated, collected, provided,
           transmitted, stored, maintained; or accessed by; or on behalf of, the USDA;

           Information systems or services; cloud based, used or operated by, for, or on behalf
           of the USDA that is within a USDA accredited system boundary; and

           Facilities used by USDA from which these information systems or services operate,
           whether owned or operated by the USDA, or owned or operated on behalf of the
           USDA by a contractor, subcontractor, or other organization.

     This DR extends to the processes, procedures, and technology for any Information
     Technology (IT) system that requires management or authentication of an “identity.”

           For this DR, “identity” refers to the unique representation of a subject. This
           includes a person, a device, a Non-Person Entity (NPE), or an automated
           technology such as Robotic Process Automation (RPA). They must be engaged in a
           transaction with at least one Federal subject or resource; including data, information
           systems or facilities.

           This DR refers to “identity” in two contexts:

           (a) Electronic Federal enterprise identity (or simply enterprise identity), which
               refers to the unique representation of personnel who act on behalf of the
               USDA; an enterprise user (such as a mission or business partner); a device; or
               a technology; that a Federal agency manages; and

           (b) Public identity, which refers to the unique representation of a subject that a
               Federal agency interacts with; but does not directly manage. Public identity
               may also refer to a mechanism of trust used to render services to the American
               public or USDA partners and collaborators.

     Detailed supporting processes, procedures, and requirements will be described in
     forthcoming associated ICAM Departmental Manuals (DM).

     Nothing in this DR will alter the requirements for the protection of information
     associated with national security systems such as those identified in the Federal
     Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA), 44 United States Code (U.S.C.) 3551
     § et seq., or the policies, directives, instructions, or standards issued by the Committee
     on National Security Systems (CNSS); or the intelligence community.



                                              3
4. BACKGROUND

  Advances in technology enable more digital and business transactions; and they also provide
  the opportunity to improve service delivery. The USDA continues to modernize and
  consolidate IT infrastructure and services to improve efficiency, effectiveness, security, and
  customer experience. New challenges have emerged along with these advances; such as data
  breaches exposing controlled unclassified information (CUI); for example, passwords and
  Personally Identifiable Information (PII), in particular. Identity management has become
  even more critical to the USDA’s successful delivery of services.

  To ensure secure and efficient operations, the USDA must be able to identify, credential,
  monitor, and manage identities that access Federal resources; such as data, information
  systems, facilities, and secured areas. The USDA must be able to conduct identity proofing,
  establish enterprise digital identities, and adopt sound processes for authentication and access
  control. This significantly affects the security, privacy, and delivery of the USDA mission;
  and enhances the trust and safety of digital transactions with the American public.

  The USDA ICAM transformation is part of a larger Governmentwide mandate to implement
  ICAM security disciplines. This will enable the right individual to access the right resources,
  at the right time, for the right reasons. The USDA ICAM program includes policy,
  processes, technologies, and personnel. Together, they identify, credential, monitor, and
  manage user access to information and information systems for the USDA.


5. POLICY

      ICAM Governance.

            ICAM requires an enterprisewide approach, to harmonize governance, architecture,
            and acquisition; and to ensure an efficient and effective implementation. To
            accomplish this, the USDA will establish an ICAM Program Office for the
            enterprise to:

            (a) Manage, administer, maintain, and continually improve the program to meet
                regulatory requirements;

            (b) Lead and synchronize ICAM implementation activities for all the USDA;

            (c) Define, implement, and govern; the policy, processes, and technology
                solutions; to deliver enterprise ICAM capabilities to all the USDA; and

            (d) Be responsible for daily operations, maintenance, and integration support; of
                ICAM shared services and enterprise capabilities managing digital identities,
                credentials, and access; to the USDA systems and applications.



                                               4
The USDA ICAM Program Office must establish and maintain an ICAM Advisory
Council. The ICAM Advisory Council will:

(a) Include the Chief Information Officer (CIO), the Chief Financial Officer
    (CFO), the Chief Information Security Officer (CISO), the Senior Agency
    Official for Privacy (SAOP), the Chief Data Officer, the Chief Acquisition
    Officer (CAO) and may include others as necessary;

(b) Include senior officials from the Office of Human Resource Management
    (OHRM), the Office of the General Counsel (OGC), and the Office of Safety,
    Security, and Protection (OSSP); and

(c) Adhere to the structure, functions, roles, and responsibilities, set forth in the
    ICAM Advisory Council Charter.

The USDA ICAM Program Office will establish and maintain an ICAM Cross
Agency Working Group (CAWG). The ICAM CAWG will:

(a) Include ICAM liaisons from each Mission Area, agency, and staff office; to
    coordinate the implementation, management, and maintenance of ICAM
    capabilities;

(b) The function of the CAWG is to facilitate communication with stakeholders,
    enable the sharing of feedback, and coordinate ICAM efforts with USDA
    mission areas.

(c) Adhere to the structure, functions, roles, and responsibilities set forth in the
    ICAM CAWG Charter;

(d) Align ICAM services and management with USDA’s mission;

(e) Establishes cross-team collaboration to provide guidance, identify common
    agency challenges, establish best practices, and share solutions;

(f) Ensures proper agency resource allocation to ICAM programs and projects;

(g) Reviews post-implementation evaluations to ensure that ICAM services and
    programs meet forecasted benefits and outcomes;

(h) Provides counsel to the ICAM Program Office to align ICAM technology,
    policy, and execution with USDA’s overall mission;

(i) Advise, guide, and Support USDA Enterprise Risk Management capabilities to
    effectively guide enterprise ICAM efforts; and




                                    5
    (j) Ensure ICAM processes, procedures, and technology solutions meet Mission
        Area, agency, and staff office requirements for mission delivery.

    The USDA ICAM Program Office will outline performance expectations, including
    security and privacy risk management, throughout the identity lifecycle for the
    enterprise. These performance expectations must support the President’s
    Management Agenda (PMA) Cross Agency Priority (CAP) goals.

    As outlined in NIST SP 800-63-3, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must
    incorporate Digital Identity Risk Management into their existing processes when
    working with ICAM integrations. ICAM integrations require an Interconnection
    Security Agreement (ISA) document. The ISA must be completed in compliance
    with the requirements of NIST SP 800-47.

ICAM Architecture.

    The USDA ICAM Program Office must establish solutions for ICAM services and
    maintain a technology solution roadmap for the enterprise. ICAM solutions must
    adhere to the following:

    (a) Align with the Federal Identity, Credential, and Access Management (FICAM)
        architecture, based on the Federal Identity, Credential, and Access
        Management (FICAM) Roadmap and Implementation Guidance, Version 2.0;

    (b) Align with Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) requirements;

    (c) Applicable Federal policies, standards, playbooks, and guidelines; and

    (d) Publish in the ICAM service catalog.

    All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must use the following:

    (a) Enterprise ICAM shared services to fulfill their ICAM requirements. Any
        exception to using Enterprise ICAM shared services must be approved using
        the waiver process.

    (b) Enterprise ICAM shared services; for credentialing and identity proofing
        public consumers who require access to USDA digital services.

    (c) The ICAM Enterprise Identity Management Service (EIMS) is the authoritative
        source for managing the digital identity lifecycle of all person identities. This
        includes all categories of USDA personnel, as well as public citizens who
        require authenticated access to the USDA online services.

    (d) The ICAM EIMS is the authoritative source for managing the digital identity
        lifecycle of all NPEs. This includes service accounts and automated



                                       6
    technologies; such as RPA tools and Artificial Intelligence (AI). EIMS ensures
    the digital identity is distinguishable, auditable, and consistently managed.

All USDA systems or applications that store, maintain, or consume user accounts;
must:

(a) Integrate with the ICAM EIMS to manage the digital identity lifecycle; and to
    enable compliance auditing and reporting;

(b) Establish processes to manage access control;

(c) Revoke access privileges when no longer authorized; and

(d) Revoke or destroy credentials in a timely manner, to prevent unauthorized
    access to information systems.

All USDA systems or applications that require authentication must use one of three
approved enterprise authentication services, as appropriate, for the system use case;

(a) Enterprise Active Directory; for the USDA’s domain for end user office
    automation services;

(b) Enterprise Data Center Active Directory; for the USDA’s data center
    privileged system access; or

(c) eAuthentication Service; for all web and mobile application access, including
    internal users and public citizens.

All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must require the use of
Homeland Security Presidential Directive (HSPD)-12, Policy for a Common
Identification Standard for Federal Employees and Contractors, compliant
credentials by all federal employees and contractors. These credentials include, but
are not limited to, the following:

(a) Personal Identity Verification (PIV) Credential;

(b) Personal Identity Verification Interoperable Credential (PIV-I); and

(c) Derived PIV (PIV-D) where applicable per Office of Personnel Management
    (OPM) requirements).

The HSPD-12 credentials serve as the primary means of identification and
authentication to Federal information systems, federally controlled facilities, and
other secured areas.




                                   7
    As technology evolves, the USDA ICAM Program, in cooperation with the
    Information Security Center (ISC), will review or approve Mission Area, agency,
    and staff office specific implementation of additional credential solutions. These
    must meet the intent of HSPD-12 and align with NIST guidelines and
    Governmentwide ICAM requirements; such as mobile and cloud identity.

    All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must follow the standard PIV
    exemption process approved by the ICAM Program Office and ISC.

    All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must require and implement
    the use of the PIV credential digital signature capability for internal business. For
    external business signature transactions, it is the responsibility of the USDA
    Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to use alternative digital or electronic
    signature mechanisms in compliance with NIST 800-63-3.

    All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices; must ensure use of the PIV
    credential for physical access to Federal facilities and secured areas is implemented
    per the following:

    (a) Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) The Risk Management
        Process for Federal Facilities: An Interagency Security Committee Standard,
        or any successive version.

    (b) NIST SP 800-116, Revision l, Guidelines for the Use of PIV Credentials in
        Facility Access, or any successive version.

    All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must update their technology
    roadmaps to adhere to the requirements of this policy.

Acquisition of ICAM Capabilities and Services.

    IT products and tools procured that require user authentication must comply with
    one of the following:

    (a) Support PIV or other HSPD-12 compliant credentials; or

    (b) Integrate with ICAM shared services that enable HSPD-12 compliant
        authentication through commercially available open standards.

    All contracts requiring contractors to have access to federally controlled facilities,
    or information systems, must include requirement to comply with HSPD-12 and
    FIPS PUB 201-2. This is based on OPM requirements and the Federal Acquisition
    Regulation (FAR), 48 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) § 4.13, Personal Identity
    Verification.




                                        8
          The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) CDM Program must be leveraged to
          accelerate procurement and deployment; of tools related to the ICAM capabilities of
          CDM.

          Products and services acquired to further HSPD-12; and ICAM implementations;
          must be compliant with the following.

          (a) OMB policy;

          (b) NIST standards; and

          (c) General Services Administration (GSA) Approved Products List (APL) and
              CDM Approved Products List (when applicable).


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

      The USDA Deputy Secretary, serving as the USDA Chief Operating Officer (COO),
      will:

          Ensure regular coordination among the CIO and USDA Mission Area, agency, and
          staff office leaders, to implement, manage, and maintain the USDA’s ICAM
          policies, processes, and technologies; and

          Ensure establishment of an ICAM Advisory Council; that will maintain the charter
          for management of ICAM.

      The USDA Assistant Secretary for Administration will:

          Ensure USDA administrative programs, policies, advice, and counsel meet the
          needs of USDA programs and organizations consistent with laws and mandates;

          Provide safe efficient facilities and services to customers; and

          Sponsor the ICAM Advisory Council that will be established by the ICAM
          program.

      The USDA CIO will:

          Ensure the coordination, implementation, and management of all the Federal ICAM
          requirements;

          Designate the enterprise ICAM Program Office to manage and administer the
          USDA ICAM program; in accordance with the Federal governmentwide policies
          and regulations;




                                              9
    Designate the solutions for the ICAM services as the authoritative source; that
    encompass the entire USDA enterprise;

    Provide oversight of the Mission Area, agency, and staff office acquisition of the
    ICAM technology solutions to eliminate duplication with enterprise shared service
    capabilities;

    Provide oversight to promote and ensure the Mission Area, agency, and staff office
    compliance with this policy and associated DMs;

    Define the ICAM related performance expectations for Mission Area Assistant
    CIOs, to support governmentwide management requirements such as PMA CAP
    goals; and

    Incorporate objectives for continual improvement of ICAM into USDA IT strategic
    plans and review with OMB, per Circular A-11, Preparation, Submission and
    Execution of the Budget.

The USDA CISO will:

    Provide oversight to the assessment and authorization of Mission Area, agency, and
    staff office systems to ensure compliance with this policy and associated DMs;

    Incorporate Digital Identity Risk Management assessment, as outlined in NIST SP
    800-63, into the existing NIST SP 800-37 Revision 2, Risk Management
    Framework [RMF] for Information Systems and Organizations process, including
    the selection of assurance levels commensurate with the risk to systems and
    applications;

    Ensure continued coordination between the USDA CDM Program and the USDA
    ICAM Program; and

    Designate a representative to participate in the ICAM Advisory Council.

The USDA ICAM Program Manager will:

(1) Provide ICAM shared service platforms to support managing identities and
    credentials, and access to USDA and Mission Area, agency, and staff office
    applications, systems, and services per Federal ICAM Architecture and CDM
    requirements;

(2) Publish and maintain the ICAM DMs, guidance, or handbooks which will provide
    detailed information and guidance about the use of systems and processes to meet
    the requirements in this ICAM policy;




                                      10
(3) Operate enterprise ICAM systems in compliance with USDA security requirements;
    and be responsible for assessment, authorization and continuous monitoring for
    ICAM Shared Services;

(4) Establish and maintain an ICAM Advisory Council, including governance structure,
    functions, roles, and responsibilities that will be described in the ICAM Advisory
    Council Charter; and

(5) Establish and maintain an ICAM CAWG including governance structure, functions,
    roles and responsibilities; that will be described in the ICAM CAWG Charter. The
    ICAM CAWG will plan, coordinate, and implement Mission Area, agency, and
    staff office specific ICAM initiatives, directives and activities; in coordination with
    the ICAM Program Office and communicate processes and procedures to its user
    population.

The Chief Security Director, OSSP, will:

    Designate a representative and alternate to participate in the ICAM Advisory
    Council;

    Offer consultation services in ICAM program, policy, and process direction for
    homeland security and emergency coordination activities and responsibilities;

    Maintain an enterprise Physical Access Control Systems (ePACS) capability and
    assist and support to integrate it with enterprise ICAM shared services; and

The Deputy Director, OHRM will:

    Designate a representative to participate in the ICAM Advisory Council;

    Develop and issue USDA wide policies and procedures to ensure that OHRM,
    Mission Area, agency, staff office, or external services that process new employees,
    accurately and timely enter all identity information required for ICAM compliance
    so that identity data for new hires is available to the ICAM system before their start
    date;

    Maintain timely changes, as appropriate, to identity related data that is used for
    ICAM purposes, or in ICAM connected systems to meet regulatory requirements,
    ICAM goals, and USDA objectives for improved efficiency through guidance from
    the ICAM Advisory Council;

    Collaborate with the USDA ICAM Program Office to identify attributes in human
    resource systems that will be designated as authoritative, and be part of the
    standardized core attribute list that constitutes the minimum requirements for a
    single digital identity record; and




                                        11
    Develop policies and procedures to ensure that access to Departmental information
    systems is granted only to individuals with an established need to know and
    meeting the minimum interim or full background investigation requirements
    consistent with the information system and level of access; being requested.

USDA Mission Area Assistant CIOs will:

    Comply with this policy, associated DMs, and ICAM related mandates, regulations,
    and guidance;

    Designate a Mission Area ICAM Liaison to coordinate activities with the USDA
    ICAM Program Office and to participate in the Advisory Council;

    Ensure compatibility of Mission Area, agency, and staff office Physical Access
    Control Systems (PACS) and Logical Access Control Systems (LACS) with
    Departmental systems, policies, and procedures;

    Use enterprise ICAM shared services for the creation, maintenance, and removal of
    identity and credential information for all persons accessing USDA PACS and
    LACS;

    Ensure that all persons accessing Departmental systems have a USDA accepted
    identity;

    Enforce the PIV card usage to meet Federal requirements;

    Ensure all relevant attributes have been appropriately completed;

    Request extensions or exceptions per Departmental guidance for systems or
    processes that cannot be aligned to the ICAM program directives;

    Waivers or request for deviations of the approved ICAM program requirements are
    still required to meet all Federal ICAM requirements; and

    Work with the USDA ICAM Program Office and USDA CDM Program to
    understand requirements and identify future CDM phase capabilities that support
    ICAM goals.

The Senior Mission Area Officials Responsible for administrative business operations
will:

    Establish standardized roles and responsibilities to process onboarding and
    separation actions for all USDA personnel;

    Identify the responsible party or organization to process onboarding and separation
    actions for all USDA non-federal personnel;



                                      12
    Ensure processing of onboarding and separation actions for all USDA non-federal
    personnel is completed in USDA's enterprise Human Resources authoritative
    system for non-federal personnel; and

    Ensure policies and procedures are established to process and enter:

    (a) New actions for all USDA personnel into designated USDA enterprise identity
        systems; prior to entry on duty date; and

    (b) Separation actions for all USDA personnel into USDA enterprise systems prior
        to the personnel’s separation date.

The Mission Area Human Resources Directors (MAHRD) will:

    Implement procedures to process and enter:

    (a) New actions for USDA employees into USDA enterprise systems prior to entry
        on duty date; and

    (b) Separation actions for USDA employees into USDA enterprise systems; in
        advance of employees’ separation date.

Mission Area ICAM Liaisons will:

    Support and participate in the ICAM Advisory Council;

    Work directly with the ICAM Program Office on all ICAM program activities;

    Assist the USDA CIO with implementing ICAM in the Department and provide all
    details when any service or systems will be integrated; or removed from the USDA
    ICAM system;

    Serve as the primary coordinator for all ICAM related activities in the Department
    and prioritize ICAM implementations as directed by USDA leadership
    organizational leadership, and business needs; and

    Provide reports and data on the USDA Agency ICAM implementation activities and
    progress as requested by the ICAM Program Office, or as required by Federal
    directive.

USDA personnel will:

(1) Notify their PIV credential sponsor or human resources point of contact of any
    changes in identity information, such as legal name or citizenship status;




                                      13
     (2) Use their PIV or other HSPD-12 compliant credential for accessing information
         systems and facilities and follow the set procedures when PIV enforcement is not
         available;

     (3) Use only the USDA approved credential(s) for accessing PACS and LACS in
         USDA;

     (4) Not share their credentials or secret keys with another person;

     (5) Secure their credentials and secret keys in a way that reduces the likelihood that
         others will use them; and

     (6) Return their PIV or other HSPD-12 compliant credential for accessing information
         systems and facilities when separating from USDA as an employee, contractor,
         intern or volunteer.


7. PENALTIES AND DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS FOR NON-COMPLIANCE

     DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, Section 16 sets forth USDA
     policy, procedures, and standards on employee responsibilities and conduct regarding
     the use of computers and telecommunications equipment. DR 4070-735-001, Section
     21, states that a violation of any of the responsibilities and conduct standards contained
     in this directive may be cause for disciplinary or adverse action; and

     Such disciplinary or adverse action will be affected in accordance with applicable law
     and regulations, such as OPM and OMB regulations, and 5 CFR § 2635, Standards of
     Ethical Conduct for Federal Employees of the Executive Branch.


8. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

     All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices; are required to conform to this
     policy. If a policy requirement cannot be met as explicitly stated, a waiver may be
     requested. To request the waiver to this policy the application system owner must
     follow the standard information security exception processes. Note that an approved
     waiver does not constitute compliance with policy. Policy waiver requests are further
     described below.

         Acknowledge non-compliance with policy and that an acceptable plan to remediate
         the weakness has been, or will be, implemented.

         Must be documented as indicated in USDA’s CAPE-SOP-003, Plan of Action and
         Milestones (POA&M) Management Standard Operating Procedure.




                                            14
      Policy waiver request memoranda will be addressed to the USDA ICAM Director and
      submitted to ICAM.Services@usda.gov for review and decision. Unless otherwise
      specified, policy waivers are approved for one year and must be reviewed and renewed
      every fiscal year.

      To be considered for a waiver, an application system must meet the following
      requirements:

           A technical constraint that inhibits the use of, or integration with, the USDA
           enterprise ICAM services.

           A transition plan is provided detailing when the asset will be retired or integrated
           with the USDA enterprise ICAM service.

           Alternative solutions must adhere to the Federal ICAM Architecture, NIST
           regulations for digital identity including NIST SP 800-63-3, and CDM
           requirements. This information must be documented in the waiver.


9. INQUIRIES

  All inquiries pertaining to the contents of this DR can be submitted to
  icam.services@usda.gov.


                                            -END-




                                              15
                                APPENDIX A

                    ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AI         Artificial Intelligence
API        Application Programming Interface
APL        Approved Products List
CAO        Chief Acquisition Officer
CAP        Cross Agency Priority
CAWG       Cross Agency Working Group
CDM        Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation
CFO        Chief Financial Officer
CFR        Code of Federal Regulations
CIO        Chief Information Officer
CISA       Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency
CISO       Chief Information Security Officer
CNSS       Committee on National Security Systems
COO        Chief Operating Officer
COR        Contracting Officer’s Representative
COTR       Contracting Officer’s Technical Representative
CUI        Controlled Unclassified Information
DHS        Department of Homeland Security
DM         Departmental Manual
DR         Departmental Regulation
DSS        Digital Signature Standard
EIMS       Enterprise Identity Management Services
ePACS      Enterprise Physical Access Controls System
FAL        Federation Assurance Level
FAR        Federal Acquisition Regulation
FICAM      Federal Identity Credential Access Management
FIPS PUB   Federal Information Processing Standards Publication
FISMA      Federal Information Security Modernization Act
GSA        General Services Administration
HSPD       Homeland Security Presidential Directive
ICAM       Identity, Credential, and Access Management
IoT        Internet of Things
ISA        Interconnection Security Agreement
ISC        Information Security Center
IT         Information Technology
LACS       Logical Access Control System
MAHRD      Mission Area Human Resources Director
NIST       National Institute of Standards and Technology
NPE        Non-Person Entity
OCIO       Office of the Chief Information Officer
OGC        Office of the General Council



                                     A-1
OHRM     Office of Human Resource Management
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
OPM      Office of Personnel Management
OSSP     Office of Safety, Security, and Protection
PACS     Physical Access Control System
PII      Personally Identifiable Information
PIV      Personal Identity Verification
PIV-I    PIV Interoperable Credential
PIV-D    Derived PIV Credential
PKI      Public Key Infrastructure
PMA      President’s Management Agenda
POA&M    Plan of Action and Milestones
RMF      Risk Management Framework
RPA      Robotic Process Automation
SAOP     Senior Agency Official for Privacy
SP       Special Publication
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                                     A-2
                                         APPENDIX B

                                        DEFINITIONS


Credential. An object or data structure that authoritatively binds an identity (and optionally,
additional attributes) to a token possessed and controlled by a subscriber. Credentials can be
something a person knows (such as password or personal identification number), something they
have (such as a LincPass), something they are (such as a biometric feature) or some combination
of these items. (Sources: DM 4620-002, Common Identification Standards for U.S. Department
of Agriculture and Federal Identity, Credential, and Access Management 4 (FICAM) Roadmap
and Implementation Guidance, December 2, 2011)

Derived PIV credential (PIV-D_. A credential issued based on proof of possession and control
of a PIV smart card that has been issued in accordance with FIPS PUB 201-2. When applied to
PIV, identity proofing, and vetting processes do not have to be repeated to issue a Derived PIV
Credential. (Sources: NIST, FIPS PUB 201-2, Personal Identity Verification of Federal
Employees and Contractors, August 2003)

Governance. A set of processes that ensures the effective and efficient use of information
technology in enabling an organization to achieve its goals. (Source: DR 3130-010, United
States Department of Agriculture Enterprise Information Technology Governance)

Non-Person Entity (NPE). Any type of non-human device (e.g., routers, servers, switches,
firewalls, sensors) or software object. (Source: Federal Identity, Credential, and Access
Management 4 (FICAM) Roadmap and Implementation Guidance, December 2, 2011)

PIV credential. PIV smart cards or other form factors that comply with FIPS 201-2 or
superseding standards. This includes technological enhancements of LincPass Smart Cards and
derived credentials. (Source: NIST, FIPS PUB 201-2, Personal Identity Verification of Federal
Employees and Contractors, August 2003)

PIV-I credential. PIV interoperable smart card that complies with FIPS 201-2 or superseding
standards. (Source: NIST, FIPS PUB 201-2, Personal Identity Verification of Federal
Employees and Contractors, August 2003)

Sponsor. The Sponsor is the employer or agency official responsible for authorizing and
individual to apply for a credential, who has undergone Sponsor training and is designated to
perform Sponsor functions. In the case of a contractor employees, the Sponsor maybe e the
Contracting Officer’s Representative (COR), Contracting Officer’s Technical Representative
(COTR), or another designated program official. (Source: DM-4620-002, Common
Identification Standards for U.S. Department of Agriculture).




                                              B-1
                                       APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Committee on National Security Systems (CNSS), CNSS Directives web page

CNSS, CNSS Instructions web page

CNSS, CNSS Policies web page

CNSS, CNSS Standards web page

Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency
(CISA), Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) web site

DHS, CISA, Interagency Security Committee, The Risk Management Process for Federal
Facilities: An Interagency Security Committee Standard, 2nd Edition, November 2016

DHS, Homeland Security Presidential Directive (HSPD) 12, Policy for a Common Identification
Standard for Federal Employees and Contractors, August 27, 2004

The Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986, 18 United States Code (U.S.C.) § 2701 et
seq., October 21, 1986

The Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act, Public Law 106-229, June 30,
2000

Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR), 48 CFR § 4.13 Personal Identity Verification

Federal Identity, Credential, and Access Management (FICAM) Roadmap and Implementation
Guidance, Version 2.0, December 2, 2011

Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. § 3551 et seq., December
18, 2014

GSA, Continuous Diagnostics & Mitigation (CDM) Program - Approved Products List web site

Government Paperwork Elimination Act, 44 U.S.C § 3501 et seq., October 21, 1998

NIST, FIPS PUB 186-4, Digital Signature Standard (DSS), September 2013

NIST, FIPS PUB 201-2, Personal Identity Verification (PIV) of Federal Employees and
Contractors, August 2013




                                             C-1
NIST, SP 800-37-2, Risk Management Framework for Information Systems and Organizations,
December 2018

NIST, SP 800-47, Security Guide for Interconnecting Information Technology Systems, August
2002

NIST, SP 800-53-5, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and
Organizations, September 2020 with updates as of December 10, 2020

NIST, SP 800 63-3, Digital Identity Guidelines, December 2017

NIST, SP 800-116, Revision 1, Guidelines for the Use of PIV Credentials in Facility Access,
June 2018

NIST, SP 800-157, Guidelines for Derived Personal Identity Verification (PIV) Credentials,
December 2014

Office of Government Ethics, Standards of Ethical Conduct for Federal Employees of the
Executive Branch, 5 CFR § 2635, et seq.

OMB, Circular A-11, Preparation, Submission and Execution of the Budge, July 10, 2020, as
amended

OMB, Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource, July 28, 2016

OMB, Memorandum M-05-24, Implementation of Homeland Security Presidential Directive
(HSPD) 12 – Policy for a Common Identification Standard for Federal Employees and
Contractors, August 5, 2005

OMB, Memorandum M-06-21, Reciprocal Recognition of Existing Personnel Security
Clearances, July 17, 2006

OMB, Memorandum M-19-17, Enabling Mission Delivery through Improved Identity,
Credential and Access Management, May 21, 2019

OMB, Memorandum, Reciprocal Recognition of Existing Personnel Security Clearances,
December 12, 2005

President’s Management Agenda (PMA) Cross Agency Priority (CAP) goals

The Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. § 552a, December 31, 1974

USDA, CAPE-SOP-003, Revision 1.1, Plan of Action and Milestones Management Standard
Operating Procedure, November 2015

USDA, CAWG Charter



                                             C-2
USDA, DM 3530-003, Use of Public Key Infrastructure (PKI), July 15, 2004

USDA, DM 3640-xxx, Identity, Credential, and Access Management Procedures, forthcoming

USDA, DM 4620-002, Common Identification Standard for U.S. Department of Agriculture
Employees and Contractors, January 14, 2009

USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System, January 4, 2018

USDA, DR 3130-010, United States Department of Agriculture Enterprise Information
Technology Governance, April 20, 2021

USDA, DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007

USDA, DR 4620-002, Common Identification Standard for U.S. Department of Agriculture,
March 22, 2021

USDA, DR 4720-001, USDA Onboarding Requirements, June 3, 2011

USDA, ICAM Advisory Council Charter

USDA, ICAM Service Catalog web page




                                           C-3
