                         U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                WASHINGTON, DC 20250

                                                              NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION DR 3600-002
                                                              DATE:
 SUBJECT: Electronic-Government Program
                                                              November 24, 2020
 OPI: Office of the Chief Information Office,                 EXPIRATION DATE:
 Information Resource Management Center (IRMC)                November 24, 2025



Section                                                                                  Page

1. Purpose                                                                               1
2. Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                    2
3. Scope                                                                                 2
4. Background                                                                            2
5. Policy                                                                                3
6. Roles and Responsibilities                                                            3
7. Compliance                                                                            6
8. Policy Exceptions                                                                     6
9. Inquiries                                                                             6

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                  A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                 B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                  C-1



1. PURPOSE

  a.   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes United States Department of Agriculture
       (USDA) Electronic-Government (E-GOV) program policy. USDA’s E-GOV Program
       promotes innovative uses of information technology (IT) using Presidential E-GOV
       initiatives and lines of business (LoB).

  b.   These initiatives (herein referred to as E-GOV initiatives) involve Mission Area, agency,
       and staff office collaboration through support of pilot projects and the use of innovative
       technologies in which USDA contributes a share of operational costs based on a
       combination of service usage metrics for inter/intra Agency collaboration. The E-GOV
       Program fosters relationships with Federal Agency Lead (AL) and USDA E-GOV
       Program Officers.
2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This DR supersedes sections 4b, 6, 7a and b, 10a(1)(a), 10d(1) through 10d(4), and 10f
       of DR 3600-000, USDA Information and Technology Transformation.

  b.   This DR is effective immediately when published.

  c.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their policies and procedures
       within 6 months to comply with this directive.


3. SCOPE

  This DR applies to the Presidential E-Government Initiatives and Line of Business in which
  USDA participates.


4. BACKGROUND

  The E-Government Act of 2002, 44 United States Code (U.S.C.) Section 3601, was enacted
  to enhance the management and promotion of electronic Government services and processes.
  E-GOV is defined as the Government use of “web-based internet applications or other
  information technology to enhance the access to and delivery of Government information and
  services to the public, other Agencies, and other Government entities; or to bring about
  improvements in Government operations that may include effectiveness, efficiency, service
  quality, or transformation.” By participating in the E-GOV initiatives, USDA has improved
  its business processes and program delivery to its customers, employees, and partners.
  Through these efforts, USDA has been able to work with other Federal Agencies to
  streamline common areas of business delivery (e.g., rulemaking, payroll, and grants
  management) and learn from best practices throughout the Government. The Department
  will continue to implement these initiatives to achieve further benefits for its customers.

  In addition to the E-Government Act, this program is supported by a few other legislative and
  regulatory requirements, including:

  a.   The Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, 40 U.S.C. § 11101 et seq., mandating that E-GOV be
       established to significantly improve how Federal Agencies plan, select, fund, control,
       and evaluate IT investments;

  b.   Provisions included in the Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
       (FITARA), Public Law (P.L.) 113-291 § 831-837, requiring the USDA Chief
       Information Officer (CIO) to work with the USDA Chief Financial Officer (CFO) and
       Director, Office of Budget and Program Analysis (OBPA) to prepare the annual E-GOV
       budget request, explanatory notes; and




                                               2
  c.   The Economy Act of 1932, 31 U.S.C. § 1535, permitting Federal Agencies to purchase
       goods or services from other Federal Agencies or other major organizational units within
       the same Agency.


5. POLICY

  It is the policy of USDA to have an E-GOV program that includes participation in inter-
  departmental projects and Presidential E-GOV initiatives.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The USDA CIO or their designated representative will:

       (1) Carry out the requirements outlined in the E-Government Act;

       (2) Ensure that Economy Act agreements within the scope of this DR receive
           appropriate levels of review and approval prior to execution;

       (3) Review and sign the Determination and Findings (D&F) document for Economy Act
           agreements within the scope of this DR; and

       (4) Sign Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) and Interagency Agreement (IAA)
           documents (Department of the Treasury, Form 7600A, Agreement Between Federal
           Agencies – General Terms and Conditions (GT&C) Section; and Department of the
           Treasury, Form 7600B, Agreement Between Federal Agencies – Order
           Requirements and Funding Information (Order) Section) that govern partner
           relationships within the scope of this DR.

  b.   The USDA E-GOV Program Manager will:

       (1) Maintain the authoritative list of E-GOV initiatives in which USDA participates;

       (2) Be responsible for managing the distributed funding for multiyear Presidential
           initiatives by:

            (a) Managing the annual budget submission for the E-GOV program. This
                includes providing a description of the E-GOV program as part of annual
                budget submissions for the E-GOV program using internal cost distribution
                worksheets. These worksheets are used to apply approved algorithms to
                calculate the amount that each Mission Area, agency, or staff office should
                contribute to each initiative;

            (b) Updating the investment management and capital planning system with the
                Mission Area, agency, or staff office contributions for each initiative, program



                                               3
         manager contact information, detailed life cycle cost (DLCC), investment
         funding information, and coordinating with USDA Program Officers and

    (c) Confirming amounts requested in the Office of Management and Budget
        (OMB) MAX.gov Homepage for the budget year USDA E-GOV initiative
        costs, validating prior year budgets, and adding funding source details for the
        current year received from the capital planning system.

(3) Be responsible for the annual OBPA budget submission reports by:

    (a) Preparing the annual explanatory notes report that indicates, in narrative
        format, USDA’s justification for the E-GOV budget for the previous, current,
        and next fiscal years; and

    (b) Providing E-GOV updates for the annual Status of Programs report for the
        President’s Budget request for USDA.

(4) Provide technical advice, within and outside the organization, as a recognized
    USDA expert on the E-Government Act;

(5) Conduct meetings with external Federal AL representatives and internal E-GOV
    Program Officers to establish policy priorities, and identify issues and matters
    related to sound E-GOV portfolio reporting and management;

(6) Validate outstanding balances for E-GOV initiatives on a quarterly basis by:

    (a) Certifying that obligations selected by the Office of the Chief Financial Office
        (OCFO) that have been identified as being inactive for at least 12 months are
        being reviewed quarterly and corrective actions are performed; and

    (b) Notifying OCFO once a determination is made that an unliquidated obligation
        is no longer valid.

(7) Administer the process of negotiating, preparing, and managing all associated
    MOU, IAA, and D&F documents that govern partner relationships;

(8) Prepare the E-Government Act report and submit, to OMB, a summary of USDA’s
    implementation status of E-GOV initiatives and compliance with the Act by each
    Mission Area, agency, and staff office;

(9) Participate in meetings for the interagency Executive Committee on an annual and
    as-needed basis, at a minimum;

(10) Manage the Information Resource Management Center (IRMC) E-GOV online
     repository ensuring that E-GOV documents are easily accessible, trackable, and
     executable;


                                       4
     (11) Review and approve acquisition approval requests (AAR) to ensure that what the
          requester is asking for does not interfere or conflict with any E-GOV initiatives and
          would not duplicate ongoing E-GOV efforts; and

     (12) Proactively and regularly take action to monitor, measure, audit, report, and enforce
          compliance with the provisions of this directive.

c.   The USDA CFO, or their designated representative, will:

     (1) Facilitate the funding process for the Presidential E-GOV initiatives through
         issuance of the allowance letter by executing all the necessary accounting actions to
         commit, obligate, and report status on all funds related to E-GOV financial
         transactions;

     (2) Monitor the status of fund collection regularly to determine escalation need;

     (3) Notify program and procurement personnel of unliquidated obligations selected for
         review in writing, request a written notification of their validity, and once a
         determination is made that an unliquidated obligation is no longer valid, OCFO
         personnel will notify appropriate agency-designated personnel, in writing, after the
         determination is made to process a deobligation;

     (4) Review, sign, and provide the purchase order number for all E-GOV IAAs prior to
         submission; and

     (5) Provide requisition information to the E-GOV Program Manager.

d.   The OBPA Budget Formulation Division will:

     (1) Request from the E-GOV Program Manager the narrative update for the OMB
         explanatory notes along with other congressional justification materials that
         accompany each year President’s Budget request for USDA; and

     (2) Request the Status of Program update from the E-GOV Program Manager.

e.   USDA E-GOV Program Officers (i.e., those who manage E-GOV initiatives) will, with
     respect to each initiative they manage:

     (1) Provide updates and narratives to the E-GOV Program Manager for those initiatives
         that have distributed funding, for inclusion in the E-GOV Presidential E-
         Government Initiatives and Line of Business;

     (2) Provide annual E-GOV Program Manager service usage metrics for the distributed
         funding budget formulation process;




                                             5
      (3) Ensure that each initiative is funded through the mechanism established for that
          initiative;

      (4) Attend monthly AL meetings to enhance the E-GOV program by collaborating with
          other Federal Agencies ;

      (5) Participate in the governance structure (budget workgroups, advisory boards, and
          executive steering committees) of the E-GOV program; and

      (6) Coordinate activities and serve as the main point of contact to address any issues
          that may arise as related to the initiative.


7. COMPLIANCE

  The E-GOV Program Manager will actively and regularly monitor, measure, audit, report,
  and enforce compliance with the provisions of this directive, and will annually review and
  update this policy as necessary.


8. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are required to conform to this policy.
  Waivers to this policy will not be granted.


9. INQURIES

  Address inquiries concerning this DR to OCIO, E-GOV office via email to the
  SM.OCIO.EGov@ocio.usda.gov mailbox.


                                           -END-




                                              6
                          APPENDIX A

              ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AAR      Acquisition Approval Request
CFO      Chief Financial Officer
CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
CIO      Chief Information Officer
D&F      Determination and Findings
DLCC     Detailed Life Cycle Cost
DR       Departmental Regulation
E-GOV    Electronic Government
FAR      Federal Acquisition Regulation
FITARA   Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act
GT&C     General Terms and Conditions
IAA      Interagency Agreement
IRMC     Information Resource Management Center
IT       Information Technology
LoB      Line of Business
MOU      Memorandum of Understanding
OBPA     Office of Budget and Program Analysis
OCFO     Office of the Chief Financial Officer
OCIO     Office of the Chief Information Officer
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
P.L.     Public Law
PMA      President’s Management Agenda
PMO      Project Management Office
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                               A-1
                                         APPENDIX B

                                        DEFINITIONS


a.   Acquisition Approval Request (AAR). The Information Technology (IT) Acquisition
     Approval Request (AAR) process is the mechanism by which the United States
     Department of Agriculture (USDA) Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO)
     monitors and reviews agency-level IT spending of IT related contracts and procurements.
     (Source: USDA, Acquisition Approval Request (AAR) Guidance for AAR Managers,
     Version 2.0, October 2018)

b.   Agency. Organizational units of the Department, other than staff offices, whose heads
     report to officials within the Office of the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Under Secretaries,
     Assistant Secretaries, and the Assistant to the Secretary. (Source: DR 0100-001,
     Departmental Directives System, January 4, 2018)

c.   Agency Lead (AL) (formerly Managing Partner). Responsible for coordinating the
     implementation of a particular E-GOV or LoB initiative among all Federal partners. The
     Agency Lead (formerly managing partner) maintains an IT shared or centralized service
     with approval by Agency leadership for Intra-Agency services and OMB for Inter-
     Agency services. The Agency Lead organization, often referred to as the Program
     Management Office (PMO), develops, implements, and maintains financial and service
     models as well as contracts with Customers and Suppliers using strategically sourced or
     best in class contracts whenever available. The Agency Lead PMO is responsible for the
     success of the IT shared service, and reports using metrics developed by the Agency Lead
     for its own Intra-Agency IT shared services as well as the governance and or interagency
     stakeholders. Agency Leads are accountable for delivering quality services as defined by
     stakeholders and/or OMB. (Source: OMB, FY 2021 IT Budget – Capital Planning
     Guidance)

d.   Deobligation. The cancellation, downward adjustment, or deletion of a previously
     recorded obligation. Such adjustments may be attributable to cancellation of a project or
     contract, price revisions, corrections of amounts previously recorded, or differences
     between obligations previously recorded and payments made. (Source: DR 2230-001,
     Reviews of Unliquidated Obligations, October 15, 2014)

e.   Determination and Findings (D&F). A special form of written approval by an authorized
     official that is required by statute or regulation as a prerequisite to taking certain contract
     actions. The determination is a conclusion or decision supported by the findings. The
     findings are statements of fact or rationale essential to support the determination and
     must cover each requirement of the statute or regulation. (Source: Federal Acquisition
     Regulation (FAR), 48 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Subpart 1.7, Determinations
     and Findings, Section 1.701, Definition)




                                              B-1
f.   Distributed Cost. Programs and/or services provided to or on behalf of the Department
     and its agencies for which costs are recovered through payments from the serviced
     agencies. This was formerly called Greenbook. The E-GOV program costs are recovered
     in a similar manner and provided to the program managers via distributed funding.

g.   Electronic Government (E-GOV). The Government use of web-based internet
     applications or other information technology to enhance the access to and delivery of
     Government information and services to the public, other Agencies, and other
     Government entities; or to bring about improvements in Government operations that may
     include effectiveness, efficiency, service quality, or transformation. (Source: E-
     Government Act of 2002, 44 U.S.C. § 3601)

h.   E-GOV Program Manager. The E-GOV Program Manager leads, coordinates,
     communicates, integrates, and is accountable for the overall success of the program
     ensuring alignment with critical agency priorities. Work includes evaluation and
     monitoring, cost schedule management, quality management and resource allocations.

i.   E-GOV Program Officer. Each E-GOV initiative has an E-GOV Program Officer who
     works closely with the E-GOV Program Manager by providing initiative updates,
     narratives, and metrics in addition to attending workgroup meetings as they pertain to
     each initiative.

j.   Information Technology (IT). (1) Any services or equipment, or interconnected system(s)
     or subsystem(s) of equipment, that are used in the automatic acquisition, storage,
     analysis, evaluation, manipulation, management, movement, control, display, switching,
     interchange, transmission, or reception of data or information by the agency; where (2)
     such services or equipment are ‘used by an agency’ if used by the agency directly or if
     used by a contractor under a contract with the agency that requires either use of the
     services or equipment or requires use of the services or equipment to a significant extent
     in the performance of a service or the furnishing of a product. (3) The term “information
     technology” includes computers, ancillary equipment (including imaging peripherals,
     input, output, and storage devices necessary for security and surveillance), peripheral
     equipment designed to be controlled by the central processing unit of a computer,
     software, firmware and similar procedures, services (including provisioned services such
     as cloud computing and support services that support any point of the lifecycle of the
     equipment or service), and related resources. D. The term “information technology” does
     not include any equipment that is acquired by a contractor incidental to a contract that
     does not require use of the equipment. (Source: OMB, M-15-14, Management and
     Oversight of Federal Information Technology)

k.   InterAgency Agreement (IAA). A written agreement entered in between two Federal
     Agencies, or major organizational units within an Agency, which specifies the goods to
     be furnished or tasks to be accomplished by one Agency, per the Treasury definition in
     support of the other. (Source: Department of the Treasury, Department of the Treasury
     Interagency Agreement Guide, Second Edition, March 2013)



                                            B-2
l.   Memorandum of Understanding (MOU). MOUs are agreements between Agencies or
     bureaus that do not involve payment or transfer of funding. If the agreement involves
     funding, an IAA must be executed. (Source: Department of the Treasury, Department
     Of the Treasury Interagency Agreement Guide)

m.   Mission Area. A group of agencies with related functions that report to the same Under
     or Assistant Secretary. Research, Education, and Economics (REE) is an example of a
     Mission Area. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-001)

n.   Presidential E-GOV initiatives. Primarily mature, operational web-based services
     provided by the Partner Agency organization for the benefit of, and on the behalf of,
     participating Partner Agencies. (Source: OMB, E-GOV Powering America’s Future
     with Technology)

o.   Staff Office. Departmental administrative offices whose heads report to officials within
     The Office of the Secretary. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-001)

p.   Unliquidated Obligation. Unliquidated obligation is the balance remaining from the
     amount of orders placed; contracts or other binding agreements awarded; or services
     rendered after making any payments or processing deobligations. Unliquidated
     obligations consist of undelivered orders and accounts payable. (Source: USDA, DR
     2230-001, Reviews of Unliquidated Obligations, October 28, 2020)




                                            B-3
                                         APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, 40 U.S.C. § 11101, et seq.

Department of the Treasury, Department of the Treasury Interagency Agreement Guide, Second
Edition, March 2013

Department of the Treasury, Form 7600A, Agreement Between Federal Agencies – General
Terms and Conditions (GT&C) Section, November 2016

Department of the Treasury, Form 7600B, Agreement Between Federal Agencies – Order
Requirements and Funding Information (Order) Section, June 2017

Determinations and Findings, 48 CFR, Subpart 1.7, Section 1.701, Definition

Economy Act of 1932, 31 U.S.C. § 1535.

E-Government Act of 2002, 44 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq.

Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA), P.L. 113-291, 128 Stat.
3292, December 19, 2014

OMB, 2018 Presidents Management Agenda, March 2018

OMB, Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource, July 28, 2016.

OMB, FY 2021 IT Budget – Capital Planning Guidance 95% Solution, June 28, 2019

OMB, MAX.gov Homepage

OMB, M-15-14, Management and Oversight of Federal Information Technology, June 10, 2015

USDA, Acquisition Approval Request (AAR) Guidance for AAR Managers, Version 2.4, October
2020

USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System, January 4, 2018

USDA, DR 1010-001, Organization Planning, Review, and Approval, January 4, 2018

USDA, DR 2230-001, Reviews of Unliquidated Obligations, October 28, 2020

USDA, DR 3600-000, USDA Information and Technology Transformation, November 2, 2004




                                             C-1
USDA, OBPA, Presidential E-Government Initiatives and Line of Business

USDA, OBPA, USDA Budget Congressional Justifications




                                           C-2
