                              U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                    WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                    NUMBER:
   DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                          DR 3620-001
  SUBJECT: USDA AgLearn Services, Courseware, and                   DATE:
  Content                                                           September 9, 2019
  OPI: Office of the Chief Information Officer & Office of          EXPIRATION DATE:
  Human Resources Management                                        September 9, 2024



Section                                                                               Page

1. Purpose                                                                            1
2. Scope                                                                              1
3. Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                 2
4. Background                                                                         2
5. Approval Requirements                                                              2
6. Policy                                                                             3
7. Roles and Responsibilities                                                         5
8. Inquiries                                                                          7

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                               A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                              B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                               C-1



1. PURPOSE

   a.     The United States Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) Agriculture Learning
          (AgLearn) System is a strategic component of USDA’s eGovernment initiative and
          enterprise architecture providing a common learning management system and related
          services. AgLearn contributes to meeting the goals and objectives outlined in USDA
          Strategic Plan, FY 2018-2022, Goal 1, Objectives 1.1 and 1.2.

   b.     This Departmental Regulation (DR) documents USDA’s AgLearn policy, framework,
          roles, and responsibilities. Policies in this DR are defined around Federal authorities to
          develop and implement training policies as well as USDA’s enterprise architecture and
          investment strategies.


2. SCOPE

   This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices.
3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  This DR supersedes DR 3620-001, USDA eLearning Services, Courseware and Content,
  dated October 29, 2004.


4. BACKGROUND

  a.   AgLearn services provide USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices with a
       consolidated, cost effective, enterprisewide learning service for employees, contractors,
       partners, volunteers, affiliates, students, and customers. AgLearn provides USDA
       Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices and their customers with a one-stop access to
       training products and services at reduced overall costs. AgLearn is a component within
       the Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO).

  b.   AgLearn supports the E-Government Act of 2002, 44 United States Code (U.S.C.) §
       3501, by promoting the use of the internet and emerging technologies within
       Government, reducing costs and burdens for Government, promoting more informed
       decision making, and providing access to high-quality Government information and
       services across multiple channels. Thus, making the Federal Government more
       transparent and accountable.

  c.   AgLearn supports the Strategic Human Capital Management Framework prescribed in 5
       Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 250, Subpart B and USDA’s human capital strategic
       efforts as a means to attract, develop, and retain a high-performing and diverse
       workforce, as well as close mission critical skill gaps.


5. APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS

  The Director of AgLearn will coordinate with the Office of Human Resources Management
  (OHRM) when procuring training delivery systems and online courseware libraries.
  Specifically, the following apply to the purchase of online training and related services:

  a.   Mission Areas, agency and staff office AgLearn Lead Administrators are the liaisons to
       OHRM and OCIO for the purchase of courseware libraries.

  b.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must purchase online courseware libraries
       through the purchasing authority of the Director of AgLearn. Purchase of online
       courseware libraries from other sources may be made only with the written approval of
       the Director, OHRM, and the USDA Chief Information Officer (CIO). Such approval
       may be granted only in those instances where courses desired by Mission Areas,
       agencies, and staff offices are not available through AgLearn.




                                                 2
  c.   Procurement offices will not process requests or actions for online courseware or
       Learning Management Systems (LMS) unless the action is accompanied by written
       approval from the Director, OHRM, and the CIO.

  d.   The Director of AgLearn will be informed and consulted with when any USDA
       organization purchases or deploys any type of electronic training delivery system or
       service.


6. POLICY

  a.   AgLearn is the official system of record for training and contains training history of
       USDA employees, contractors, partners, political appointees, volunteers, affiliates,
       students, and customers. As stated in Reporting, 5 CFR § 410.601 (c), all Federal
       Agencies are required to establish a schedule of training records. USDA adheres to the
       National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), General Records Schedule 2.6.
       Training records at USDA will be disposed of after 6 years. Mission Areas, agencies,
       and staff offices may submit a request to the Director of AgLearn to retain training
       records longer than the Disposition Authority stated on the NARA schedule of
       Governmentwide records if the records are required for business use.

  b.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will have access to AgLearn.
       AgLearn provides the mechanism to deliver, track, and record training, examinations,
       and surveys completed by USDA employees, partners, and contract staff. Available
       through the internet and fully integrated with USDA eAuthentication service, it is a
       secure service that is accessible in and outside of USDA and is available 24 hours each
       day.

  c.   All Federal Agencies, as stated in Reporting, 5 CFR § 410.601 (a), are required to
       capture and record training records, expenditures, and activities and submit to Office of
       Personnel Management’s (OPM) Data, Analysis & Documentation, Enterprise Human
       Resources Integration (EHRI) data warehouse. AgLearn follows OPM’s Data, Analysis
       & Documentation, Data Policy & Guidance, Guide to Human Resource Reporting when
       reporting all completed training activities to EHRI. All AgLearn Leads and
       Administrators are to ensure all employee training activities are captured in AgLearn.

  d.   AgLearn users have access to the OPM Standard Form (SF) 182, Authorization,
       Agreement and Certification of Training form. This is a Governmentwide training form
       used to request, approve, and certify completion of training activities. The SF-182
       includes the mandatory training data elements USDA must report to OPM.

  e.   As an official USDA corporate system, any course content on AgLearn will be training
       that is appropriate to be documented as part of an individual’s USDA training record.
       Content may include online training, classroom training, webinars, examinations,
       surveys, handbooks, books, and videos. Custom developed courses or commercial off-
       the-shelf (COTS) courseware must meet specific industry standards to work properly on



                                                3
     AgLearn. These are currently Aviation Industry Computer-Based Training Committee
     (AICC) or Shareable Content Object Reference Model (SCORM) standards.

f.   Mission Areas, agency and staff office Course Owners will review all courses for
     relevancy and content 2 years after its posting date thereafter. The course owners must
     review courses every 2 years thereafter. The Director of AgLearn retains the right to
     remove courses at his or her discretion and will notify the course owner immediately if
     course removal occurs.

g.   The Director of AgLearn sets an end-of-life date on all online courses. The default end-
     of-life date is 5 years from the date of the course publication unless a different date is
     requested at the time of submission.

h.   All USDA online courses, videos, and books must adhere to the policies set forth in
     Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. § 794d). Any online course,
     video, or book that is not Section 508 compliant is subject to removal from AgLearn.
     For more information, refer to DR 4030-001, Section 508 Program.

i.   USDA requires all supervisors, managers, and executives to complete a 360-degree
     assessment at least every 3 years. Supervisors, managers, and executives should use
     AgLearn to complete 360-degree assessments to meet this requirement in DR 4040-412-
     001, Leadership Competency Framework and Assessments.

j.   Content available through AgLearn may be made available to users of AgLearn,
     including the public or restricted to specific groups of employees or customers. The
     owner of the content or learning activity typically makes access decisions.

k.   USDA employees have access to an online Individual Develop Plan (IDP) or Executive
     Development Plan (EDP) through AgLearn. USDA requires the following employees to
     complete an IDP: Presidential Management Fellows, Senior Executive Service
     Candidate Development Program participants, all non-bargaining unit employees, and
     any employee who requests an IDP. All Senior Executives, Senior Level, Scientific, and
     Senior Science and Technology Services groups are required to complete an EDP. For
     more information on IDPs, refer to DR 4040-410, Creating Individual Development
     Plans (IDP). For more information on EDPs, refer to DR 4740-003, Executive
     Continual Learning Program.

l.   USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will ensure any custom online content
     they have developed complies with published AgLearn standards.

m. Source data is processed through the Identity, Credential, and Access Management
   (ICAM) and Enterprise Entitlement Management System (EEMS). This automated
   provisioning of user data is completed daily. All user data will be processed in AgLearn
   through this enterprise solution.




                                               4
  n.   Every user type in AgLearn is required to use an eAuthentication-managed account for
       access to AgLearn.

  o.   Administrative roles are granted as part of the authoritative data source enforcement and
       Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. § 3551,
       compliant access control practices. An administrator may never change a user’s account
       status in AgLearn. All user account changes related to active status or disabled status
       must be completed at the authoritative data source (e.g., the USDA Human Resources
       (HR) systems).

  p.   USDA’s non-Federal users have limited access to AgLearn. All contractors, volunteers,
       and partners are required to complete annual information security awareness training as
       described in DR 3545-001, Information Security Awareness and Training Policy. Some
       course content in AgLearn is not available to contractors. Contractor organizations
       should provide fully trained employees to perform the work and offer continual learning
       and development for employees to maintain and improve their knowledge and skills
       outside of AgLearn.


7. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILTIES

  a.   The USDA CIO will:

       (1) Provide leadership for overall technical and operational direction of AgLearn; and

       (2) Provide written approval of the purchase of online courseware libraries from other
           sources, in coordination with the Director of AgLearn and the Director of OHRM,
           in those instances where courses desired by Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
           offices are not available through AgLearn as stated in Section 5b of this DR.

  b.   The Director of OHRM will:

       (1) Provide the overall leadership for USDA’s learning and development strategy;

       (2) Provide written approval of the purchase of online courseware libraries from other
           sources, in coordination with the CIO and the Director of AgLearn, in those
           instances where courses desired by Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are
           not available through AgLearn as stated in Section 5b of this DR;

       (3) Provide leadership for incorporating AgLearn services into the training and human
           resource operations at USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices. Specific
           areas may include developing and issuing guidance about the use of AgLearn for
           training requests, IDPs, EDP, SF-182s, training records, and 360-degree
           competency assessments.




                                                5
c.   The Director of AgLearn will:

     (1) Provide strategic, technical, and operational leadership for AgLearn;

     (2) Be informed and consulted with when any USDA organization purchases or
         deploys any type of electronic training delivery asset or service;

     (3) Coordinate with OHRM when procuring training delivery systems and online
         courseware libraries;

     (4) Provide written approval of the purchase of online courseware libraries from other
         sources, in coordination with the CIO and the Director of OHRM, in those instances
         where courses desired by Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are not
         available through AgLearn as stated in Section 5b of this DR;

     (5) Set an end-of-life date on all online courses; and

     (6) Retain the right to remove courses at his/her discretion and will notify the course
         owner immediately if this occurs.

d.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office AgLearn Lead Administrators will:

     (1) Act as the liaison between their Mission Area, agency, or staff office and the
         Director of AgLearn as stated in Section 5a of this DR;

     (2) Purchase online courseware libraries through the purchasing authority of the
         Director of AgLearn as stated in Section 5b of this DR;

     (3) Promote AgLearn within their respective Mission Areas, agencies, or staff offices;

     (4) Provide advice and guidance for current and new course content; and

     (5) Ensure, in coordination with their Mission Area, agency, or staff office AgLearn
         Administrators, that all employee training activities are captured in AgLearn.

e.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Course Owners will:

     (1) Review all courses for relevancy and content 2 years after the initial posting date
         and every 2 years thereafter; and

     (2) Make access decisions (e.g., available to all users of AgLearn, including the public
         or restricted to specific groups of employees or customers) for AgLearn learning
         activities.




                                               6
  f.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Procurement Offices will only process requests
       or actions for online courseware or LMS if the action is accompanied by written
       approval from the USDA CIO, the Director of AgLearn, and the Director of OHRM.


8. INQUIRIES

  All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will direct questions and inquiries
  regarding this DR to the OCIO AgLearn Office via email at TeamAgLearn@usda.gov.


                                             -END-




                                               7
                      APPENDIX A

          ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ADL       Advanced Distributed Learning
AgLearn   Agriculture Learning System
AICC      Aviation Industry Computer-Based Training Committee
ATD       Association for Talent Development
ASTD      American Society for Training and Development
CBT       Computer-Based Training
CFR       Code of Federal Regulations
CIO       Chief Information Officer
COTS      Commercial Off-The-Shelf
DR        Departmental Regulation
EDP       Executive Development Plan
EEMS      Enterprise Entitlement Management System
EHRI      Enterprise Human Resources Integration
FISMA     Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014
HR        Human Resources
ICAM      Identity, Credential, and Access Management
IDP       Individual Development Plan
IT        Information Technology
LMS       Learning Management System
NARA      National Archives and Records Administration
OCIO      Office of the Chief Information Officer
OHRM      Office of Human Resources Management
OPM       Office of Personnel Management
SCORM     Shareable Content Object Reference Model
SF        Standard Form
U.S.C.    United States Code
USDA      United States Department of Agriculture




                           A-1
                                  APPENDIX B

                                  DEFINITIONS


a. Aviation Industry Computer-Based Training Committee (AICC). An
   international association of technology-based training professionals that develop
   guidelines for the development, delivery, and evaluation of computer-based
   training (CBT) and related training technologies. (Source: Advanced Distributed
   Learning (ADL))

b. AICC Standard. A standard for developing CBT that has been expanded for use
   by all industries for promoting interoperability and data exchange between
   standard online courseware and learning management systems and players.
   (Source: ADL)

c. Commercial Off-the-Shelf Online Courseware. Commercial off-the-shelf (COTS)
   courses that are taken by computer and are available from vendors without
   customization or changes. (Source: Federal Acquisition Regulation, 48 CFR
   Section 2.101)

d. Content. Information captured digitally and imparted to learners. Formats for
   electronic learning content include text, audio, video, animation, simulation, and
   more. (Source: Association for Talent Development, ASTD Handbook Glossary)

e. Learning Management System (LMS). Software that automates the
   administration of training. The LMS registers users, tracks courses in a catalog,
   records data from learners and provides reports to management. An LMS is
   typically designed to handle courses by multiple publishers and providers. It
   usually doesn’t include its own authoring capabilities. An LMS focuses on
   managing courses created by a variety of other sources. (Source: ASTD
   Handbook Glossary)

f. Section 508. All electronic and information technology developed, procured,
   maintained or used by the Federal Government must be accessible to individuals
   with disabilities. (Source: Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. § 794d)

g. Shareable Content Object Reference Model (SCORM). Standard for developing
   online content developed by ADL Co-Lab and built upon the work of the AICC
   and other standards as a way to make electronic learning content interchangeable
   with learning delivery systems. The SCORM standard focuses on content
   aggregation and reusability and includes aspects that pertain to learning
   management systems, content authoring tools, instructional designers, content
   developers, and training providers. (Source: ADL)




                                        B-1
                                         APPENDIX C

                             AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Advanced Distributed Learning website

Association for Talent Development, ASTD Handbook Glossary

E-Government Act of 2002, 44 U.S.C. § 3501, (2017)

Federal Acquisition Regulation, 48 CFR § 2.101, (2018)

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA), 44 U.S.C. § 3551,
(2017)

Government Employees Training Act, 5 U.S.C. Chapter 41, (2017)

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), General Records Schedule 2.6

OPM, Data, Analysis & Documentation, Enterprise Human Resources Integration,
December 2013

OPM, Data, Analysis & Documentation, Data Policy & Guidance, Guide to Human
Resource Reporting, July 31, 2013

OPM, SF-182, Authorization, Agreement and Certification of Training, December 2006

Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. § 794d (2015)

Strategic Human Capital Management, 5 CFR 250, Subpart B, (January 1, 2018)

Supervisory, Management, and Executive Development, 5 CFR 412, (January 1, 2018)

Training, 5 CFR 410, (January 1, 2018)

Reporting, 5 CFR § 410.601, ( January 1, 2018)

USDA, DR 3545-001, Information Security Awareness and Training Policy, October 22,
2013

USDA, DR 4030-001, Section 508 Program, September 8, 2014

USDA, DR 4040-410, Creating Individual Development Plans (IDP), February 7, 2011

USDA, DR 4740-003, Executive Continual Learning Program, July 25, 2014

                                            C-1
USDA, DR 4040-412-001, Leadership Competency Framework and Assessments, July 25,
2014

USDA, USDA Strategic Plan, FY 2018-2022




                                       C-2
