                                U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                      WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


                                                                          Number:
    DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                               DR-4020-251
SUBJECT:                                       DATE:
Associations of Management Officials           July 27, 2005
and/or Supervisors and Other Organizations
                                               OPI: Office of Human Capital Management –
                                               Performance Management and Policy Division



Section

1   PURPOSE                                                                     1
2   SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS                                          1
3   DEFINITIONS                                                                 2
4   POLICY                                                                      3
5   RECOGNITION PROCEDURES                                                      4
6   DUES ALLOTMENTS                                                             5

Appendix A            Declaration Statement for Associations of Management
                      Officials or Supervisors, Professional Associations and USDA Employee
                      Organizations
Appendix B            Sample MOU for Dues Allotments



1   PURPOSE

    This regulation establishes USDA policy dealing with established associations of
    management officials and/or supervisors, employee organizations and professional
    associations other than labor organizations as defined in chapter 71 of title 5, U.S. Code
    (Federal Service Labor Management Relations Statute (FSLMRS), whose membership is
    comprised primarily of USDA employees. It is intended to ensure the Department complies
    with provisions of 5 C.F.R. 251. It does not address organizations or associations
    established outside USDA, of which USDA employees may be members, or USDA
    organizations formed to promote the social, welfare, and recreational interests of
    Department and agency employees.



2   SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

    This regulation replaces Departmental Regulation DR 4020-251, dated January 24, 2005,
    which at that time replaced Personnel Manual Chapter 252, Amendment 213, dated October
DR 4020-251                                                                   July 27, 2995


   28, 1991, and Personnel Bulletin No. 252-1, dated March 11, 1999, as they pertained to all
   associations and organizations except welfare and recreation organizations. This issuance
   is made to make minor technical changes in Section 3, wherein the organizations named as
   examples for the definitions were removed, and to the Declaration Statement (Appendix A)
   to conform with 7 CRF Part 15d.


3 DEFINITIONS

   a   Association of Management Officials and/or Supervisors (Supervisory/Managerial
       Association) means a established association comprised primarily of USDA
       management officials and/or supervisors, which is not eligible for recognition under the
       FSLMRS or comparable provisions of other laws, and which is not affiliated with a
       labor organization or federation of labor organizations. The purpose of such
       associations may include providing consultation services to USDA executives
       concerning the identification and resolution of agency operational issues, including
       problems affecting working conditions of supervisors and managers.

   b Employee Organization means a established organization, other than a labor
     organization, Supervisory/Managerial Association, or Professional Association, made
     up primarily of USDA employees whose purpose may include providing information,
     views and services that contribute to improved USDA agency operations, personnel
     management, and employee effectiveness. Such an organization may be a group of
     employees focused on matters related to civil rights, social, consumer, cultural, or
     safety, or similar issues

   c   Professional Group or Association (Professional Association) means a established
       organization (or local chapter of such organizations), other than a labor organization,
       Supervisory/Managerial Association or Employee Organization, whose membership
       consists primarily of USDA employees within a recognized professional, technical or
       managerial field of work that normally requires credentials acquired from an institution
       of higher learning or a course of specialized instruction. Typically, the primary purpose
       of such groups or associations is to improve their profession and advance professional
       growth and development of their respective members in their career field. A
       professional group or association may include members of several professions or
       disciplines.

   d USDA employee, for the purposes of this regulation, means both Federal civilian
     employees as defined under 5 U.S.C. 2105, and USDA county committee employees, as
     defined under 16 U.S.C. 590h.




                                             2
July 27, 2005                                                                     DR 4020-251


4   POLICY

    USDA only recognizes established Supervisory/Managerial Associations, Employee
    Organizations and Professional Associations who meet the coverage requirements set forth
    in 5 C.F.R. 251.102, as determined by the Director of the Office of Human Capital
    Management (OHCM). Recognition does not infer Departmental sponsorship, sanction, or
    endorsement of the organization or its activities. Moreover, because such organizations are
    not Federal entities, employees are not performing official duties while engaged in
    organization activities. Use of official time for employees attending organization-
    sponsored meetings and events may be authorized subject to the conditions contained in
    this policy.

    Support to recognized Supervisory/Managerial Associations, Employee Organizations and
    Professional Associations will be specifically limited to the activities listed below as
    authorized by the agency’s Human Resource Management Director or designee. In making
    this determination, the subject activity must comply with applicable statutes/regulations
    (including 5 C.F.R. 2635, Subpart H, ethics regulations pertaining to outside activities), and
    in the case of meeting attendance, the event benefits agency programs or is part of an
    established employee development program consistent with 5 C.F.R. Part 410.

    Listed activities are not entitlements. Authorization is subject to the availability of
    resources and agency funds, work priorities and other bona fide management
    considerations.

     a Reasonable use of agency equipment and administrative support services for
       employees to prepare professional papers in conjunction with their role or membership
       in a professional association where there is a benefit to the agency.

     b Payment for travel, per diem, tuition and official time to attend professional association
       meetings where the agency will benefit directly.

     c Authorization of excused absences for employees willing to pay their own way to attend
       professional association meetings where benefit to the agency is evident.

     d Use of meeting space in USDA facilities on a space available basis.

     e Use of designated bulletin boards and other areas for display as consistent with building
       policy, USDA internal mail system, and electronic mail to notify its members about
       meetings and organization or group activities provided such activity does not interfere
       with conducting official business. USDA-recognized associations and employee
       organizations are not authorized to use agency-developed and controlled all-employee
       mailing lists to send broadcast messages.

    These limitations do not preclude the attendance of USDA employees at training events or
    meetings that may be sponsored by USDA-recognized supervisory/managerial associations
    or employee organizations as part of an approved employee development plan, or
    authorized as part of an employee’s official duties.

                                               3
DR 4020-251                                                                      July 27, 2995




    Supervisory/Managerial Associations, Employee Organizations and Professional
    Associations are specifically prohibited from using agency office space, equipment and
    administrative support services to engage in fund raising, lobbying efforts, or litigation-
    related activities in which the United States or USDA is a party or has a direct substantial
    interest.

    An association or other employee organization may use the name of the Department or an
    Agency in its name provided it is made clear that the association or organization is not an
    official organization of the Department or Agency.

    USDA managers must not bypass a labor organization with exclusive recognition rights as
    provided for under Chapter 71 of Title 5 of the U.S. Code or comparable provisions of other
    laws, to meet with or negotiate with an association or employee organization on grievances
    or matters affecting conditions of employments of bargaining unit employees.


5   RECOGNITION PROCEDURES

    a In order to be recognized as a Supervisory/Managerial Association, Employee
      Organization, or Professional Association within USDA, and therefore become eligible
      for coverage under this regulation, the Director of OHCM must certify that the
      conditions in 5 C.F.R. 251.102 are being met. Procedures for recognition are as
      follows:
       (1) The President or duly authorized official of the Association
            (Supervisory/Managerial or Professional) or Employee Organization must submit
            a copy of the group’s Constitution and Bylaws along with a signed Association or
            Employee Organization Declaration Statement, to the OHRM Director. See
            Appendix A.
       (2) The Director, OHCM will review the documents and initiate any necessary follow
            up action in order to determine whether conditions set forth in 5 C.F.R. 251.102,
            are being met.
       (3) Upon determining such conditions are met, the Director OHRM will issue a memo
            to the President of the Association or Employee Organization recognizing the
            group under these regulations. Recognition will be conditional on the group
            continuing to meet provisions of 5 C.F.R. 251.102, as determined by Director
            OHCM.
       (4) The Director OHCM will maintain a listing of all Associations and Employee
            Organizations recognized by USDA and post this list on the USDA OHCM web
            site.

    b   After being recognized, the Association or Employee Organization must provide the
        Director OHCM with any changes to their Constitution, Bylaws, as well as updated
        contact information for their President within 30 days after the change occurs.




                                               4
July 27, 2005                                                                  DR 4020-251


6 DUES ALLOTMENTS

        a   Consistent with 5 C.F.R. 550.331, for Associations (Supervisory/Managerial or
            Professional) and Employee Organizations, the Director, OHCM or designee may
            authorize the automatic allotment of dues to an Association or Organization
            provided that the following conditions are met:
            (1) Authorization to establish automatic dues allotments for members of an
                 Association must be established in a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
                 between the Director of OHCM and President of the Association or
                 Organization. A sample MOU is provided as Appendix B.
            (2) To justify administrative costs associated with setting up an allotment
                 program; the Association or Organization must have at least 200 USDA
                 employee members who may request dues withholding. [Note: The 200
                 employee requirement will be applied prospectively, with no effect on current
                 organizations receiving automatic dues allotments for their members.]
                 Additionally, bi-weekly withholding for amount dues cannot be less than
                 ($1.00).
            (3) The Association or Organization must allow its USDA employee members to
                 voluntarily revoke their dues allotment at least quarterly. Revocation requests
                 must be submitted in writing from the employees and processed through their
                 Servicing Personnel Office in accordance with terms of the MOU described in
                 (1).
            (4) Dues allotment requests must be initiated on a Request for Payroll Deductions
                 for Association Dues, Form AD-1054.

        b As an option to establishing automated dues allotment, members of Associations or
          Employee Organizations may set up individual financial allotments to pay dues.
          Arrangements for such allotments must be made directly between the employee
          member and their Servicing Personnel Office using a Direct Deposit Sign Up Form,
          SF 1199A.




                                              5
July 27, 2005                                                                     DR 4020-251
                                                                                  Appendix A

                                       APPENDIX A

                     DECLARATION STATEMENT
                              FOR
      ASSOCIATIONS OF MANAGEMENT OFFICIALS OR SUPERVISORS,
    USDA EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS, or PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS


  Name of Association
  or Employee Organization:


  This Declaration Statement is submitted in accordance with Departmental Regulation
  4020-251, in fulfillment of requirements necessary to receive recognition by the USDA.

  On behalf of this Association or Employee Organization, I declare the following
  statement to be true.

      This Association or Employee Organization:
         1. Is a nonprofit organization whose membership is primarily made up of
             USDA employees,
         2. Has a current Constitution and Bylaws (copy attached),
         3. Does not discriminate in terms of membership or treatment of its members
             because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, sexual orientation,
             disability, marital status., familial status, or because all or part of an
             individual’s income is derived from any public assistance program, and
         4. Will not assist or participate in any strike, work stoppage or slowdown
             against the USDA, or advocate the overthrow of the Constitutional form of
             Government of the United States.


  _____________________           ____________
  President                         Date

Contact information: Name of President

                       Association or
                       Organization Address

                         Phone number

                         E-mail


Attachment: Constitution and Bylaws



                                             A-1
July 27, 2005                                                                 DR 4020-251
                                                                              Appendix B

                                           APPENDIX B

                    SAMPLE MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
                                    BETWEEN
                      THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                      AND
                         NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF XYZ

        The parties to this Memorandum, the National Association of XYZ, herein after referred
to as NAXYZ, and the U.S. Department of Agriculture, hereinafter referred to as USDA, enter
into this agreement for the purpose of establishing a mutually beneficial dues withholding
agreement.

1.      This Memorandum of Understanding is subject to and governed by regulations issued
        by the Office of Personnel Management (5 CFR 550.301, 550.311, 550.312, 550.113,
        and 550.331), and will be modified as necessary by any future amendments to said
        rules, regulations and law.

2.      USDA will permit any employee of USDA who is a member of NAXYZ to make a
        voluntary allotment for the payment of dues to NAXYZ. Such deductions shall begin
        after certification of this agreement by USDA and upon request by the appropriate
        association official and shall be at no cost to NAXYZ. Prior to the processing of any
        voluntary allotments, the Association must furnish USDA-OHCM information
        necessary for the USDA-National Finance Center to electronically transfer funds to a
        financial institution designated by the Association, to include; the account type,
        taxpayer ID number, account number and routing number. This Memorandum of
        Understanding shall be made part of every future agreement between USDA and
        NAXYZ and shall be the only authorized method for obtaining dues withholding.

3.     An employee requesting dues withholding shall obtain an AD-1054, "Request for
       Payroll Deductions for Association Dues", from NAXYZ and shall file the completed
       AD-1054 with the designated NAXYZ officer. The employee shall be instructed by
       NAXYZ to complete Section A of the form. No number shall appear in block 2 of the
       form except the employee's Social Security number.

4.     The NAXYZ authorized official will certify on each AD-1054 that the employee is a
       member in good standing of NAXYZ; insert the amount to be withheld; and submit the
       completed AD-1054(s) and a covering memo to the Servicing Personnel Office (SPO) of
       the USDA Agency involved. The SPO shall certify the employee eligibility for dues
       withholding, insert the NAXYZ code and, process the form(s). The SPO will promptly
       sign and note the effective pay period on the cover memo and return a copy to NAXYZ.

        When the SPO determines that an AD-1054 cannot be processed, the SPO shall
        promptly return the form to the Association, annotated with the reason for its return.
        Dues deductions, to be taken in the order of precedence under law, will not be made for
        employees who do not receive compensation sufficient to cover the total amount of the
        dues allotment.

                                            B-1
DR 4020-251                                                                        July 27, 2005
Appendix B



5.        Deductions will be made each pay period and remittances made by electronic funds
          transfer (EFT) on the Department's payday to the payee designated by the Association.
          A grace period of 7 days will be permitted in unusual circumstances. The NFC shall
          also promptly forward to NAXYZ a hardcopy listing of dues withheld via regular mail.
          The listing shall show the name of each member employee from whose pay dues were
          withheld, the employee's Social Security number, the amount withheld, the code of the
          employing agency, and any specific branch or chapter number to which each employee
          belongs. The listing will be in alphabetical order by the employee's last name. Each
          listing shall be summarized to show the total number of members for whom dues were
          withheld, the total number of dues withheld in each pay grade, the total amount
          withheld, and amount due to the branch or chapter. The list will also include the name
          of each employee member for that branch or chapter who previously made an allotment
          for whom no deduction was made that pay period, whether to leave without pay,
          insufficient pay, or dues cancellation. Such employees shall be designated with an
          appropriate explanatory term.

     6.   The amount of dues certified on the AD-1054 by the authorized Association official
          (see Section B) shall be the amount of regular dues, exclusive of initiation fees,
          assessment, back dues, fines, and similar charges and fees. One standard dues amount
          for all employees will be specified. If there should be a change in the dues structure or
          amount, the authorized Association official shall notify the appropriate SPO. If the
          change is the same for all members of the branch or chapter, a blanket authorization
          may be used which involves a varying dues structure, and then a revised rate schedule
          will be provided to the SPO. The SPO shall add the NAXYZ code and promptly
          forward the certification to the NFC. The change shall be effected at the beginning of
          the first full pay period after the certification is received by the NFC which shall be no
          later than 30 days after the Association provides written notification to the SPO of the
          change in dues. Only one such change to the dues structure may be made in any 12-
          month period.

7.        An employee may voluntarily revoke an allotment for the payment of dues by
          completing a AD-356A, "Cancellation of Withholding of Dues to Labor Organizations
          and Associations of Supervisors and Managers" or by memorandum in duplicate, and
          submitting this form to the appropriate SPO. If the employee uses a written request, it
          must contain all the information required by the AD-356A. The SPO shall process the
          revocation effective as of the first full pay period the revocation was received by the
          SPO. The SPO shall verify the information and forward an official copy of each
          revocation to NAXYZ. This official copy will be appropriate notification for the
          revocation.

8.        USDA will terminate an allotment:

          a.   As of the beginning of the first full pay period following withdrawal of USDA
               recognition of the Association;
          b.   At the end of the pay period during which an employee member is separated from
               USDA;

                                               B-2
July 27, 2005                                                                      DR 4020-251
                                                                                   Appendix B

        c.      As of the beginning of the first full pay period following receipt of notice from the
                NAXYZ Secretary/Treasurer that an employee member has ceased to be a member
                in good standing; or
        d.      As of the beginning of the first full pay period following receipt of revocation from
                the employee member as provided in section 7.

9.      The parties to this agreement recognize that problems may occur in the administration
        of this agreement and the dues withholding program. The parties agree to exchange
        names, addresses, and telephone numbers of responsible officials and/or technicians of
        NAXYZ and USDA to facilitate resolution of problems. These individuals shall
        cooperate fully in an effort to resolve any issue relating to dues withholding under the
        terms of this Memorandum of Understanding. This does not constitute a waiver of any
        legal, regulatory, or contractual right.

10.     The USDA incurs no liability in connection with any authorized dues allotment
        disbursed in accordance with an employee’s request. Any disputes regarding any
        authorized allotment are a matter to be resolved between NAXYZ and the employee.

11.     This Memorandum of Understanding shall remain in effect at the discretion of the
        Director of Office of Human Capital Management provided NAXYZ is recognized as
        an association under USDA regulations. Either party may propose amendments
        annually, before the anniversary date of the signing of this agreement.

12.     The initial dues deduction capability for the NAXYZ will be in place no later that 6
        weeks from the date that this Memorandum of Understanding is signed.


       Agreed and signed: ________________________               _______________________
                         Director, Office of Human                President, NAXYZ
                         Capital Management, USDA




                                                B-3
