                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                        Number:
          DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                       DR 4030-330-002
                                                                        Date:
                                                                        February 27, 2014
     Subject:
     Special Selection Priority Programs                                OPI:
                                                                        Office of Human Resources
                                                                        Management


                                     TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section                                                                              Page

 1. Purpose                                                                          1
 2. Authority                                                                        1
 3. References                                                                       2
 4. Special Instructions/Cancellations                                               2
 5. Policy                                                                           2
 6. Responsibilities                                                                 3
 7. Employee Coverage                                                                3
 8. Career Transition Assistance Plan (CTAP)                                         4
 9. Reemployment Priority List (RPL)                                                 12
10. Interagency Career Transition Assistance Plan (ICTAP)                            20
11. Payment of Travel & Relocation Expenses                                          24

Appendix A           Definitions                                                     A-1
Appendix B           USDA CTAP Eligibility Adjudication Worksheet                    B-1
Appendix C           USDA RPL Eligibility Adjudication Worksheet                     C-1
Appendix D           ICTAP Eligibility Adjudication Worksheet                        D-1


1.        PURPOSE

          The purpose of this policy is to update and set forth guidelines for managing the
          special selection priority programs within the United States Department of
          Agriculture (USDA). The special selection priority programs include the Career
          Transition Assistance Plan (CTAP), the Reemployment Priority List (RPL), and
          the Interagency Career Transition Assistance Plan (ICTAP). This policy is
          intended to provide a general understanding of the special selection authorities
          and required placement processes.


2.        AUTHORITY

          The Office of Personnel Management (OPM) issued Title 5, Code of Federal
          Regulations (CFR), Part 330, requiring Executive Branch departments to provide
     career transition and interagency career transition assistance plans to employees
     affected by downsizing or restructuring. These regulations also require USDA to
     maintain an RPL listing all employees by geographic local commuting area who
     were separated by Reduction in Force (RIF).

     The Director, Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM), is delegated
     authority to set policy and provide overall guidance and direction for
     implementing those plans and maintaining the CTAP and RPL for USDA.


3.   REFERENCES

     This Directive must be used in conjunction with:

     a. Title 5, CFR, Part 330, Recruitment, Selection, and Placement (General);
     b. Title 5, CFR, Part 353, Restoration to Duty from Uniformed Service or
        Compensable Injury;
     c. Title 5, United States Code (U.S.C.), Section 5724a(g), Travel and
        Transportation Subsistence;
     d. Title 5, U.S.C. , Section 8337, Retirement, Civil Service Retirement,
        Disability Retirement;
     e. Title 5, U.S.C. , Section 8451, Federal Employees’ Retirement System,
        Disability Benefits, Disability Retirement;
     f. Title 5, U.S.C. , Section 8456, Federal Employees’ Retirement System,
        Disability Benefits, Military Reserve Technicians;
     g. Workforce Investment Act (WIA) of 1998, administered by the U.S.
        Department of Labor;
     h. CTAP information and surplus letters issued list at USDA website
        http://www.dm.usda.gov/employ/CTAP-website-2a.htm;
     i. RPL information at USDA website http://www.dm.usda.gov/employ/policy-
        employment/rpl.htm;
     j. USDA’s RPL website http://www.dm.usda.gov/employ/reemployment-
        priority-list.htm; and
     k. USDA’s RPL Registration Sheet at
        http://www.dm.usda.gov/employ/Rplappl.htm.


4.   SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     This policy supersedes Departmental Regulation 4030-330-001, Special
     Placement Programs, dated August 5, 2005, and OHRM Advisory 2011-003
     “Changes to 5 C.F.R. 330, Recruitment, Placement, and Selection,” dated
     March 2, 2011.


5.   POLICY

     All USDA mission areas, agencies, and staff offices will effect special placement
     priority selection to surplus and displaced employees for vacancies subject to
                                             2
     consideration in the local commuting area before selecting candidates from either
     within or outside the Department unless the action is an exception as identified in
     Section 8(e), 9(g), and 10(e) of this Directive. (Also listed at 5 CFR 330.211, 5
     CFR 330.609, and 5 CFR 330.707) The provisions of the USDA CTAP, RPL,
     and ICTAP special priority placement policy are effective upon release of this
     DR and will be applied uniformly across the Department for all surplus and
     displaced employees, including those in the excepted service as described. This
     policy shall be used in conjunction with support and advice from the servicing
     HRO and the regulations at 5 CFR 330.


6.   RESPONSIBILITIES

     The Director, OHRM, is responsible for setting policy and providing overall technical
     guidance and direction for USDA’s special selection priority programs. OHRM will
     provide staff assistance and monitor compliance with laws, regulations, and
     Departmental policy and will ensure that information regarding the special selection
     priority programs is available and accessible to employees affected by downsizing,
     workforce reshaping, reorganization, and budget constraints who may ultimately be
     separated.

     Mission areas, agencies and staff offices may not supplement this Directive without
     prior approval of the Director, OHRM, and the HR Policy Division. Approved
     supplemental regulations, policies or internal guidance, which are integrated into the
     standard operating procedures, issued by mission areas, agencies, staff offices, or
     servicing Human Resources offices (HRO) may not conflict with the contents of this
     Directive. Servicing HROs must make this Directive, and any approved supplemental
     regulations or guidance, available to all employees.

     Management officials have the responsibility for upholding the intent of USDA’s
     special selection priority programs.


7.   EMPLOYEE COVERAGE

     This Directive covers the following employees:

     a. All current or former USDA career or career-conditional (tenure group I or II)
        competitive service employees at the GS-15 (or equivalent) and below who meet
        eligibility requirements for a special priority placement program;

     b. All current or former USDA excepted service employees on an appointment without
        time limit (tenure group II) at grade level GS-15 (or equivalent) or below who meet
        eligibility requirements for a special placement priority program; and

     c. Former competitive service employees fully recovered from a compensable injury
        (as defined in 5 CFR 353) after more than one year who meet eligibility
        requirements for a special placement priority program.

                                              3
     Note: Although “grades” are referred to throughout this document, agencies with an
     alternative personnel system may substitute “pay band” or other applicable term for
     “grade,” as appropriate.

     CTAP and ICTAP do not apply to the Senior Executive Service (SES), although they
     do apply to Senior Level (SL) and Scientific and Professional (ST) Positions in the
     competitive service, and Senior Science and Technology Service (SSTS) positions in
     the excepted service in certain cases. The Department's Executive Resources
     Management Division will address transition assistance for these senior employees and
     SES employees accordingly.


8.   CAREER TRANSITION ASSISTANCE PLAN (CTAP)

     a. Eligibility

        A CTAP eligible is a current career or career-conditional employee (tenure I or II)
        in the competitive service who is "displaced" or "surplus" and who has a current
        performance rating of record of at least fully successful (Level 3) or equivalent.

        (1)   Displaced Employee

              A current USDA career or career-conditional competitive service employee at
              the GS-15 (or equivalent) or below who: received a RIF separation notice
              under 5 CFR 351 and has not declined an offer for a position with the same
              type of work schedule and representative rate at least as high as that of the
              position from which the employee will be separated; or received a notice of
              proposed removal under 5 CFR 752 for declining a directed reassignment
              outside the local commuting area (positions with mobility statements not
              covered); or

              A current USDA excepted service employee serving on an appointment
              without time limit, at the GS-15 (or equivalent) and below, who: is covered by
              law providing both noncompetitive appointment eligibility to and selection
              priority for, competitive service positions; and received a RIF separation
              notice under 5 CFR 351 or notice of proposed removal under 5 CFR 752 for
              declining a directed reassignment outside the local commuting area (positions
              with mobility statements not covered).

        (2)   Surplus Employee

              A current USDA career or career-conditional competitive service employee at
              the GS-15 (or equivalent) and below who: received a Certificate of Expected
              Separation (CES) under 5 CFR 351 or other official agency notification
              indicating the employee's position is surplus, such as a notice of position
              abolishment or eligibility for a discontinued service retirement;

              A current USDA excepted service employee serving on an appointment
              without time limit, at the GS-15 (or equivalent) and below, who: is covered by
                                             4
         law providing both noncompetitive appointment eligibility to, and selection
         priority for, competitive service positions; and received a CES notice under 5
         CFR 351; or

         A current excepted service employee on a Schedule A or B appointment
         without a time limit at a GS-15 (or equivalent) or below and who: received a
         CES under 5 CFR 351 or other official agency notification indicating the
         employee's position is surplus, such as a notice of position abolishment or
         eligibility for a discontinued service retirement; or received a RIF notice under
         5 CFR 351 or a notice of proposed removal under 5 CFR 752 for declining a
         directed reassignment outside the local commuting area (positions with
         mobility statements not covered).

   (3)   Period of Eligibility

         Eligibility begins on the date the servicing HRO issues the employee a RIF
         separation notice, notice of proposed separation for declining a transfer of
         function or directed reassignment outside the local commuting area, CES, or
         other official agency certification.

         CTAP eligibility for selection priority expires upon the earliest of:

         (a) On the RIF separation date, the date of the employee’s resignation,
             retirement, or separation from USDA (including separation under
             adverse action procedures for declining a directed reassignment or
             transfer of function or similar relocation to another local commuting
             area);

         (b) Cancellation of the RIF separation notice, notice of proposed removal for
             declining a directed reassignment or transfer of function outside of the
             local commuting area, a CES, or other official certification (e.g., a notice
             of position abolishment or a notice stating that the employee is eligible
             for discontinued service retirement) issued by the servicing HRO;

         (c) Being placed in another position, within the department at any grade or
             pay, either permanent or time limited before the agency separates the
             employee;

         (d) Receiving a career, career-conditional, or excepted service appointment
             without time limit in any agency at any grade level;

         (e) Declining a career, career-conditional, or excepted appointment without
             time limit within USDA for which the employee has applied and has
             been rated “well qualified;” or

         (f) Failing to respond within a reasonable period of time (recommend 10
             business days) to an offer or official inquiry of availability.

b. Vacancy
                                          5
   A vacant competitive service position at grade GS-15 (or equivalent) or below to be
   filled for a total of 121 days or more, including all extensions, regardless of whether
   a vacancy announcement was advertised qualifies as a vacancy requiring CTAP
   clearance. Vacancy announcements must contain information regarding how
   eligible employees may apply, proof of eligibility requirements, and the standard
   for what constitutes a “well qualified” candidate.

   A CTAP eligible must file an application for a specific vacancy announcement by
   11:59pm Eastern Time on the closing date and provide proof of eligibility as
   required; apply for a vacancy that is at a grade or pay level with the representative
   rate no higher than the representative rate of the grade or pay level of the CTAP
   eligible's permanent position of record; has no greater promotion potential than the
   position from which the employee may be or is being separated; occupy a position
   in the same local commuting area as the position vacancy for which he/she is
   requesting priority consideration; is filled during the CTAP/ICTAP eligible's
   eligibility period and is filled under the same competitive or excepted appointing
   authority as the eligible's permanent position of record. A candidate claiming
   CTAP/ICTAP consideration, but is determined not eligible, must still be considered
   as he/she would have otherwise without claiming the priority.

   Agency components may place a component employee, who is currently employed
   within the local commuting area, into the vacant position after the servicing HRO
   applies the above criteria to determine if there are selection priority candidates.

c. Determining “Well Qualified”

   Candidates are determined “well qualified” if they possess the competencies which
   exceed the minimum qualification requirements for the vacancy. The servicing
   HRO must be able to determine that the CTAP eligible:

   (1) Meets basic eligibility requirements, qualification standards, and applicable
       selective factors;

   (2) Is physically qualified with or without reasonable accommodation to perform
       the essential duties of the position;

   (3) Meets any special qualifying conditions of the position;

   (4) Is able to satisfactorily perform the duties of the position upon entry; and

   (5) Rates at or above specified level(s) on all quality ranking factors. (See
       5 CFR 330.606(b)) Applicants must receive a rating of at least 85 out
       of a possible 100 points when assessed through traditional or score-
       based category rating methods or be determined to be in the “well
       qualified” group when assessed through the category rating method. If
       it is determined that the applicant is not “well qualified”, the HRO
       must conduct a second review of the application and notify the
       applicant of the results in writing in accordance with 5 CFR
                                         6
         330.608(e).

d. Order of Selection

   A CTAP selection priority candidate is a CTAP eligible who applied for and was
   determined to be “well qualified” by the servicing HRO and whom the selecting
   official must select over any other applicant for the vacancy unless the action to be
   taken is listed as an exception under 5 CFR 330.609.

   When it is determined that there are two or more CTAP selection priority
   candidates for a vacancy, to determine the order, the component may provide an
   internal component candidate a higher priority than another component's
   candidate.

   Only after the servicing HRO has made the vacancy available to CTAP eligibles
   and met its obligation to CTAP selection priority candidates can the position be
   filled by a permanent competitive service candidate from within its workforce
   through appropriate staffing procedures.

   A mission area, agency, or staff office may provide CTAP selection priority to
   eligible employees from another commuting area only after fulfilling its obligation
   to CTAP selection priority candidates in the local commuting area.

   If the HRO can document that there are no CTAP eligibles in a local commuting
   area (i.e., via the USDA CTAP website), the HRO need not post the vacancy
   announcement for CTAP eligibles. (See 5 CFR 330.608(d))

   Agencies and staff offices may not hire temporary help services until a
   determination is made that no CTAP eligible is available in accordance with 5
   CFR 300 subpart E.

e. Exceptions to CTAP Selection Priority

   Below are the personnel action exceptions which are exempt from CTAP priority
   consideration. HROs must confirm and document current exceptions, listed under 5
   CFR 330.609, prior to effecting selection.

   (1)    Reemployment of a former USDA employee with regulatory or statutory
          reemployment rights, including the reemployment of an injured worker who
          either has been restored to earning capacity by the Office of Workers'
          Compensation Programs, Department of Labor, or has received a notice that
          his or her compensation benefits will cease because of full recovery from the
          disabling injury or illness;

   (2)    Reassignment or demotion of an employee under 5 CFR 432 or 752;

   (3)    Appointment of an individual for a period limited to 120 or fewer days,
          including all extensions;

                                         7
(4)   Reassignment of employees between or among positions in the local
      commuting area (sometimes called job swaps) when there is no change in
      grade or promotion potential and no actual vacancy results;

(5)   Conversion of an employee currently serving under an appointment providing
      noncompetitive conversion eligibility to a competitive service appointment,
      including from: (1) a Veterans Recruitment Appointment under 5 CFR 307;
      (2) an appointment under 5 U.S.C. 3112 and 5 CFR 316 of a veteran with a
      compensable service-connected disability of 30 percent or more; and (3) make
      an excepted service appointment under 5 CFR 213, such as for persons with
      disabilities or in one of the Pathways Programs (i.e., the Presidential
      Management Fellow Program, Recent Graduates Program, or Internship
      Program);

(6)   Effecting a personnel action under, or specifically in lieu of, 5 CFR 351;

(7)   Effecting a position change of an employee into a different position as a result
      of a formal reorganization, as long as the former position ceases to exist and
      no actual vacancy results;

(8)   Assignment or exchange of an employee under a statutory program, such as
      Subchapter VI of Chapter 33 of Title 5, U.S.C. (also called the
      Intergovernmental Personnel Act), or the Information Technology Exchange
      Program under Chapter 37 of Title 5, U.S.C.;

(9)   Appointment of an individual under an excepted service appointing authority;

(10) Effecting a position change of an employee within the excepted service;

(11) Detailing an employee within USDA;

(12) Promoting an employee for a period limited to 120 or fewer days, including all
     extensions;

(13) Effecting a position change of a surplus or displaced employee in the local
     commuting area;

(14) Effecting a position change of an employee under 5 U.S.C. 8337 or 8451 to
     allow continued employment of an employee who is unable to provide useful
     and efficient service in his or her current position because of a medical
     condition;

(15) Effecting a position change of an employee to a position that constitutes a
     reasonable offer as defined in 5 U.S.C. 8336(d) and 8414(b);

(16) Effecting a position change of an employee resulting from a reclassification
     action (such as accretion of duties or an action resulting from application of
     new position classification standards);

                                      8
(17) Promoting an employee to the next higher grade or pay level of a designated
     career ladder position;

(18) Recalling a seasonal or intermittent employee from non-pay status;

(19) Effecting a position change of an injured or disabled employee to a position in
     which he or she can be reasonably accommodated;

(20) Effecting a personnel action pursuant to the settlement of a formal complaint,
     grievance, appeal, or other litigation;

(21) Reassignment or demotion of an employee under 5 CFR 315.907 for failure to
     complete a supervisory or managerial probationary period;

(22) Retaining an individual whose position is brought into the competitive service
     under 5 CFR 316 and convert that individual, when applicable, under 5 CFR
     315;

(23) Retaining an employee covered by an OPM-approved variation under Civil
     Service Rule 5.1 (5 CFR 5.1);

(24) Reemployment of a former USDA employee who retired under a formal trial
     retirement and reemployment program and who requests reemployment under
     the program's provisions and applicable time limits;

(25) Extending a time- limited promotion or appointment up to the maximum
     period allowed (including any OPM-approved extensions beyond the
     regulatory limit on the time- limited promotion or appointment), if the original
     action was made subject to CTAP selection priority and the original
     announcement or notice stated that the promotion or appointment could be
     extended without further announcement;

(26) Transfer of an employee between departments (i.e. USDA and DOT) under
     appropriate authority during an inter-departmental reorganization, inter-
     departmental transfer of function, or inter-departmental mass transfer;

(27) Appointment of a member of the Senior Executive Service into the
     competitive service under 5 U.S.C. 3594;

(28) Transfer of an employee voluntarily from one department to another (i.e.
     USDA and DOT) under a Memorandum of Understanding or similar
     agreement under appropriate authority resulting from an inter-departmental
     reorganization, inter-departmental transfer of function, or inter-departmental
     mass transfer, when both the departments and the affected employee agree to
     the transfer;

(29) Reassignment of an employee whose position description or other written
     mobility agreement provides for reassignment outside the commuting area as
     part of a planned USDA rotational program;
                                     9
     (30) Transfer or a position change of an employee under 5 CFR 412; or

     (31) Conversion of an employee's time- limited appointment in the competitive or
          excepted service to a permanent appointment in the competitive service if the
          employee accepted the time- limited appointment while a CTAP eligible.

f.   CTAP Notification & Tracking Services

     Employees receiving a surplus certification or a separation notice due to RIF or
     failure to accept relocation to a different commuting area must be informed in
     writing of their eligibility for priority placement and career transition services.
     Similarly, when an HRO identifies a former employee as displaced under 5 CFR
     330.703(b), he/she will be notified of their eligibility under Subpart G of 5 CFR
     Part 330.

     Each servicing HRO will establish a method of tracking its affected employees and
     furnishing information on current eligibility. In addition, each HRO employing a
     displaced employee on a basis that affects their eligibility under CTAP shall notify
     in writing the former employing office and OHRM Human Resources Policy
     Division of the action taken.

g. USDA Transition Services

     Each HRO will provide information to its servicing area’s employees on the use
     of transition services, and the supervisors and managers on the requirements of
     CTAP selection priority. Per Section 10(g) of this Directive, priority
     information and services regarding ICTAP and an overview of the Workforce
     Investment Act of 1998 are to be provided in conjunction with CTAP
     information and services. They will also provide a specific orientation session
     for surplus and displaced employees at the time they become eligible for
     services and selection priority.

     A minimum level of services will be available to all employees affected by
     downsizing, workforce reshaping, budget reductions, reorganization, or similar
     events to include, as applicable:

     (1) Government job vacancy information – www.usajobs.gov/;

     (2) Career transition workshops, training, and skills development;

     (3) Employee Assistance Program (EAP) – These programs are staffed by
         professional counselors who provide free, confidential assistance to
         employees on a number of issues. Employees may contact their EAP
         provider directly for assistance. HROs will provide information on how to
         contact EAP counselors; and

     (4) Reasonable accommodations for employees with disabilities who are entitled to
         services under this plan. Mission areas, agencies, staff offices, and HROs must
                                           10
        ensure that both training and materials are suitable for employees with
        disabilities and alternative formats are provided upon request.

     Mission areas, agencies, staff offices, and HROs have the authority to provide the
     required CTAP orientation session in person, through an automated training
     session, or Intranet.

h. Use of Services and Facilities

     Displaced employees will have access to career transition services for 90 days
     from the date of separation. This does not allow for continued access to secure
     areas or information.

     OHRM will coordinate the development of any cost-shared services for mission
     areas.

i.   Use of Excused Absence

     Each affected employee who requests excused absence will be granted up to
     forty (40) hours of administrative leave to make use of the available career
     transition services. Additional administrative leave may be approved by the
     first level supervisor as warranted by the individual situation. Supervisors
     should verify that time granted is used appropriately. Mission areas,
     agencies, and staff offices must be prepared to reimburse individuals for
     travel expenses, in accordance with regulation, for transition services
     activities which it makes available.

j.   Retraining Efforts

     Mission Areas, agencies and staff offices will, to the extent possible, retrain
     surplus/displaced employees for other occupations needed by their organization
     before hiring external candidates to fill a USDA vacancy. Managers should make
     every effort to provide training to internal employees who lack specialized
     knowledge in a specific program area, but who are basically qualified to perform
     the job. However, to ensure that all affected employees receive adequate training
     opportunities, prudence must be used in considering the course(s) and potentially
     the number of courses authorized. Such considerations include budget constraints,
     training costs, the parity of spending, and the likelihood of making placement(s).

     Employees who begin training before the effective date of separation may
     complete their training after separation unless additional costs would be incurred
     or other limitation reason, such as security or system access.

k. Information on Federal, State, or Local Assistance to Support Career Transition
   for Employees with Disabilities

     The servicing HRO or, as applicable, mission area, agency or staff office, will
     designate a coordinator or provide contacts for Federal, state or local availability of
     persons or organizations to support career transition for persons with disabilities.
                                           11
          Upon employee request, printed materials will be provided in suitable formats.

     l.   USDA CTAP Website

          OHRM developed a website to post contact information on current USDA
          CTAP eligibles, including location (city, state), contact names (one primary
          contact and one alternate contact) and phone numbers, current series and grade,
          and date of eligibility. The HROs are responsible for submitting this contact
          information to the OHRM designee within two business days of a surplus letter
          being issued. In turn, OHRM is responsible for maintaining and updating
          website within three business days of receipt.

          Additionally, cancellations and changes to information on the CTAP website must
          be provided timely by the servicing HROs to the OHRM designee. Information
          may be obtained from the website at: http://www.dm.usda.gov/employ/CTAP-
          website-2a.htm.

          Agencies filling positions subject to CTAP considerations must check this website
          for eligible candidates before announcing the position. If a determination is made
          that there is no available candidate, then normal staffing procedures may continue.
          A copy of the webpage, signed and dated by the servicing HR Specialist, showing
          the CTAP eligibles or none (no one listed) is to be kept with the recruitment action
          (i.e. the job announcement case file if applicable).

     m. Notice of Application Status

          Surplus and displaced employees must receive written results of their application
          status, including whether or not they were determined “well qualified” for specific
          vacancy announcement within their local commuting area. If a CTAP eligible
          applicant is found to be “well qualified” and another “well qualified” applicant is
          selected, the CTAP eligible applicant must be informed of his/her non-selection
          including whether another CTAP selection priority candidate was hired; whether
          the position was filled under an exception listed in 5 CFR 330.609; and whether the
          recruitment was cancelled. If the CTAP eligible applicant was not found to be
          “well- qualified,” such notification must include results from an independent,
          second review, consistent with 5 CFR 330.605(b).

     n. Not “Well Qualified” Reviews

          Servicing HROs will ensure that a documented, independent second review is
          conducted whenever an otherwise eligible CTAP selection priority candidate is
          determined to be not “well qualified”. The applicant must be advised in writing of
          the results of the second review before a referral certificate is issued. Both of these
          reviews are to be maintained in the applicable vacancy announcement case file.


9.   REEMPLOYMENT PRIORITY LIST (RPL)

     In accordance with 5 CFR 330.201(a), RPL assists current and former competitive
                                                 12
service employees who will be or were separated by RIF under 5 CFR 351, or who
have recovered from a compensable work related injury after more than one year, as
required by 5 CFR 353. In filling vacancies, mission areas, agencies and staff offices
must give USDA’s RPL registrants placement priority for most competitive service
positions before hiring an individual outside the USDA workforce.

a. General Provisions

   Servicing HROs are responsible for ensuring that USDA employees separated by
   RIF or those who are fully recovered from a compensable injury after more than
   one year receive non-competitive reemployment priority consideration for vacant
   positions for which he/she is qualified. The reemployment priority consideration
   requires careful review of the basic qualifications of the RPL eligible, followed by
   contact to determine interest and availability. Eligibility for RPL is limited to
   competitive service employees in tenure groups I (career) and II (career-
   conditional) in accordance with 5 CFR 330.203 and §330.204 respectively. HRO
   staff are expected to interpret and apply OPM’s qualification standards, minimum
   educational requirements and selective placement factors (including any minimum
   education and established selective placement factors) to place basically qualified
   RPL eligibles in vacant positions when possible.

b. Establishment of the RPL

   The Department’s OHRM is required to establish and maintain the RPL for
   USDA. The USDA RPL lists each duty station for which an employee has been
   separated by RIF or who is fully recovered from a compensable injury after
   more than one year.

   USDA’s RPL (most recent list) is available online at
   http://www.dm.usda.gov/employ/reemployment-priority- list.htm.

c. RPL Application and Registration

   An RPL eligible must request reemployment consideration by submitting the
   Department’s RPL Registration Sheet on or before the RIF separation date, or 30
   calendar days after the date compensation ceases for a work-related injury or the
   Department of Labor denies an appeal for continuation of injury compensation
   benefits. An employee who fails to submit a timely application is not entitled to
   placement on the RPL. The Registration Sheet must be submitted to the servicing
   HRO, specifying the series, grade(s), tenure, work schedule(s), and other
   information as noted on form for RPL registration.

   Information can be obtained from the USDA website
   http://www.dm.usda.gov/employ/policy-employment/rpl.htm, which includes a
   link to the USDA RPL Registration Sheet,
   http://www.dm.usda.gov/employ/Rplappl.htm.

   The servicing HRO is responsible for faxing or otherwise submitting the
   completed Registration Sheet to OHRM no later than 10 calendar days after
                                         13
   receipt of the form. The servicing HRO must contact OHRM for any
   additions/deletions to RPL information, to be effected within three business days.

   RPL eligibles may apply for designated population centers within a commuting
   area. RPL eligibles cannot be removed from the list for refusing an offer outside
   of designated population centers for which they have registered. At any time, an
   RPL eligible may further expand or reduce their availability within a commuting
   area by providing an updated Registration Sheet.

   RPL registration is limited to the local commuting area in which the eligible was, or
   will be, separated unless:

   (1) If USDA has or will have no competitive service positions remaining in the
       local commuting area from which the RPL eligible will be separated under 5
       CFR 351, the servicing HRO with Director, OHRM (or designee) concurrence
       may designate a different local commuting area where there are continuing
       positions for the RPL eligible to exercise placement priority. The Director,
       OHRM (or designee), has sole discretion over whether to offer this option and
       which local commuting area to designate, taking into consideration the size and
       locations of its workforce, available vacancies, and available funds.

   (2) If the RPL eligible agreed to transfer with his or her function under 5 CFR 351
       but will be separated by RIF from the gaining competitive area, registration is
       limited to the RPL covering the gaining competitive area's local commuting
       area.

   (3) For an individual who is eligible under 5 CFR 330.203(b), registration is
       initially limited to the RPL covering the local commuting area of the position
       from which the employee was separated.

   (4) If the RPL eligible was, or will be, separated from an overseas position (see 5
       CFR 301), RPL registration is limited to the local commuting area in which
       the eligible was, or will be, separated, unless:

       (a) The servicing HRO in concurrence with the Director, OHRM (or
           designee), approves a written request by the RPL eligible for registration
           in the local commuting area from which employed for overseas service, or
           in another area within the United States that is mutually acceptable to the
           eligible and the Department; or

       (b) The Department has a formal program for rotating employees between
           overseas areas and the United States (USDA does not), and the RPL
           eligible's preceding and prospective overseas service would exceed the
           maximum duration of an overseas duty tour in the rotation program. In
           this case, the eligible may register for a local commuting area within the
           United States that is mutually acceptable to the eligible and USDA.

d. Period of Eligibility


                                         14
An employee or former employee must meet the conditions in either subsection (1)
or (2) to be an RPL eligible.

(1) For eligibility based on RIF (5 CFR 351), the employee:

   (a) Must be serving in an appointment in the competitive service in tenure group
       I or II;

   (b) Must have received either a specific notice of separation or a CES that has
       not been cancelled, rescinded, or modified so that the employee is no longer
       under notice of separation;

   (c) Must have received a rating of record of at least fully successful (Level 3) or
       equivalent as the most recent performance rating of record; and

   (d) Must not have declined an offer of a position with the same type of work
       schedule and with a representative rate at least as high as that of the position
       from which the employee will be separated.

(2) For eligibility based on Restoration to Duty (5 CFR 353), the employee or
    former employee:

   (a) Must be serving in, or separated from, an appointment in the competitive
       service in tenure group I or II;

   (b) Must either have accepted a position at a lower grade or pay level in lieu of
       separation or have been separated because of a compensable injury or
       disability;

   (c) Must have fully recovered more than one year after compensation began;
       and

   (d) Must have received notification from the Office of Workers' Compensation
       Programs, Department of Labor, that injury compensation benefits have
       ceased or will cease.

An employee or former employee must meet the conditions in subsection (3), (4), or
(5) to be removed from the RPL. Declinations should be obtained in writing for
documentations purposes. Declination of time- limited employment does not affect
RPL eligibility.

(3) The period of RPL eligibility for selection priority at all registered grades or pay
    levels expires the earliest of when an employee:

   (a) Declines or fails to reply to the HRO, mission area, agency, or staff office’s
       inquiry about an RPL offer of a career, career-conditional, or excepted
       appointment without time limit for a position having the same type of work
       schedule and a representative rate at least as high as the position from which
       the registrant was, or will be, separated;
                                      15
   (b) Receives a written cancellation, rescission, or modification to:

       1   The RIF separation notice or CES so that the employee no longer meets
           the conditions for RPL eligibility in 5 CFR 330.203(a); or

       2   The notification of cessation of injury compensation benefits so that
           injury compensation benefits continue;

   (c) Separates from USDA for any other reason (such as retirement, resignation,
       or transfer) before the RIF separation effective date. Registration continues
       if the RPL registrant retires on or after the RIF separation effective date.
       This condition does not apply to an RPL registrant under 5 CFR 330.203(b);

   (d) Requests in writing removal from the RPL;

   (e) Is placed in a USDA position without time limit at any grade or pay level;

   (f) Accepts a career, career-conditional or excepted appointment without time
       limit at any grade or pay level in any department;

   (g) Leaves the area covered by an overseas RPL (see 5 CFR 301) or is ineligible
       for continued overseas employment because of previous service or
       residence;

   (h) Declines an offer of career, career-conditional, or excepted appointment
       without time limit or fails to reply to an inquiry; or

   (i) The period of eligibility for RPL has elapsed.

(4) An RPL registrant is removed from the RPL (no longer eligible for selection
    priority) at registered grades or pay levels with a representative rate at and
    below the representative rate of a position offered by a USDA HRO if the
    offered position is below the last grade or pay level held and the registrant:

   (a) Declines or fails to reply to the HRO, mission area, agency or staff office’s
       inquiry about an RPL offer of a career, career-conditional, or excepted
       appointment without time limit for a position meeting the acceptable
       conditions shown on the RPL registrant's application; or

   (b) Declines or fails to appear for a scheduled interview.

       An RPL registrant removed from the RPL under this subsection at lower
       grades or pay levels than the last grade or pay level held remains on the RPL
       for positions with a representative rate higher than the offered position up to
       the grade or pay level last held, unless registration expires or otherwise
       terminates.

(5) RPL registration expires two years from the date of RIF separation under 5 CFR
                                      16
       351, or two years from the date the Department registers the RPL eligible
       because of recovery from a compensable work injury under 5 CFR
       330.206(a)(3)(i) or (ii). An RPL eligible remains registered for the full two-year
       period unless the registrant is removed from the RPL for a reason specified in 5
       CFR 330.209.

       OPM may extend the registration period when an RPL eligible does not receive
       a full two years of placement priority, for example, because of an administrative
       or procedural error by the Department or sub-organization. Either the servicing
       HRO through the Director, OHRM (or designee) or the RPL eligible themselves
       may request OPM to extend the registration period based on the error. The
       request must describe the administrative or procedural error that caused the RPL
       eligible to be registered for less than the full two-year period. OPM may request
       additional information either from the Department or the RPL eligible in
       connection with any such request. OPM will notify both the Department and the
       RPL eligible of the decision to approve or deny an extension request. OPM's
       decision regarding an extension request is not subject to appeal under 5 CFR
       330.214.

e. RPL Consideration

   Agencies filling positions subject to RPL consideration, and with regard to any
   permanent or temporary positions vacancies, the servicing HROs must check the
   USDA RPL website for eligible candidates. A copy of the most recent RPL is to
   be kept with the personnel action (i.e., the job announcement case file if
   applicable). In conducting external and internal recruitment, the HRO must
   consider RPL eligibles at one of the following stages of the process after fulfilling
   agency obligations to CTAP selection priority candidates and before hiring an
   individual outside the USDA workforce:

   (1) Prior to announcing the vacancy;

   (2) Prior to requesting a certificate issued by OPM or a Delegated Examining unit;

   (3) Prior to referring a certificate of eligibles; or

   (4) Prior to making an offer of employment.

   The servicing HRO must document that there are no RPL placement priority
   candidates for the vacancy when requesting a competitive certificate of eligibles
   under 5 CFR 332. Similarly, the HRO must offer the vacancy to any RPL
   placement priority candidate(s) before effecting an appointment under a
   noncompetitive appointing authority, such as under 5 CFR 315. Once the servicing
   HRO has ensured there are no CTAP or RPL placement priority candidates for a
   particular vacancy and documents in writing an employment offer that is accepted
   by another individual, the HRO may fulfill that employment offer to that individual.

   Mission areas, agencies, and staff offices must use the USDA RPL to give
   placement priority to USDA’s:
                                            17
     (5) Current competitive service employees with a specific notice of RIF separation
         or a CES issued under 5 CFR 351;

     (6) Former competitive service employees separated by RIF under 5 CFR 351; and

     (7) Former competitive service employees fully recovered from a compensable
         injury (as defined in 5 CFR 353) after more than one year.

f.   Order of Selection

     When hiring from the RPL, selection must be made in tenure group and subgroup
     order with tenure group I (career) eligibles being considered before tenure group II
     (career-conditional) eligibles. Tenure group I are career employees eligible for two
     years from date entered on RPL; tenure group II are career-conditional employees
     also eligible for two years from date entered on RPL. In each tenure group,
     veteran’s preference eligibles are given priority over non-preference eligibles.
     Within the veteran’s preference subgroup, priority order is the same as with
     Delegated Examining consideration though this consideration process does not
     involve points and scores. HROs may allow mission areas, agencies, and staff
     offices to select RPL eligibles in a subgroup without regard to retention standing
     within the subgroup. If there are no qualified and available RPL eligibles whose last
     work schedule matches that of the vacancy, they may consider RPL eligibles with
     other work schedules.

g. Exceptions to Clearing RPL Placement Priority

     Clearance of RPL (see Section 9e) is not required for actions involving employees
     already on the USDA’s rolls. Below are the personnel action exceptions which are
     exempt from RPL placement priority. HRO’s must confirm and document current
     exceptions, listed under 5 CFR 330.211 prior to effecting a personnel action:

     (1) When all RPL placement priority candidates decline an offer of the position or
         fail to respond to a written HRO inquiry about their availability;

     (2) With an employee of the Department’s current permanent competitive service
         workforce through detail or position change;

     (3) Appoint a 10-point preference eligible through an appropriate appointing
         authority;

     (4) Appoint a current or former employee exercising restoration rights under 5 CFR
         353 based on return from military service or recovery from a compensable
         injury or disability within one year;

     (5) Appoint a current or former employee exercising other statutory or regulatory
         reemployment rights;



                                          18
     (6) Convert an employee serving under an appointment that provides
         noncompetitive conversion eligibility to a competitive service appointment,
         including from:

         (a) A Veterans Recruitment Appointment under 5 CFR 307;

         (b) An appointment under 5 U.S.C. 3112 and 5 CFR 316 of a veteran with a
             compensable service-connected disability of 30 percent or more; and

         (c) An excepted service appointment under 5 CFR 213, such as for persons with
             disabilities or Pathways appointees;

     (7) Reappoint without a break in service to the same position currently held by an
         employee serving under a temporary appointment of one year or less (only to
         another temporary appointment not to exceed one year or less);

     (8) Extend an employee's temporary or term appointment up to the maximum
         permitted by the appointment authority or as authorized by OPM; or

     (9) Appoint an individual under an excepted service appointing authority.

h. RPL Notification & Tracking Services

     The servicing HRO must give each RPL eligible information about its RPL
     program, including Merit Systems Protection Board appeal rights under 5 CFR
     330.214, when:

     (1) The HRO issues a RIF separation notice or a CES under 5 CFR 351; or

     (2) The employee accepts a position at a lower grade or pay level or is separated
         from USDA because of a compensable work-related injury.

     In addition, each HRO employing a displaced employee on a basis that affects their
     eligibility under RPL shall notify in writing the former employing office and
     OHRM, Human Resources Policy Division, of the action taken.

     All position offers to RPL eligibles must be in writing and contain: the USDA
     sub-organization; official title, pay plan, series, grade, salary; duty station; type of
     appointment and work schedule; effect of acceptance or declination on RPL
     status; and candidate acceptance or declination section for written confirmation of
     decision.

i.   Appeal Rights

     An RPL registrant who believes USDA violated his or her reemployment rights
     under 5 CFR 330 by employing another person who otherwise would not have been
     eligible to be appointed properly may appeal to the Merit Systems Protection Board
     under the Board's regulations in 5 CFR 1200.

                                             19
10.   INTERAGENCY CAREER TRANSITION ASSISTANCE PLAN (ICTAP)

      The ICTAP provides eligible displaced Federal employees with inter-departmental
      selection priority for vacancies in agencies which are being filled from outside of the
      USDA permanent competitive service workforce; it does not prohibit movement of
      competitive service employees within a department.

      a. Eligibility

         An ICTAP Eligible is a current or former career or career-conditional employee
         (tenure I or II) in the competitive service who is "displaced" and has a current/last
         performance rating of record of at least fully successful (Level 3) or equivalent.

         (1) Displaced Employee

             A current career or career-conditional competitive service employee at grade
             levels GS–15 (or equivalent) and below, who has received a specific RIF
             separation notice, or a notice of proposed removal for declining a transfer of
             function or directed reassignment outside of the local commuting area;

             A former career or career-conditional competitive service employee at grade
             levels GS–15 (or equivalent) and below, who was separated through RIF, or
             removed for declining a transfer of function or directed reassignment outside of
             the local commuting area;

             A former career or career-conditional employee who was separated because of a
             compensable injury or illness as provided under the provisions of Subchapter I
             of Chapter 81 of Title 5, U.S.C., whose compensation has been terminated and
             whose former department is unable to place the individual as required by 5 CFR
             353.110(b);

             A former career or career-conditional competitive service employee who retired
             with a disability under Sections 8337 or 8451 of Title 5, U.S.C., whose
             disability annuity has been or is being terminated;

             A former career or career-conditional competitive service employee at grades
             GS–15 level (or equivalent) or below, who received a RIF separation notice, and
             who retired on the effective date of the RIF or under the discontinued service
             retirement option;

             A former Military Reserve Technician or National Guard Technician who is
             receiving a special disability retirement annuity from OPM under Section
             8337(h) or 8456 of Title 5 U.S.C.;

             A current Executive Branch employee in the excepted service, serving on an
             appointment without time limit, at grade levels GS–15 (or equivalent) and
             below, who has been given noncompetitive appointment eligibility (e.g., non-
             appropriated fund employees) and selection priority by statute for positions in
                                                20
   the competitive service, and who is in receipt of a RIF separation notice or
   notice of proposed removal for declining a transfer of function or directed
   reassignment outside of the local commuting area; or

   A former Executive Branch employee in the excepted service, who served on an
   appointment without time limit, at grade levels GS–15 (or equivalent) and
   below, who has been given noncompetitive appointment eligibility and selection
   priority by statute for positions in the competitive service, and who has been
   separated through RIF or removed for declining a transfer of function or
   directed reassignment outside of the local commuting area.

(2) Period of Eligibility

   Eligibility begins on the date:

   (a) The servicing HRO issues the employee a RIF separation notice;

   (b) A department certifies that it cannot place an employee eligible under 5 CFR
       353;

   (c) An employee eligible under 5 U.S.C. 8337 or 8451 is notified that his or her
       disability annuity has been or is being terminated;

   (d) The servicing HRO issues a formal notice of proposed separation to an
       employee for declining a transfer of function or directed reassignment
       outside the local commuting area; or

   (e) The National Guard Bureau or Military Department certifies that an
       employee has retired receiving a special disability retirement annuity under
       5 U.S.C. 8337(h) or 8456.

   ICTAP eligibility for selection priority expires upon the earliest of:

   (f) One year after separation;

   (g) One year after a department certifies that an individual under 5 CFR 353
       cannot be placed;

   (h) One year after an individual under 5 U.S.C. 8337 or 8451 receives
       notification that his/her disability annuity has been or will be terminated;

   (i) When the employee receives a career, career-conditional, or excepted
       appointment without time limit in any department at any grade level;

   (j) When the employee no longer meets the eligibility requirements (e.g., the
       employee is no longer being separated by RIF, or under adverse action
       procedures for declining a transfer of function or directed reassignment
       outside the local commuting area, or separates by resignation or non-
       discontinued service retirement prior to the RIF effective date);
                                      21
       (k) When an eligible employee declines a career, career-conditional, or excepted
           appointment (without time limit), for which the employee has applied and
           been rated “well qualified”; or upon the failure of the applicant to respond
           within a reasonable period of time (recommend 10 business days) to an offer
           or official inquiry of availability; or

       (l) Two years after separation, for those employees eligible under 5 CFR
           330.407(b).

b. Vacancy

   A vacant competitive service position at grade GS-15 (or equivalent) or below to be
   filled for a total of 121 days or more, including all extensions, regardless of whether
   a vacancy announcement was posted qualifies as a vacancy requiring ICTAP
   clearance. Vacancy announcements must contain information regarding how
   eligible employees may apply, proof of eligibility requirements, and the standard
   for “well qualified”. See Section 8 (b) of this Directive for additional information
   and requirements.

c. Determining “Well Qualified”

   Candidates are determined “well qualified” if they possess the competencies which
   exceed the minimum qualification requirements for the vacancy. The servicing
   HRO must be able to determine the ICTAP eligible:

   (1) Meets basic eligibility requirements, qualification standards, and applicable
       selective factors;

   (2) Is physically qualified with or without reasonable accommodation to perform
       the essential duties;

   (3) Meets any special qualifying conditions of the position;

   (4) Is able to satisfactorily perform the duties of the position upon entry; and

   (5) Rates at or above specified level(s) on all quality ranking factors.
       Applicants must receive a rating of at least 85 out of a possible 100
       points when assessed through traditional or scored-based category
       rating methods or be determined to be in the “well qualified” group
       when assessed through the manual category rating method. If it is
       determined that the applicant is not “well qualified”, the HRO must
       conduct a second review of the application and notify the applicant of
       the results in writing in accordance with 5 CFR 330.605.

d. Order of Selection

   When a mission area, agency, or staff office considers candidates from outside the
   Department for vacancies, USDA CTAP eligibles and registrants in USDA's RPL
                                         22
   have priority for selection over employees eligible under ICTAP in accordance with
   5 CFR 330.705. ICTAP selection priority applies only when agencies or staff
   offices are making selections from outside the USDA workforce, and does not
   prohibit movement within USDA.

   When filling a vacancy from outside USDA’s workforce the hiring manager must
   select in the following order:

   (1) Current or former USDA employees eligible under USDA's Reemployment
       Priority List (see Section 9 of this DR), then;

   (2) Any other former employee displaced from the Department (under appropriate
       selection procedures), then;

   (3) From any of the following three conditions:

         (a) Current or former Federal employees displaced from other departments;

         (b) Current or former eligible employees displaced from the District of
             Columbia Department of Corrections, or

         (c) Displaced eligible Panama Canal Zone employees.

   (4) Any other candidate under appropriate selection procedures.

   The following actions are subject to the above order of selection:

   (5) Competitive appointments (e.g., from registers or delegated examining);

   (6) Noncompetitive appointments to the competitive service (e.g., the types listed in
       5 CFR 315(f);

   (7) Movement between departments (e.g., transfer), except noncompetitive
       movement due to an inter-departmental reorganization, inter-departmental
       transfer of function, or inter-departmental mass transfer, or other per 5 CFR 351;

   (8) Reinstatements; and

   (9) Time- limited competitive appointments of 121 days or more, including all
       extensions, except as provided in 5 CFR 330.705(c)(11).

e. Exceptions to ICTAP Selection Priority

   Below are the personnel action exceptions which are exempt from ICTAP priority
   consideration. HROs must confirm and document current exceptions, listed under 5
   CFR 330.707, prior to effecting selection.

   (1)    Placement of a current or reinstate a former USDA employee with RPL
          selection priority;
                                          23
(2)   Effecting a position change of a current permanent competitive service USDA
      employee;

(3)   Appointment of a 10-point veteran preference eligible through an appropriate
      appointing authority;

(4)   Reemployment of a former USDA employee with regulatory or statutory
      reemployment rights, including the reemployment of an injured worker who
      either has been restored to earning capacity by the Office of Workers'
      Compensation Programs, Department of Labor, or has received a notice that
      his or her compensation benefits will cease because of recovery from disabling
      injury or illness;

(5)   Appointment of an individual for a period limited to 120 or fewer days,
      including all extensions;

(6)   Effecting a personnel action under, or specifically in lieu of, 5 CFR 351;

(7)   Appointment of an individual under an excepted service appointing authority;

(8)   Conversion of an employee serving under an appointment that provides
      noncompetitive conversion eligibility to a competitive service appointment,
      including from: (1) a Veterans Recruitment Appointment under 5 CFR 307;
      (2) an appointment under 5 U.S.C. 3112 and 5 CFR 316 of a veteran with a
      compensable service-connected disability of 30 percent or more; and (3) an
      excepted service appointment under 5 CFR 213, such as for persons with
      disabilities or in the Pathways Program;

(9)   Transfer of an employee between departments under appropriate authority
      during an inter-departmental reorganization, inter-departmental transfer of
      function, or inter-departmental mass transfer;

(10) Reemployment of a former USDA employee who retired under a formal trial
     retirement and reemployment program and who requests reemployment under
     the program's provisions and applicable time limits;

(11) Effecting a personnel action pursuant to the settlement of a formal complaint,
     grievance, appeal, or other litigation;

(12) Extending a time- limited appointment up to the maximum period allowed
     (including any OPM-approved extension past the regulatory limit on the time-
     limited appointment), if the original action was made subject to ICTAP
     selection priority and the original vacancy announcement stated that the
     appointment could be extended without further announcement;

(13) Reappointment of a former USDA employee into a hard-to- fill position
     requiring unique skills and experience to conduct a formal skills-based
     Department training program;
                                      24
     (14) Retaining an individual whose position is brought into the competitive service
          under 5 CFR 316 and convert that individual, when applicable, 5 CFR 315;

     (15) Retaining an employee covered by an OPM-approved variation under Civil
          Service Rule 5.1 (5 CFR 5.1);

     (16) Appointment of an appointee of the Senior Executive Service into the
          competitive service under 5 U.S.C. 3594;

     (17) Assigning or exchange of an employee under a statutory program, such as
          Subchapter VI of Chapter 33 of Title 5, U.S.C. (also called the
          Intergovernmental Personnel Act), or the Information Technology Exchange
          Program under Chapter 37 of Title 5, U.S.C.;

     (18) Detailing an employee to another department;

     (19) Transfer of employees under an OPM-approved inter-departmental job swap
          plan designed to facilitate the exchange of employees between departments to
          avoid or minimize involuntary separations;

     (20) Transfer or reinstatement of an ICTAP eligible who meets USDA's definition
          of “well qualified”;

     (21) Transfer of an employee voluntarily from one department to another under a
          Memorandum of Understanding or similar agreement under appropriate
          authority resulting from an inter-departmental reorganization, inter-
          departmental transfer of function, or inter-departmental realignment, when
          both the departments and the affected employee agree to the transfer; or

     (22) Transfer or a position change of an employee under 5 CFR 412.

f.   ICTAP Notification & Tracking Services

     In addition to meeting the requirements of 5 CFR 330.602(a)(1)(iv) and
     §330.607(a), at the time a HRO issues a specific RIF separation notice or notice of
     proposed removal for declining a transfer of function or directed reassignment
     outside of the local commuting area, the servicing HRO must give each of its
     eligible employees information in writing of their eligibility for priority placement
     and career transition services. Such information must contain guidance to the
     employee on how to apply for vacancies under the ICTAP, and what documentation
     is generally required as proof of eligibility.

     Similarly, when a mission area, agency or staff office identifies a former employee
     as displaced under 5 U.S.C. 8337, 8451, or 8456, he/she will be notified of their
     eligibility under Subpart G of 5 CFR Part 330.

     Each HRO employing a displaced employee on a basis that affects their eligibility
     under ICTAP shall notify in writing the former employing office (whether internal
                                          25
           to USDA or from another department) and OHRM Human Resources Policy
           Division of the action taken.

      g. USDA Transition Services

           Each HRO will provide information to its servicing area’s employees on the use
           of transition services, and the supervisors and managers on the meaning of
           selection priority. They will also provide a specific orientation session for
           surplus and displaced employees at the time they become eligible for services
           and selection priority. See Section 8(g) of this Directive for more specifics as
           the ICTAP selection priority information and services are provided in
           conjunction with CTAP information and services.

      h. Notice of Application Status

           Surplus and displaced employees must receive written results on their application
           status, including whether or not they were determined “well- qualified” for specific
           vacancy announcement within their local commuting area. If an ICTAP eligible
           applicant is found to be “well qualified” and another “well qualified” applicant is
           selected, the ICTAP eligible must be informed of his/her non-selection including
           whether another CTAP/ICTAP selection priority candidate was hired; whether the
           position was filled under an exception listed in 5 CFR 330.705; and whether the
           recruitment was cancelled. If the displaced employee was not found to be “well-
           qualified”, such notification must include results from an independent, second
           review, consistent with 5 CFR 330.706(c).

      i.   Not “Well Qualified” Reviews

           Servicing HRO will ensure that a documented, independent second review is
           conducted whenever an otherwise eligible ICTAP priority employee is determined
           to be not “well qualified”. The applicant must be advised in writing of the results of
           the second review before a referral certificate is issued. Both of these reviews are
           to be maintained in applicable vacancy announcement case file.


11.   PAYMENT OF TRAVEL AND RELOCATION EXPENSES

      A former employee separated under RIF or transfer of function, who within one year
      after the date of separation is reemployed under a non-temporary appointment at a
      different geographical location other than that from which separated, may be
      authorized travel and relocation expenses under 5 U.S.C. 5724a(g). Questions
      regarding what expenses are paid should be directed to the appropriate servicing travel
      office.


                                            - END -




                                                 26
                                      APPENDIX A

DEFINITIONS

Agency                Mission areas, bureaus, agencies, staff offices, component or
                      organizational unit of USDA.
                      In this Directive, “department” is USDA (or in comparison to other
                      organizations at the same government level). “Department” in this
                      policy is synonymous with “agency” in the CFR references. The terms
                      “mission area,” “agency” and “staff office” are used in reference to
                      USDA’s sub organizations.
Application (as       To receive this special selection priority, eligible employees must
applicable with       apply directly to departments/agencies for specific vacancies in the
CTAP and ICTAP)       local commuting area within the prescribed time frames, attach the
                      appropriate proof of eligibility and be determined “well qualified” by
                      the agency for the specific position. See “proof of eligibility” for
                      related information.
Commuting Area /      The geographic area that usually constitutes one area for employment
Local Commuting       purposes. It includes any population center (of two or more
Area                  neighboring ones) and surrounding localities in which people live and
                      can reasonably be expected to travel back and forth daily to their usual
                      employment. For example, the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area
                      includes the District of Columbia; Prince George’s, Montgomery and
                      Charles counties in Maryland; the cities of Alexandria, Fairfax, and
                      Falls Church in Virginia; and Arlington, Fairfax, Loudoun, Prince
                      William, Stafford, and King George counties in Virginia.
Component             The first major subdivision of the Department (USDA) that is
                      separately organized and clearly distinguished from other components
                      in work function and operation. Those parts of the Department within
                      a local commuting area that are assigned to a separate agency code for
                      Central Personnel Data File (CPDF) purposes.
Department            An executive department, a government corporation, and an
                      independent establishment.
                      In this Directive, “department” is USDA (or in comparison to other
                      organizations at the same government level, i.e. U.S. Department of
                      Labor). “Department” in this policy is synonymous with “agency” in
                      the CFR references. The terms “mission area,” “agency” and “staff
                      office” are used in reference to USDA’s component organizations.
Displaced Employee    An individual in one of these two categories:
(as applies to CTAP   1) A current career or career-conditional (tenure group I or II)
and ICTAP)            competitive service employee at grade GS-15 (or equivalent) or below
                      who received a RIF separation notice or received a notice of proposed
                      removal for declining a directed reassignment or transfer of function
                      outside the local commuting area; or
                      2) A current Executive Branch department employee in the excepted
                      service, serving on an appointment without time limit, at grade level
                      GS-15 (or equivalent) or below who has been given noncompetitive
                      appointment eligibility and selection priority by statute for position in
                                           A-1
                        the competitive service, and who is in receipt of a RIF separation
                        notice or notice of proposed removal for declining a transfer of
                        function or directed reassignment outside of the local commuting area.
Eligible Employee       A surplus or displaced employee who has a current performance rating
                        of record at least Fully Successful or equivalent and who meets the
                        other conditions set forth in 5 CFR 330.605 and §330.704.
Injury (as applies to   A compensable injury sustained under the provisions of 5 U.S.C.
RPL)                    chapter 81, subchapter 1, and includes, in addition to accidental injury,
                        a disease proximately caused by the employment. See “partially
                        recovered” for related information.
Mission Area            The term used within USDA to denote one or more agencies that
                        report to an Under Secretary.
Partially Recovered     An injured employee, though not ready to resume the full range of his
(as applies to RPL)     or her regular duties, has recovered sufficiently to return to part-time
                        or light duty or to another position with less demanding physical
                        requirements. Ordinarily, it is expected that a partially recovered
                        employee will fully recover eventually. See “injury” for related
                        information.
Proof of Eligibility    Employees must submit the following as proof of eligibility for the
                        special selection priority:
                          • RIF separation notice, or notice of proposed removal for
                              declining a transfer of function or directed reassignment to
                              another commuting area;
                          • Documentation, e.g., SF–50, Notification of Personnel Action,
                              showing that they were separated as a result of reduction in force,
                              or for declining a transfer of function or directed reassignment to
                              another commuting area;
                          • Other official agency notification indicating the employee's
                              position is surplus, such as a notice of position abolishment or
                              eligibility for a discontinued service retirement;
                          • Official certification from USDA stating that it cannot place an
                              individual whose injury compensation has been or is being
                              terminated;
                          • Official notification from OPM that an individual's disability
                              annuity has been or is being terminated; or
                          • Official notification from the Military Department or National
                              Guard Bureau that the employee has retired under 5 U.S.C.
                              8337(h) or 8456.
                        See “application” for related information.
Qualified (for RPL      A registrant who: (1) meets OPM established or approved
purposes)               qualification standards and requirements for the position, including
                        minimum educational requirements, and department/agency-
                        established selective factors (as this term is used in OPM's "Operating
                        Manual: Qualification Standards for General Schedule Positions"); (2)
                        will not cause an undue interruption, as defined in 5 CFR 351.203 of
                        this chapter, that would prevent the completion of required work by
                        the registrant 90 days after the registrant is placed in the position; (3)
                        is physically qualified, with or without reasonable accommodation, to
                                                A-2
                       perform the duties of the position; (4) meets any special OPM-
                       approved qualifying conditions for the position; and (5) meets any
                       other applicable requirements for competitive service appointment.
Reduction-In-Force     The process defined in 5 CFR 351 used in the Federal government to
(RIF)                  identify one or more employees who will be separated or downgraded
                       for a reason such as reorganization, lack of work, shortage of funds,
                       insufficient personnel ceiling, or the exercise of certain reemployment
                       or restoration rights.
Reorganization         The planned elimination, addition, or redistribution of work function
                       within an organization, normally announcement in writing.
Surplus Employee (as   An individual in one of these two categories:
applies to CTAP and    1) A current department employee serving under an appointment in the
ICTAP)                 competitive service, in tenure group I or II, at grade level GS-15 (or
                       equivalent) and below, who has received a certificate of expected
                       separation (CES) or other official certification issued by the
                       department indicating that the position is surplus; or
                       2) A current Executive Branch department employee serving on an
                       excepted service appointment without time limit, at grade level GS-15
                       (or equivalent) and below, who has been issued a CES or other official
                       agency certification indicating that his/her position is surplus, and who
                       has been conferred noncompetitive appointment eligibility and
                       specialist selection priority by statute for position in the competitive
                       service; and
                       3) At a department’s (USDA) discretion, a current Executive Branch
                       employee serving on a Schedule A or B executive appointment
                       without time limit, as grade level GS-15 (or equivalent) and below,
                       and who is in receipt of a CES or other official agency certification
                       indicating that his/her job is surplus; such employee may exercise
                       selection priority for permanent excepted service positions within the
                       department’s local commuting area, provide the position to which
                       appointed has the same appointing authority, i.e. Schedule A or B, as
                       the position from which being separated.




                                            A-3
                                                    Appendix B

USDA CTAP Eligibility Adjudication Worksheet Sample

Applicant Name: ____________________________________________
                                                       Criteria                                           Yes No
 1    Is the vacancy for a position lasting 121 days or longer, including extensions?
      Is the applicant a displaced USDA employee (e.g., has a notice of RIF separation or a notice of
      proposed removal for declining a directed reassignment out of the commuting area) or a surplus
 2
      employee (e.g. has been issued a notice of position abolishment or other agency certification), and
      still on the rolls until actually separated from the agency?
      Is the displaced/surplus USDA employee a current career or career-conditional (tenure group I or
 3
      II) competitive service employee, at GS-15 (or equivalent) and below?
      Does the displaced/surplus USDA employee have a current/last performance rating of at least fully
 4
      successful?
      Did the displaced/surplus USDA employee apply for the vacancy, which is at grade or pay level
      with a representative rate no higher than the representative rate of the grade or pay level of the
      employee’s permanent position of record, and which does not have promotion potential above the
 5
      current grade?
      NOTE: A CTAP eligible can still exercise his/her priority consideration regardless of whether or
      not the agency issues a vacancy announcement.
      Is the position the displaced/surplus USDA employee is being separated from in the same local
 6
      commuting area as the vacancy for which he/she applied?
      Did the displaced/surplus USDA employee apply directly to the vacancy within the timeframe
 7
      established by its announcement and provide proof of eligibility (see question 2) for CTAP?
      Has the displaced/surplus USDA employee been determined to be “well qualified” for the position?
      To be “well qualified” the employee must exceed the OPM minimum qualification criteria for the
      position and meet any educational requirements.
 8    NOTE: If he/she is determined not “well qualified” for the position, the HRO must conduct an
      independent second review of the employee’s qualifications. If the second review confirms the
      employee is not “well qualified,” the HRO must advise the employee in writing of the results of the
      second review before a referral certificate is issued.
      Are there any other applicants/employees with higher order of consideration/priority when filling a
 9
      vacancy? If so, the individual with higher consideration has first priority for the position.
       • If two or more CTAP eligible employees are found “well qualified” for the vacancy, the agency may select
             from among them.
 10
       • The HRO must provide a CTAP eligible who applied for a specific vacancy written notice of the final status
             of his or her application.

If the answers are “YES” to questions 1-8, the applicant is eligible for CTAP selection priority; the HRO must then apply
questions 9 and 10. If the answer is “NO” to any of questions 1-8, the applicant is not eligible for CTAP selection
priority; however, the applicant must still be considered for referral if otherwise eligible.

CTAP Determination: _____                Eligible / Not Eligible (circle one) for CTAP Selection Priority

HR Adjudicator Name:                                                   Date:




                                                         B-1
                                                     Appendix C

USDA RPL Eligibility Adjudication Worksheet Sample

Registrant Name: ____________________________________________
                                                       Criteria                                                Yes     No
 1    Is the hire from outside of USDA’s workforce?
 2    Is the vacant position being filled by a competitive service permanent or time-limited appointment?
 3    Is the RPL registrant in the same local commuting area as the vacancy?
      Does the vacancy/position have a representative rate at or below the grade for which the RPL
      registrant is listed?
 4
      NOTE: The registrant cannot exercise placement priority for positions with promotion potential
      above their current grade level.
 5    Does the vacancy/position have the same type of work schedule as the RPL registrant?
      Does the RPL registrant meet the position’s OPM qualification requirements including as applicable
      education, any selective factors, and the criteria listed below?
       • Will not cause undue interruption as defined in 5 CFR 351.203 that would prevent the
           completion of required work by the registrant 90 days after placed in the position;
 6     • Is physically qualified with or without reasonable accommodation to perform the duties of the
           position;
       • Meet any special OPM-approved qualifying conditions for the position (e.g., medical
           standards); and
       • Meet any other applicable requirements for competitive service appointment.
      Are there any other applicants/employees with higher order of consideration/priority when filling a
 7
      vacancy? If so, the individual with higher consideration has first priority for the position.

If the answers are “YES” to questions 1-6, the registrant is eligible for RPL priority placement; the HRO must then apply
question 7. If the answer is “NO” to any of questions 1-6, the registrant is not eligible for RPL priority placement.

RPL Determination: ______                 Eligible / Not Eligible (circle one) for RPL Priority Placement

HR Adjudicator Name:                                                     Date:

 Additional information in case an applicant claims Reemployment Priority, but is not registered on the USDA list.
 Criteria Under RIF:
  • USDA employee in Tenure Group I or II must be serving in a competitive service appointment.
  • USDA employee received a specific notice of separation or a CES under RIF that has not been cancelled,
      rescinded, or modified so that the employee is no longer under notice of separation.
  • USDA employee has a current/last performance rating of at least fully successful.
  • USDA employee must have not declined an offer under RIF of a position with the same type of work schedule
      and with a representative rate at least as high as that of the position from which the employee will be separated.
 Criteria Under Compensable Injury:
  • USDA current or former employee, in Tenure Group I or II must be serving in, or separated from, a competitive
      service appointment.
  • USDA current or former employee must have either accepted a position at a lower grade of pay level in lieu of
      separation, or have been separated because of a compensable injury or disability. NOTE: For these purposes, any
      reference to the position from which an individual was or will be separated includes a position from which the
      RPL eligible accepted a lower graded or pay level position.
  • USDA current or former employee must have fully recovered for more than one year after compensation began.
  • USDA current or former employee must have received notification from the Office of Workers' Compensation
      Programs, Department of Labor that injury compensation benefits have ceased or will cease.
                                                          C-1
                                                    Appendix D

ICTAP Eligibility Adjudication Worksheet Sample

Applicant Name: ____________________________________________
                                                        Criteria                                             Yes No
 1    Is the hire from outside of USDA’s workforce?
 2    Is the vacancy for a position lasting 121 days or longer, including extensions?
      Is/was the employee/applicant a career or career-conditional (tenure group I or II) competitive
 3
      service employee at GS-15 (or equivalent) and below?
 4    Does the employee/applicant have a current/last performance rating of at least fully successful?
      Did the employee/applicant apply for the vacancy, which is at grade or pay level with a
 5    representative rate no higher than the representative rate of the grade or pay level of the employee’s
      permanent position of record, and which does not have promotion potential above the current grade?
      Is the position the employee/applicant is being or was separated from in the same local commuting
 6
      area as the vacancy for which he/she applied?
      Did the employee/applicant apply directly to the vacancy within the timeframe established by its
 7
      announcement and provide proof of eligibility (see questions 8 and 9) for ICTAP?
      Did the employee/applicant provide proof of eligibility?
        • RIF Separation Notice or Proposal to Remove Notice,
        • SF-50 indicating separated by RIF,
 8
        • SF-50 indicating declination of transfer of function or directed reassignment/change in duty
            station outside commuting area, or
        • SF-50 indicating retirement under discontinued service retirement (DSR) in lieu of RIF.
      Did employee/applicant apply within one year of the separation date, from one of the following?
        • Separated by RIF
 9      • Separated because he/she declines a transfer of function or directed reassignment/change in duty
            station outside the commuting area
        • Separated under discontinued service retirement (DSR)
      Has the displaced/surplus USDA employee been determined to be “well qualified” for the position?
      To be “well qualified” the employee must exceed the OPM minimum qualification criteria for the
      position and meet any educational requirements.
 10   NOTE: If he/she is determined not “well qualified” for the position, the HRO must conduct an
      independent second review of the employee’s qualifications. If the second review confirms the
      employee is not “well qualified,” the HRO must advise the employee in writing of the results of the
      second review before a referral certificate is issued.
      Are there any other applicants/employees with higher order of consideration/priority when filling a
 11
      vacancy? If so, the individual with higher consideration has first priority for the position.
        • If two or more ICTAP eligibles are found “well qualified” for the vacancy, the agency may select from
            among them.
 12
        • The HRO must provide an ICTAP eligible who applied for a specific vacancy written notice of the final
            status of his or her application.

If the answers are “YES” to questions 1-10, the applicant is eligible for ICTAP selection priority; the HRO must then
apply questions 11 and 12. If the answer is “NO” to any of questions1-10, the applicant is not eligible for ICTAP
selection priority; however, the applicant must still be considered for referral if otherwise eligible.

ICTAP Determination: _____               Eligible / Not Eligible (circle one) for ICTAP Selection Priority

HR Adjudicator Name:                                                    Date:


                                                         D-1
