                                 U. S. Department of Agriculture
                                    Washington, D.C. 20250

                                                                            NUMBER:
     DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                               4050-572-001
 SUBJECT:                                                 DATE: February 3, 2011
 Payment of Travel and Transportation Expenses for        OPI:
 New Appointees and Pre-Employment Interviews             Office of Human Resources
                                                          Management



Section                                                                               Page

1    Purpose                                                                             1
2    References                                                                          1
3    Special Instructions                                                                2
4    Policy                                                                              2
5    Delegation of Authority                                                             2
6    Definitions                                                                         2
7    Responsibilities                                                                    3
8    Persons Covered                                                                     3
9    Requirements                                                                        4
10   Recordkeeping                                                                       4
11   Reports                                                                             5


1.    PURPOSE

      The purpose of this directive is to set forth the Department of Agriculture’s (USDA)
      policy for the payment of travel and transportation expenses for new appointees and pre-
      employment interviews.


2.    REFERENCES

      This directive must be used in conjunction with:

      a.      Title 5, United States Code (U.S.C.), sections 5706b and 5723;

      b.      Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 572 – Travel and Transportation
              Expenses; and

      c.      41 CFR 301-304 – Federal Travel Regulations (FTR).
3.   SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS

     This directive supersedes USDA Personnel Letter No. 572-1, Payment of Travel and
     Transportation Expenses for New Appointments and Interviews, dated March 5, 1991.


4.   POLICY

     It is USDA’s policy to allow employing agencies and staff offices discretion to pay travel
     and transportation expenses for a new appointee’s first post of duty and for an applicant’s
     pre-employment interview. Each decision is unique to the position or vacancy being
     filled and does not require a like determination by any other agency filling similar
     positions. In making the decision to use this authority, Staff Office and Agency Heads or
     their designees will consider the availability of funds and whether or not use of this
     authority is necessary to entice a candidate to accept the position, or to assess a
     candidate’s qualifications, particularly when considering other recruitment incentives that
     may have been offered. Payment of these expenses will be made in accordance with the
     FTR.


5.   DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY

     The authority to pay an appointee’s travel expenses to the first post of duty or for pre-
     employment interview expenses currently resides with the Director, Office of Human
     Resources Management (OHRM). This authority is hereby delegated to Agency or Staff
     Office Heads and may be redelegated to Human Resources Officers or lower levels of the
     organization, as appropriate.


6.   DEFINITIONS

     a.     Agency. An organizational unit of the Department, other than a staff office as
            defined below, whose head reports to an Under Secretary.

     b.     Agency Head. The head of a USDA agency or an official who has been delegated
            the authority to act for the head of the agency in the matter concerned.

     c.     Staff Office. A Departmental administrative office whose head reports to the
            Secretary or Assistant Secretary.

     d.     Staff Office Head. The head of a staff office or an official who has been
            delegated the authority to act for the head of the staff office in the matter
            concerned.



                                               2
7.   RESPONSIBILITIES

     a.    The Director, OHRM, is responsible for:

           (1)    Establishing USDA’s policy for payment of travel and transportation
                  expenses for new appointees and pre-employment interviews and
                  providing technical assistance and advice to agencies or staff offices;

           (2)    Monitoring compliance with Departmental policy; and

           (3)    Reporting to the Office of Personnel Management, as required.

     b.    Agency or Staff Office Heads are responsible for:

           (1)    Justifying the need to pay for a new appointees travel and transportation
                  expenses to the first post of duty and for a candidate's pre-employment
                  interview expenses.

           (2)    Ensuring judicious and equitable use of this authority;

           (3)    Monitoring and assessing compliance with this Departmental policy;

           (4)    Ensuring the advancement of USDA’s equal employment opportunity
                  objectives when using this authority; and

           (5)    Reporting to OHRM, as requested.


8.   PERSONS COVERED

     a. New Appointee.

           (1)    An individual who is employed with the Federal Government for the very
                  first time (including an individual who has performed transition activities
                  under section 3 of the Presidential Transition Act of 1963 (3 U.S.C. 102),
                  as amended, and is appointed in the same fiscal year as the Presidential
                  inauguration);

           (2)    An employee who is returning to the Federal Government after a break in
                  government service of at least 90 days (except an employee separated as
                  the result of a reduction in force or a transfer of functions and is
                  reemployed within one year after such action); or

           (3)    A student trainee assigned to the Federal Government upon completion of
                  his/her college work.

                                            3
      b.     Applicant for Pre-Employment Interviews. An individual who is being
             considered for employment by an agency or staff office. He or she may be a
             current Federal Government employee.


9.    REQUIREMENTS

      An agency or staff office may pay travel and transportation expenses for a new appointee
      in accordance with provisions in this regulation only after he/she agrees in writing to
      remain in the Federal Government’s service for 12 months from the date of the
      appointment, unless separated for reasons beyond his/her control, which are deemed
      acceptable to the agency or staff office, such as through management initiated
      reassignments or reduction-in-force actions.


10.   RECORDKEEPING

      Each agency or staff office will maintain records in the Human Resources Office of
      positions for which payments are made under this authority and will make those records
      available to OHRM upon request. The Human Resources Office will dispose of these
      records in accordance with records retention requirements for recruitment and merit
      promotion case files. At a minimum, each Human Resources Office must maintain a
      record of the amount of expenses paid along with the following documentation:

      a.     Appointee or Pre-employment Interview Information. Record the
             employee/candidate name, title, pay plan, series, grade and duty station for the
             position to which he/she is appointed or has applied and for which travel and/or
             transportation expenses are paid;

      b.     Method of Appointment/Recruitment. If travel expenses are paid to a new
             appointee’s first post of duty, record the type of appointment used (e.g.,
             reinstatement, career-conditional appointment, etc.). If travel expenses are paid to
             an applicant for a pre-employment interview, record the recruitment source (e.g.,
             vacancy announcement, certificate of eligibles, etc.);

      c.     Delegations of Authority. Record the name, title, and signature of the person who
             has been delegated the authority to approve the final action and the date of
             approval; and




                                              4
      d.     Basis for Decision. Prepare a statement setting forth the rationale for the decision
             and a description of how payment of travel expenses meets the requirements of
             5 CFR 572.


11.   REPORTS

      Reports on the use of this authority may be requested periodically by OHRM.




                                              5
