                                    U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                           WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


                                                                                Number:
  DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                       DR-4020-251-01

SUBJECT:                                              DATE:
Welfare and Recreation Organizations                  July 27, 2005
                                                      OPI:
                                                      Office of Human Capital Management –
                                                      Performance Management and Policy
                                                      Division


  Section

  1    PURPOSE                                                                         1
  2    SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS                                              1
  3    DEFINITIONS                                                                     2
  4    POLICY                                                                          2
  5    RECOGNITION PROCEDURES                                                          3
  6    USE OF FACILITIES AND SERVICES                                                  4
  7    ETHICS AND CONDUCT RULES                                                        5
  8    DUES                                                                            7

  Appendix A      Declaration Statement for Welfare and Recreation Organizations



  1    PURPOSE

       This regulation establishes U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) policy dealing with
       formally established welfare and recreation organizations, other than labor organizations, as
       defined in Chapter 71, Title 5, United States Code (U.S.C.), Federal Service Labor
       Management Relations Statute, whose membership is comprised primarily of USDA
       employees. It does not address organizations or associations established outside of USDA,
       of which USDA employees may be members, or of formally recognized USDA
       associations of management officials and/or supervisors and other organizations as defined
       in Departmental Regulation (DR) 4020-251.



   2   SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

       With respect to all organizations formed to promote the social, welfare, and recreation
       interests of Department and agency employees, this regulation replaces Departmental
       Personnel Manual Chapter 252, Amendment 213, dated October 28, 1991, and Personnel
       Bulletin No. 252-1, dated March 11, 1999.
DR 4020-251-01                                                                  July 27, 2005




 3    DEFINITIONS

     a Welfare and Recreation Organization, means a formally established organization,
       other than a labor organization or an organization recognized under DR 4020-251,
       made up primarily of USDA employees whose purpose is to promote the social,
       welfare, and recreation interests of Departmental employees. Membership may be
       open to all USDA employees or restricted to employees of a particular organizational
       unit(s) or geographical area. Examples of such organizations include USDA
       Employee Services & Recreation Association (ESRA), National Finance Center
       Employees Association (NFCEA), U.S. Horticultural Research Employee
       Association.

     b USDA employee, for the purposes of this regulation, means both Federal civilian
       employees as defined under 5 U.S.C. 2105, and USDA county committee employees,
       as defined under 16 U.S.C. 590h.

     c Designated Official, means a USDA official who is authorized in writing by the
       USDA Assistant Secretary for Administration, an agency Deputy Administrator for
       Management, or their designees, to formally recognize welfare and recreation
       organizations and to ensure their compliance with agreements authorizing the use of
       USDA real property in accordance with provisions of this regulation. Designated
       officials may also approve agreements authorizing use by such recognized
       organizations seeking to use USDA real property. For purposes of this regulation,
       designated officials will exercise their authority as follows:

         (1)     For organizations whose majority of members are employees of a given agency,
                 recognition and property use authorizations are granted by designated officials
                 within that same agency. When a majority membership determination is not
                 apparent, the designated official from the same agency as the organization’s
                 president will act on recognition and property use requests.
         (2)     For organizations whose membership is Department-wide (e.g. ESRA), the
                 Deputy Assistant Secretary for Administration or designee will act on
                 recognition and property use requests.



 4   POLICY

     In order to be afforded the use of agency facilities, services and resources as described in
     Section 6 of this directive, USDA welfare and recreation organizations must be formally
     recognized by a designated official as described in Section 3, in accordance with
     procedures set forth in Section 5. Recognition does not infer Departmental sponsorship,
     sanction, or endorsement of the organization or its activities. Moreover, because such
     organizations are not Federal entities, employees are not performing official duties while
     engaged in organization activities.




                                               2
July 27, 2005                                                                    DR 4020-251-01

       USDA managers must not bypass a labor organization with exclusive recognition rights
       as provided for under Chapter 71, Title 5, U.S.C. or comparable provisions of other laws,
       to meet with or negotiate with an association or employee organization on matters
       affecting conditions of employments of bargaining unit employees.

       In order to be recognized, a welfare and recreation organization must:

      a Be a nonprofit organization whose membership is primarily made up of USDA
        employees;

       b     Have a current constitution and bylaws, that includes a non-discrimination statement;

      c Adhere to relevant law and regulations pertaining to use of government property,
        ethics and conduct;

      d Not discriminate in terms of membership or treatment of its members because of race,
        color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, martial status, familial status, or
        because all or part of an individual’s income is derived from any public assistance
        program; and,

      e Not assist or participate in any strike, work stoppage or slowdown against the USDA,
        or advocate the overthrow of the constitutional form of government of the United
        States.



    5 RECOGNITION PROCEDURES

           a In order to be recognized as a welfare and recreation organization within USDA,
             and therefore become eligible for coverage under this regulation, the designated
             official must certify that the organization meets Departmental policy as contained in
             this directive. Procedures for certification are as follows:

                (1)   The president or duly authorized official of the welfare and recreation
                      organization must submit a copy of the organization’s constitution and bylaws
                      along with a signed declaration statement, to the designated official. See
                      Appendix A.
                (2)   The designated official will review the documents and initiate any necessary
                      follow up action in order to determine whether conditions set forth in this
                      directive are met.
                (3)   Upon determining such conditions are met, the designated official will issue a
                      memorandum to the president of the welfare and recreation organization
                      recognizing the organization under these regulations. Recognition will be
                      conditional on the organization continuing to meet provisions of this directive.
                (4)   Each agency will maintain a listing of all requests made by welfare and
                      recreation organizations as well as those associations recognized by designated
                      officials within that agency.




                                                 3
DR 4020-251-01                                                                   July 27, 2005

       b   After being recognized, the welfare and recreation organization must provide the
           designated official with any changes to their constitution, bylaws, the person
           holding the position of president, and contact information (i.e., name, address,
           phone number, and e-mail) for the president within 30 days after the change occurs.



   6 USE OF AGENCY FACILITIES, SERVICES, AND RESOURCES

       a   Welfare and recreation organizations that are recognized in USDA may be
           authorized to use only the following facilities, services, and resources subject to the
           availability of agency funds, work priorities, and other bona fide management
           considerations:

           (1)   Use of meeting space and incidental storage of organization supplies in USDA
                 facilities; and,
           (2)   Use of designated bulletin boards and other areas for display as consistent
                 with building policy, USDA internal mail system, and electronic mail to notify
                 its members about meetings and organization or group activities provided such
                 activity does not interfere with conducting official business. Welfare and
                 recreation organizations are not authorized to use agency-developed and
                 controlled all-employee mailing lists to send messages.

       b   Use of real property, either owned or leased by USDA, by welfare and recreation
           organizations for ongoing (i.e. more than 90 calendar days) organization-operated
           facilities may be permitted subject to applicable law, as well as USDA and General
           Services Administration regulations, including a requirement that they be deemed
           necessary for the health and efficiency of USDA employees. Agreements that set
           forth the terms and conditions for the use of USDA real property by facilities
           operated or sponsored by welfare and recreation organizations must be established
           in writing and address, at a minimum, the following topics:

           (1)   Specific location, size and description of planned use of the property;
           (2)   How the welfare and recreation organization will staff its facility located on
                 USDA property, including whether it will use USDA employees and/or non-
                 USDA volunteers or paid staff;
           (3)   Time period or duration of property use;
           (4)   Obligations on behalf of the agency and/or welfare and recreation organization
                 for payment or provision of utilities, maintenance and cleaning of the
                 property;
           (5)   Description of the services and benefits to be realized by USDA and its
                 employees from the planned use; and,
           (6)   Contact persons and information within both the agency and the welfare and
                 recreation organization responsible for administering the agreement.

       c Agreements authorizing the ongoing use of USDA real property must be reviewed
         from a security, legal, and property management perspective, and approved in
         advance by a designated official.


                                              4
July 27, 2005                                                                     DR 4020-251-01

        d       Welfare and recreation organizations that are authorized to operate ongoing
                facilities on USDA real property are not permitted to unilaterally contract with or
                permit other organizations to use USDA property for any purpose unless
                specifically authorized by a designated official.

        e Incidental use of USDA real property by welfare and recreation organizations for
          time-limited functions (i.e. less than 90 calendar days) may be authorized by a
          designated official provided such functions comply with law and USDA regulations,
          and the purpose is consistent with organization’s purpose as expressed in its
          constitution and bylaws. Prior to authorizing use, the designated official should
          seek appropriate staff advice concerning issues related to agency liability, ethics and
          Federal property management.



    7 ETHICS AND CONDUCT RULES

        a General. Some of the ethics and conduct rules, particularly pertinent to welfare and
          recreation organizations are summarized in this section. At the outset, employees
          engaged in such activities must comply with all applicable statutes and/or
          regulations pertaining to ethics and conduct (including 5 C.F.R. 2635, Subpart H,
          Outside Activities) while participating in organization-related activities.

        b       Use of Official Time and Administrative Leave. Welfare and recreation
                organizations are not Governmental entities. Therefore, in order to attend or
                participate in organization-sponsored events while on official time or administrative
                leave, employees must receive supervisory authorization based on a determination
                that the subject event or activity benefits agency programs.

        c Fundraising.

                (1)   On Federal property or on Official Time. Under 5 C.F.R. 950.102(d),
                      agencies may establish policies and procedures applicable to solicitations
                      conducted by employee organizations among their own members and for the
                      benefit of welfare funds for their members. Such solicitations are not covered
                      by the rules governing solicitation of employees on Government property for
                      charitable donations as part of the Combined Federal Campaign. Accordingly,
                      Federal employees who are members of welfare and recreation organizations
                      may solicit money on behalf of their organization on Government property
                      under the following conditions:

                      (a)   Solicitations are made only to other members of the organization who
                            are current Federal employees [solicitation of non-employee members
                            and non-members on Federal property, under this authority, is
                            prohibited];
                      (b)   Solicitations are for organizational support (e.g., dues, see Section 8
                            below) or for the benefit of welfare funds for their members. See 5
                            C.F.R. 950.102(d);



                                                  5
DR 4020-251-01                                                                      July 27, 2005

                 (c)     Members do not directly solicit from an employee members whom they
                         know to be their subordinates;
                 (d)     All messages and notices communicate that the event is open only to
                         members of the welfare and recreation organization; and,
                 (e)     Any member of a welfare and recreation organization may provide to
                         that organization a written request that the organization not solicit
                         donations from that member, either on or off Federal Property and on
                         official time, and that request kept in the files of that organization, and
                         honored, until the employee provides to the organization a written
                         rescission of the request.

           (2)    Off Federal property and on personal time. The only rules that apply to the
                  conduct of fundraising by Federal personnel under these circumstances are
                  the fundraising rules set forth in 5 C.F.R. 2635.808(c). Accordingly, Federal
                  employees who are members of welfare and recreation organizations may
                  solicit money on behalf of their organization under the following conditions:

                   (a)    A Federal employee member, other than a special Government
                          employee (as defined at 18 U.S.C. 202), may not solicit or accept
                          donations from a person whom he or she knows to be a prohibited
                          source within the meaning of 5 C.F.R. 2635.203(d) [However, a non-
                          employee member could make such solicitation];
                   (b)    A Federal employee member may not personally solicit funds or other
                          support from another employee member who is his or her subordinate;
                          and
                   (c)    Solicitations are for organizational support (e.g., dues, see Section 8
                          below) or for the benefit of welfare funds for their members. See 5
                          C.F.R. 950.102(d).

       d   Gifts-in-Kind Collections. Subject to case-by-case approval from the designated
           official, welfare and recreation organizations may collect gifts-in-kind such as food,
           clothing, and toys on government property to be used for charitable donations on
           behalf of the organization for the designated benefit of organizations listed in the
           current Combined Federal Campaign catalogue or to assist victims of specific
           emergencies or disasters as defined in 5 C.F.R. 950.102(a). See 5 C.F.R.
           950.102(b).

       e Use of USDA Support. Welfare and recreation organizations are prohibited from
         using Government property, equipment, and administrative support services to
         engage in fundraising using a lottery or game of chance, lobbying efforts, or
         litigation-related activities in which the United States or USDA is a party or has a
         direct and substantial interest.

       f Use of Agency Name. An association or other employee organization may use the
         name of the Department or an agency in its name provided it is made clear that the
         association or organization is not an official organization of the Department or
         agency.




                                                 6
July 27, 2005                                                             DR 4020-251-01




     8 DUES AND FINANCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY

          a USDA assumes no responsibility for dues and other funds or in-kind gifts
            collected by welfare and recreation organizations.

          b It is recognized that welfare and recreation organizations may require members to
            pay dues as a condition of membership. Dues may be collected directly by the
            organization during non-duty hours, or employee members may set up individual
            financial allotments to a financial institution. Arrangements for such allotments
            must be made directly between the employee member and his/her servicing
            personnel office using a Direct Deposit Sign Up Form, SF 1199A.




                                            7
July 27, 2005                                                                  DR 4020-251-01
                                                                                  Appendix A
                                             APPENDIX A

                             DECLARATION STATEMENT
                                       FOR
                       WELFARE AND RECREATION ORGANIZATIONS


 Name of Welfare and
Recreation Organization:


 This Declaration Statement is submitted in accordance with Departmental Regulation 4020-
 251-1, in fulfillment of requirements necessary to receive recognition by the USDA.

 On behalf of this Welfare and Recreation Organization, I declare the following statement to
 be true.

      This Welfare and Recreation Organization:

                1. Is a nonprofit organization whose membership is primarily made up of USDA
                   employees,
                2. Has a current constitution and bylaws (copy attached),
                3. Adheres to relevant law and regulations pertaining to use of Government
                   property, ethics and conduct,
                4. Does not discriminate in terms of membership or treatment of its members
                   because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, martial
                   status, familial status, or because all or part of an individual’s income is
                   derived from any public assistance program, and
                5. Will not assist or participate in any strike, work stoppage or slowdown against
                   the USDA, or advocate the overthrow of the constitutional form of
                   government of the United States.


  President                           Date

Contact information: Name of President

                         Employing Agency

                           Mailing Address


           eMail                             Phone Number


Attachment: Constitution and Bylaws



                                               A-1
