U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE 
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250 
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION 

NUMBER: 

DR 4080-811-002 

SUBJECT: Telework and Remote Work Programs 

DATE: 

November 22, 2021 

OPI: Office of Human Resource Management 

EXPIRATION DATE: 

November 22, 2026 



Section Page 

 

1. Purpose 1 
2. Special Instructions/Cancellations 2 
3. Scope 2 
4. Telework Policy 2 
5. Telework Procedures 5 
6. Remote Work Policy 9 
7. Remote Work Procedures 10 
8. Establishing or Changing a Work Employment Arrangement 11 
9. Pay, Holiday, and Time and Attendance 12 
10. Domestic Employees Teleworking Overseas 13 
11. Roles and Responsibilities 14 
12. Inquiries 18 


Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations A-1 

Appendix B – Definitions B-1 

Appendix C – Authorities and References C-1 

1. PURPOSE 
This Departmental Regulation (DR) sets forth the authority, policy, and responsibilities 
for managing the Telework and Remote Work Programs within the United States 
Department of Agriculture (USDA). 
Effective use of telework and remote work enables USDA to recruit and retain a diverse 
workforce. Telework and remote work also may result in tangible savings in terms of 
reduced real estate and physical space demands, utilities, and transit subsidy costs. 





2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS 
This DR supersedes the Step 1 interim telework guidance provided in Secretary Vilsack’s 
memorandum, Building a Model Workplace with Expanded Telework and Work 
Flexibilities – Our First Steps, dated March 11, 2021, which repealed DR 4080-811-002, 
USDA Telework Program, dated January 4, 2018. 
All USDA organizations must ensure compliance with the provisions of this regulation 
and applicable labor relations obligations. 
Supplemental Guidance. To the extent the implementation of this directive may affect 
bargaining unit employees’ conditions of employment, management must fulfill its 
statutory labor relations obligations prior to the directive being implemented. 
Consequently, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may supplement this directive 
through the collective bargaining process, with the sole exception of an agency 
demonstrating a compelling need under the Federal Labor Relation Authority’s 
regulation set forth in 5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) § 2424.50, Illustrative 
Criteria. 


3. SCOPE 
This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, organizations, and 
employees. 
This DR requires close collaboration from Departmental, Mission Area, agency, and 
staff office leadership and across all support functions. 


4. TELEWORK POLICY 
USDA fully supports and promotes the use of telework for and by eligible employees. 
The USDA Telework Program is designed to fully implement the Telework 
Enhancement Act of 2010 and enhance work-life balance for employees. 
USDA permits telework up to 8 days per biweekly pay period based on the duties of the 
position. 
A teleworker’s official duty station will remain unchanged if they report physically to 
their employing office worksite location for 2 full workdays or a combination of 
workday and some form of personal leave each biweekly pay period on a regular and 
recurring basis. If a holiday falls on a teleworker’s day to physically report to the 
employing office worksite, it is not required to add an alternate day to the employee’s 
requirement to physically report to the employing office worksite for that specific 
biweekly pay period. 



 Telework should be used as a strategic tool to recruit and retain a diverse workforce and 
support employee work-life balance. 
Use of telework is a key component of USDA’s ability to operate in situations in which 
working from the official worksite is unsafe or unavailable. Unscheduled telework will 
be considered and may be authorized or required during inclement weather, emergency 
situations that involve national security, extended emergencies, or other unique 
situations as determined by the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) or USDA. 
Mission Area, agencies, and staff offices should incorporate telework into their 
Continuity of Operations Plan (COOP). 
(1) All USDA employees, regardless of tenure, grade, job series, title, or supervisory 
designation are presumed eligible for telework unless prohibited by other 
exclusionary provisions of this regulation or negotiated as part of a collective 
bargaining agreement (CBA). 


 Eligibility 


 

(2) Employees occupying a telework eligible position may telework up to 8 days per 
pay period based on the duties of the position and the amount of onsite activities 
that must be performed. Employees, in positions ineligible for telework and those 
performing similar functions will be treated as fairly and equitably as those that 
telework. All approved telework arrangements must be documented on an 
Agriculture Department (AD) 3018, USDA Telework Agreement form and must 
conform to any applicable negotiated labor agreement. 


 

(3) Positions may be identified as ineligible for telework based only on the following 
criteria: 
Position duties require daily physical presence and do not include any portable 
or administrative work that can be accomplished from an alternate office or 
location. 
Position responsibilities require daily access to specialized equipment located 
at the official worksite and do not include any portable or administrative work 
that can be accomplished from an alternate office or location. 
Position activities require daily access to classified materials and do not 
include any portable or administrative work that can be accomplished from an 
alternate office or location. 











 

 

 

 

(4) Employees may be identified as ineligible for telework based only on the following 
criteria: 


 

(a) Performance. An employee may be found ineligible for telework if their 
performance falls below fully successful. In such circumstances, supervisors 



are required to initiate corrective action in accordance with DR 4040-430, 
Employee Performance and Awards. The employee's eligibility for telework 
must be reassessed every 12 months from the date the supervisor determined 
that the performance fell short. 


 

(b) Conduct. An employee may be found ineligible for telework if the employee 
was subject to formal disciplinary action, adverse action, or was placed on a 
leave restriction within the previous 12 months. 
1 Violation of 5 CFR Part 2635, Subpart G, Misuse of Position, of the 
Standards for Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch for 
viewing, downloading, or exchanging pornography, including child 
pornography, on a Federal Government computer or while performing 
their official duties; or 
2 Absence Without Leave (AWOL). AWOL is a non-pay status that covers 
an absence from duty that is not approved. Any USDA employee AWOL 
for 5 or more days in any calendar year is permanently ineligible. 
Temporary Eligibility. In certain circumstances, an agency may temporarily 
designate the location of the agency worksite for an employee’s position 
(i.e., the place where the employee would normally work, absent a Telework 
agreement) as the official worksite even though the employee is not able to 
report at least twice each biweekly pay period on a regular and recurring basis 
to the Mission Area, agency, or staff office worksite. The employee must be 
expected to return to the Mission Area, agency, or staff office worksite at some 
point in the future on a regular and recurring basis. It is the responsibility of 
the employee’s immediate supervisor to decide when it no longer is proper to 
apply the temporary exception. However, if a teleworking employee is not 
expected to report to the Mission Area, agency, or staff office worksite on a 
regular and recurring basis in the future, the temporary exception would no 
longer be applicable. Supervisors must periodically review (at least every 3 
months) an employee’s temporary full-time telework arrangement to ensure 
any approved temporary exception continues to apply. A supervisor may 
waive this requirement on a temporary basis in situations such as: 
1 Recovery from an injury or medical condition; 
2 Emergency conditions that prevent an employee from commuting to the 
official worksite, such as a severe weather emergency or public health 
crisis; 














 

(c) Permanent Ineligibility. As specified in the Telework Enhancement Act, an 
employee is permanently ineligible for telework if they have been formally 
disciplined for the following: 

 

 

 

 

 

 


3 An extended period of approved absence from work, e.g., paid leave; 
4 A period during which the employee is in temporary duty travel status 
away from the official worksite; or 
5 A period during which an employee is temporarily detailed to work at a 
location other than a location covered by a Telework agreement. 


 
Telework should be considered, when appropriate, for reasonable 
accommodation requests for employees with a disability or for accommodation 
of religious beliefs. All reasonable accommodation requests, including those 
for telework, must comply with DR 4300-008, Reasonable Accommodations 
and Personal Assistance Services for Employees and Applicants with 
Disabilities. 











 

 

 

 

 

5. TELEWORK PROCEDURES 

 

 Telework Participation 

 

(1) Telework agreements remain in effect until a change is initiated, though it is a good 
practice for supervisors to review telework agreements with employees on an 
annual basis. Either management or an employee may initiate a change to a 
Telework agreement with a minimum of 45 calendar days advance written 
notification, or as required by the terms of a CBA, except in emergency situations 
where the timeframe may be shorter. 
Teleworking employees are expected to perform their duties and 
responsibilities at an acceptable level of competence. In accordance with the 
terms and provisions of any applicable CBA, participation in telework may be 
changed, suspended, or terminated by management if an employee no longer 
meets the eligibility criteria or performance expectations. 
Management will provide sufficient written notice if possible, usually at least 
45 calendar days, or as required by the terms of a CBA, before changing, 
suspending, or terminating a Telework agreement to allow the affected 
employee to make necessary arrangements. The notice will include the reason, 
effective date, and any appeals or grievance procedures available to the 
employee. Consent or acknowledgement via signature by the employee is not 
required for the modification or termination to take effect. 
Changes (e.g., change in position or change requested by management or 
employee) will require a new or updated Telework agreement to be completed. 
A new Telework agreement is not needed for temporary changes in position or 
supervisor (e.g., due to detail, temporary promotion, or assignments of a short 
duration). 











 

 

 

 


(2) In accordance with this DR and the terms and provisions of any applicable CBA, 
management reserves the right to call employees back to the office, even on 
scheduled telework days, with at least a 24-hour notice. 


 

(3) Teleworkers and remote workers may participate in flexible and compressed work 
schedules or other flexible work arrangements. 


 

(4) Telework is voluntary for all USDA employees. At a minimum, every employee 
must decide either to participate in the telework program or affirmatively opt out of 
the telework program by completing the AD-3018 form and giving it to their 
immediate supervisor. 


 

 Unscheduled and Emergency Telework 

 

(1) OPM or USDA authorized officials may announce emergency operating status 
guidance allowing for unscheduled or required telework beyond that outlined in the 
OPM early dismissal guidance for weather events. 


 

(2) Management may order employees to evacuate from their worksite and perform 
work from their home, or an alternative location, during inclement weather, public 
health crisis, or other emergency without regard to whether the employee has a 
Telework agreement in place at the time the order to evacuate is issued. 
Departmental and Mission Area, agency, or staff office COOPs should be followed. 


 

(3) Employees with a Telework agreement are expected to telework or take other 
authorized leave (paid or unpaid), paid time off or a combination of both, as 
approved by the Mission Area, agency, or staff office. 


 

(4) Teleworkers generally are ineligible for weather and safety leave when a closure is 
announced, except in rare circumstances: 
Weather and safety leave may be granted to a telework-ready employee who, in 
the Mission Area, agency, or staff office’s judgment, could not have reasonably 
anticipated the severe weather or other emergency condition so did not take 
home needed equipment or work. 
Weather and safety leave may be granted to a telework-ready employee who is 
prevented from safely working at the alternate site because of the severe 
weather or other emergency event (e.g., electrical power or broadband outage, 
fire, flooding or heating and cooling failures). In this case, the home or other 
approved telework site is also affected in such a way that work cannot be safely 
performed. Employees must communicate with their supervisors as soon as 
possible when such work disruptions occur. For more detailed guidance relative 
to weather and safety leave regulations see 5 CFR § 630.1603, Authorization, 
and OPM’s Governmentwide Dismissal and Closure Procedures. 








 

 

 


 Teleworkers who are working in the office when an early departure is 
announced generally may receive weather and safety leave for time required to 
commute home (excluding the period for an unpaid lunch break. This means 
that telework participants must complete the remaining hours of their workday 
(if any) either by teleworking or taking leave (paid or unpaid) or other paid time 
off once they arrive home. 











 

 Time and Attendance (applies to teleworkers and remote workers) 

 

(1) Employees must follow their Mission Area, agency, or staff office-specific 
procedures for accurately coding time spent teleworking and working remotely. 


 

(2) USDA procedures for requesting and approving overtime, credit hours, and leave 
apply to all USDA employees, including teleworkers and remote workers. 


 

 Safety 

 

(1) USDA encourages teleworkers and remote workers to be proactive in ensuring a 
safe alternate worksite and safe work habits. 


 

(2) As a remote worker or while teleworking from an alternate worksite, USDA 
employees may be covered by the following: 
Federal Tort Claims Act (FTCA), 28 United States Code (U.S.C.) §§ 2671- 
2680, Tort Claims Procedure; and 
Federal Employees’ Compensation Act (FECA), 5 U.S.C. Chapter 81, 
Compensation for Work Injuries. 








 

 

 

(3) Employees are covered by FECA at their alternate worksite if an injury occurs 
while performing their official duties. 


 

(4) If an injury occurs, the employee must notify their supervisor immediately, provide 
details of the incident or injury, and complete the following Department of Labor 
(DOL), Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) forms: 


 

(a) OSHA, Form 301, Log of Work-Related Injuries and Illnesses; and 


 

(b) DOL, FECA Form CA-1, Federal Employee's Notice of Traumatic Injury and 
Claim for Continuation of Pay/Compensation; or 


 

(c) DOL, FECA CA-2 Form(s): 
1 Form CA-2, Notice of Occupational Disease and Claim for 
Compensation; and 





 

 


2 Form CA-2a, Notice of Recurrence; and 








 

(d) As applicable, for Federal Employee’s Notice of Traumatic Injury and Claim 
for Continuation of Pay/Compensation (CA-1) situations, employees can 
access the DOL Employees’ Compensation Operations and Management Portal 
(ECOMP) through the How to File a Form website. 


 

(5) The Government is not liable for damages to the employee’s personal or real 
property while the employee is teleworking, except to the extent the Government is 
held liable by the FTCA. 


 

 Reasonable Accommodation and Medical Telework 

 

(1) An employee seeking to telework or work remotely as a reasonable accommodation 
is required to follow the policies and procedures outlined in DR 4300-008. 


 

(2) It is not a requirement to document or track a Telework agreement or a Mission 
Area, agency or staff office unique remote work agreement approved for a 
reasonable accommodation. However, written documentation in another format 
may be needed to document the efficacy of the organization’s reasonable 
accommodation arrangement with the employee. 


 

 Telework Appeals 

 

(1) Appeals of the denial of an employee’s request to telework are governed by DR 
4070-771-001, Administrative Grievance System, or the applicable negotiated 
grievance procedure for bargaining unit employees. 


 

(2) Employees may appeal the following denials of telework: 
A written decision of ineligibility based on the duties of the position or the 
employee’s suitability for telework; 
Denial of an employee’s request to telework documented by the submission of 
a Telework agreement; 
Management termination of an existing Telework agreement; and 
Denial of an employee’s request to telework without a valid business reason 
yet, the employee is approved for ad hoc telework. 





 
USDA fully supports and promotes remote work arrangements for and by employees 
occupying remote work eligible positions. The USDA remote work policy as described 
in this DR is intended to enhance the work-life balance for employees. 





 

 

 

 

 

 

6. REMOTE WORK POLICY 

 


 OPM permits Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to develop their own agencyspecific 
remote work policies and forms and to implement a strategic and 
comprehensive framework for such policies. While employees and organizations 
benefit from remote work arrangements, such arrangements are subject to a Mission 
Area, agency, or staff office’s budget, business and operational needs, this DR, and the 
terms and provisions of any applicable CBA. USDA organizations must create formal 
remote work agreement forms to document employee requests, approvals and denials of 
remote work opportunities. 
Remote work is an arrangement under which USDA employees are scheduled to 
perform their position’s job duties at an approved alternate worksite, typically the 
employee’s residence. The remote worksite may be within or outside of the local 
commuting area of the Mission Area, agency, or staff office’s worksite. Remote work 
employees will be expected to work at a designated approved location, typically the 
employee’s residence, on a regular and continuing basis. 
Remote work arrangements may be used for a variety of business reasons, including, but 
not limited to: 





 

 

 

 

(1) Retaining high performing employees who must move for personal reasons and 
would otherwise leave the USDA; 


 

(2) Recruiting employees with specialized skills, who may not want or be able to 
relocate for personal reasons; 


 

(3) Achieving Mission Area, agency, or staff office real estate or other business cost 
reductions; 


 

(4) Reducing costs associated with filling vacancies when employees must relocate; 
and 


 

(5) Increasing employee work-life balance, resulting in increased morale. 
Remote Work Eligibility. At a minimum, the following conditions or criteria will be 
considered when a remote work arrangement is requested or when included in a Job 
Opportunity Announcement (JOA): 





 

 

(1) As part of the ongoing position management processes, each USDA Mission Area, 
agency, or staff office will review positions to determine eligibility for a remote 
work arrangement. Eligibility must be determined prior to posting a JOA; and 


 

(2) A Mission Area, agency, or staff office must consider: 
Job duties that only can be performed onsite and the amount of time required to 
complete such duties in a typical bi-weekly pay period; 





 


 The amount of time required each week to participate in other aspects of the 
work unit operations such as training, meetings, or collaboration, including 
collaboration with stakeholders that cannot be conducted virtually; 
The type and frequency of travel associated with the position; and 
Any requirement for accessing classified information. 





 
Although remote employees generally are not expected to report to the Mission Area, 
agency, or staff office worksite, the supervisor can require the presence of a remote 
employee at the worksite in certain situations, e.g., random drug testing, training, or an 
official meeting. Supervisors should provide as much advance notice as possible. 
Remote work arrangements should be cost-neutral or low-cost, to the extent practical, 
after factoring in the net cost savings accrued moving each employee to a remote 
arrangement. Supervisors should minimize official travel between the remote work 
location and the Mission Area, agency, or staff office worksite unless necessary to 
accomplish mission critical or operational needs or where alternative virtual 
communication means (e.g., teleconference, virtual meetings) are not suitable or 
available. 
When travel is required, clear communication between the employee and supervisor will 
ensure an accurate understanding of mutual responsibilities and obligations. When a 
Mission Area, agency, or staff office authorizes a remote employee to travel to an office 
worksite for official duty, the agency will pay travel costs consistent with applicable 
travel regulations and policies. 
Remote employees must be treated equitably for appraisals of job performance, training, 
awards, reassignment, promotions, changes in grade, work requirements, approval of 
overtime work, flexible and compressed work schedules, and other actions within 
management’s discretion. Remote employees are entitled to receive progress reviews 
and annual performance appraisals from their supervisors in accordance with USDA’s 
performance management policies. 
When creating a JOA, hiring managers must identify: 





 

 

 

 

 

7. REMOTE WORK PROCEDURES 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8. ESTABLISHING OR CHANGING A REMOTE WORK ARRANGEMENT 

 

 

(1) Whether the position is eligible for a telework or remote work arrangement; and 


 


(2) Whether a remote work arrangement is required for the position. Candidates 
accepting a position where a remote work arrangement is required must accept the 
arrangement as a condition of employment. 
USDA employees may request to work remotely, to change an existing remote work 
arrangement, or to terminate their remote work arrangement. Absent urgent 
circumstances and in accordance with the terms of an applicable CBA, employee 
requests to change their remote work location or remote work arrangement is limited to 
once every 6 months. The employee requesting a change must: 





 

 

(1) Discuss the request with their supervisor. Changing the employee’s duty station 
likely will affect the employee in several ways (e.g., locality pay, Reduction-in- 
Force (RIF) competitive area, bargaining unit status, unemployment compensation). 
When discussing such requests with the employee, management must address other 
available workplace flexibilities, including but not limited to, alternative work 
schedules, details, leave options (e.g., extended leave without pay (LWOP), and 
shared leave programs. 


 

(2) The employee then may submit a request for a remote work arrangement, change to 
a remote work arrangement, or termination of a remote work arrangement in 
writing. The request must include the proposed duty station and effective date. 
To the extent the eligibility criteria in Section 6e(2) of this directive are met, supervisors 
normally will approve requests to set up a remote work arrangement from employees 
occupying positions that are remote-eligible. Supervisors may consider, however, 
whether there is a need to limit the geographic location of the duty station for the remote 
work arrangement due to travel or other mission requirements. 
Supervisory considerations of employee requests to change or terminate a remote work 
arrangement include: 





 

 

 

(1) That the proposed creation or change of a remote work arrangement does not 
negatively affect the Mission Area, agency, or staff office’s budget or ability to 
execute its mission; and 


 

(2) Requests to terminate a remote work arrangement may be denied due to space 
limitations within a Mission Area, agency, or staff office worksite. 
Generally, to the extent the eligibility criteria in Section 6e(2) of this directive are 
present, employees may be considered eligible for a remote work arrangement. 
However, as with telework, an employee becomes permanently ineligible for a remote 
work arrangement if they have been formally disciplined for either: 





 

 

(1) A violation of Subpart G, Misuse of Position, of the Standards for Ethical Conduct 
for Employees of the Executive Branch for viewing, downloading, or exchanging 
pornography, including child pornography, on a Federal Government computing 



device to include cell phones and tablets or while performing official, Federal 
Government duties; or 


 

(2) Absence without leave (AWOL) for 5 or more days in any calendar year. 
Performance and Conduct. Employees on remote work arrangements are subject to the 
same laws, rules, regulations, and policies that address performance deficiencies and 
employee misconduct. 
In USDA, appeals to a denial of a request for a remote work arrangement are governed 
by DR 4070-771-001or the applicable negotiated grievance procedure for bargaining 
unit employees. 
The basic rate of pay of a remote employee is determined by the employee’s base pay 
rate, the applicable locality pay rate and any special pay rate associated with the 
employee’s official duty station of record, as recorded on the employee’s OPM Standard 
Form (SF)-50, Notification of Personnel Action. For remote employees, the official 
worksite typically is their residence. 
Teleworker and remote workers are required to follow Departmental policies and 
procedures for requesting and using approved leave. Leave should be requested and 
approved in accordance with standard leave approval procedures, with leave hours 
accurately recorded in the time and attendance system. 
Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices generally should not pay relocation expenses 
related to remote work arrangements such as expenses to relocate to a new official duty 
station or to return to the Mission Area, agency, or staff office worksite when such 
arrangements were requested by the employee and is not the result of a directed 
reassignment. 
Remote work employees traveling on official business are eligible for the same travel 
benefits as non-remote work employees. Supervisors should, whenever possible, 
minimize official travel for remote employees. Alternate communication technologies 
should be leveraged to the greatest extent possible to minimize travel unless necessary. 
Remote work employees generally will not have an assigned or dedicated workspace at 
the Mission Area, agency, or staff office worksite. Performance issues of remote 
employees will be addressed in accordance with USDA policies, regulations, and 
applicable CBA provisions. Absent exigent circumstances, supervisors are expected to 
allow the employee to continue as a remote employee while addressing performance or 
conduct issues in accordance with USDA policies and in accordance with the terms and 
provisions of any applicable CBA. 





 

 

 

 

9. PAY, HOLIDAY, AND TIME AND ATTENDANCE 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 All required training and travel for remote employees as determined by the supervisor 
(e.g., mandatory participation at meetings or conferences at the Mission Area, agency, or 
staff office worksite) will be subject to normal training approval requests, applicable 
travel regulations, and Mission Area, agency, or staff office funding. 
Remote work employees may be eligible for Workers' Compensation benefits for workrelated 
injuries or illnesses sustained while in the performance of duty under FECA, 
which is administered by the DOL’s Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs 
(OWCP). For further information, see 5 U.S.C. 81. 
Domestic Employees Teleworking Overseas (DETO) are overseas work arrangements 
that allow Federal Executive Branch employees to perform the work requirements and 
duties of their positions temporarily from approved overseas locations via DETO 
agreements. Employees have no authorization to telework from a foreign location 
without approval from USDA and the Department of State (DOS). 
USDA employees who may be considered for a DETO are those who are the spouse or 
domestic partner of a sponsoring Foreign Service Officer, Federal Civil Service 
employee, Department of Defense (DoD) employee, or uniformed service member 
assigned overseas. To be considered for a DETO, the USDA employee must be on the 
U.S. Government orders of the sponsoring individual assigned overseas. 
DETO requests will be considered on a case-by-case basis. Employees must consult 
with the OHRM as early as possible in the process because DOS approval can take from 
6 months to a year, if not longer. 
Any DETO request must be approved by the applicable Mission Area, agency, or staff 
office prior to submission to the DOS and must follow the requirements in this DR, the 
DOS Executive Secretary Memorandum, Requirements for Executive Branch Employees 
Teleworking in Foreign Locations, dated June 7, 2016, and the DOS Foreign Affairs 
Manual (FAM), 3 FAM 2370, Domestic Employee Teleworking Overseas (DETO) 
policy guidance, dated August 11, 2021. 
Before approval, the employee must complete a DETO agreement using the DOS DETO 
agreement form, fulfill any overseas training requirements, and obtain proper 
documentation (e.g., passports, visas, work permits) to perform work overseas. The 
completed DETO agreement must be submitted through the employee’s supervisory 
chain of command for approval. Once approved, it must be submitted to the DOS. 
A DETO may entail significant costs to the Mission Area, agency, or staff office, the 
employee, or both. Therefore, prior to approving a DETO agreement, the applicable 
Mission Area, agency, or staff office must be prepared to address any contingencies or 





 

 

 

10. DOMESTIC EMPLOYEES TELEWORKING OVERSEAS 

 

 

 

 

 

 


problems with the overseas telework arrangement, including situations when the 
employee or Mission Area, agency, or staff office may need to terminate the DETO. 
Upon approval of a DETO agreement, the approved case must be forwarded to the 
servicing Human Resource Office to change the employee’s duty station to the overseas 
location. The DOS regulation 3 FAM 2370 governs the availability of overseas 
allowances, including the termination of locality pay, and other differentials for 
employees. 
DOS policy requirements apply to all employees working under a DETO. 





 

 

 

 

11. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITES 

 

 The Director, Office of Human Resource Management (OHRM) serving as the USDA 
Chief Human Capital Officer (CHCO), or designee, will serve as the Telework 
Management Officer (TMO), as required by the Telework Enhancement Act of 2010. 
The TMO will: 

 

(1) Advise the Secretary of Agriculture, Mission Area and Agency Heads, and Staff 
Office Directors of the development and implementation of policies, programs, and 
oversight of the USDA Telework and Remote Work Programs; 


 

(2) Develop and interpret USDA policies and standards for the Telework and Remote 
Work Programs; 


 

(3) Provide Mission Area, agency, and staff office officials with technical assistance 
and consultative services for Telework and Remote Work Program issues; and 
report statistics from all Telework Program Coordinators (TPC) as required; and 


 

(4) Develop and interpret USDA policies and standards for the equitable 
implementation of remote work. 


 

 Mission Area and Agency Heads, and Staff Office Directors will: 

 

(1) Promote the USDA Telework and Remote Work Programs and give all eligible 
employees the opportunity to participate in telework or remote work arrangements; 


 

(2) Determine the suitability of positions for remote work arrangements; this 
responsibility may be delegated; 


 

(3) Hold supervisors and managers accountable for implementing their respective 
Telework and Remote Work Programs in accordance with this DR; 


 

(4) Incorporate information about the availability of telework, remote work, and related 
policies into new employee orientation and other training programs; 



 

(5) Ensure supervisors and managers are held accountable for evaluating all 
teleworkers, remote workers, and non-teleworkers under the same employee 
performance management system and affording the same professional 
opportunities, assignments, and treatment about work projects assigned, appraisal of 
job performance, awards, recognition, training and developmental opportunities, 
promotions, and retention incentives; and 


 

(6) Designate a Telework Program Coordinator to manage the program. 


 

 TPCs will: 

 

(1) Administer the USDA Telework Program for their respective organizations per this 
DR and all applicable laws, rules, and regulations; 


 

(2) Ensure supervisors are aware of the requirement to notify their employees; 


 

(3) Ensure all employees are notified of their eligibility to telework and encourage 
them to annually review or update their Telework agreements or opt-out by 
selecting the AD-3018 Opt-Out Section check boxes; 


 

(4) Notify and provide new employees with a link to or copy of this policy. 


 

(5) Ensure supervisors are aware of the requirement to provide written notification and 
explanation to ineligible employees who are not authorized to participate in the 
Telework and Remote Work Programs; 


 

(6) Ensure supervisors are aware of their responsibility to account for Telework 
agreements; 


 

(7) Ensure supervisors are aware of the requirement that teleworkers who are 
designated as emergency employees or mission-critical emergency employees are 
identified as such in their Telework agreements; 


 

(8) Ensure managers are aware of the requirement for teleworkers and supervisors to 
complete required training prior to implementing a Telework arrangement; 


 

(9) Coordinate with relevant parties on inventories of available computers, laptops, 
printers, and other office equipment for use in the Telework Program prior to 
reporting the property as excess; 


 

(10) Promote the appeals process as defined in this DR; 


 

(11) Report the required telework program information, as requested by the TMO; 


 


(12) Maintain all documentation in accordance with National Archives and Records 
Administration (NARA), General Records Schedule (GRS) 22.2, Section 080, 
Supervisor’s personnel files, which requires Telework agreements to be retained for 
1 year after the end of the employee’s participation in the program; 


 

(13) Ensure employees are provided information on the USDA Telework and Remote 
Work Programs, including eligibility criteria and application procedures; 


 

(14) Ensure employees and supervisors accurately record official time spent in telework 
or remote work status in the time and attendance system. 


 

(15) Establish a system to receive feedback from employees about the implementation 
effectiveness and impact of the Telework and Remote Work Programs; and 


 

(16) Encourage supervisors to review Telework agreements with their employees 
annually. 


 

 USDA Supervisors and Managers will: 

 

(1) Assist the TPC in administering the Telework and Remote Work Programs 
including providing copies of approved agreements and notices of agreement 
terminations; 


 

(2) Complete the required Telework training in AgLearn or other specified training 
system; 


 

(3) Notify all assigned employees of their eligibility to telework, work remotely, or optout; 


 

(4) Within 10 business days of receipt of a telework or remote work request, meet with 
the employee to approve, modify, or deny the request based on the Telework 
Enhancement Act of 2010 and this DR. If the request is denied or terminated, 
provide written justification to the employee and the Mission Area, agency, or staff 
office TPC; 


 

(5) Provide written notification and explanation to employees who are not authorized to 
participate in the USDA Telework and Remote Work Programs; 


 

(6) Review approved Telework agreements for all assigned employees annually; 


 

(7) Ensure consistent and fair administration of the Telework and Remote Work 
Programs policies and procedures in their areas of responsibility; 


 

(8) Upon approval of a Telework agreement or Remote Work agreement, establish and 
communicate clear expectations with employees regarding methods of 
communication, (i.e., customer service, timeframes for returning phone calls, 



voicemail messages, and email communication), staff meeting attendance, duty 
hours, and the accurate coding of telework for time and attendance purposes; 


 

(9) Evaluate all teleworkers, remote workers and opt-out workers under the same 
performance management system and afford the same professional opportunities, 
assignments, and treatment with regards to work projects assigned, periodic 
appraisal of job performance, awards, recognition, training and developmental 
opportunities, promotions, and retention incentives as those employees working 
from organization worksites; 


 

(10) Ensure a personnel action is effected to document the correct official duty location 
for each employee approved for remote work. Temporary exceptions may apply as 
set out in Section 4f(4)(d), Temporary Eligibility, above; 


 

(11) Resolve telework denial and remote work denial appeals or grievances in a timely 
manner; 


 

(12) Ensure compliance with approved telework and remote work agreements in their 
areas of responsibility; and 


 

(13) Ensure official time spent teleworking or working remotely is properly documented 
and recorded in the time and attendance system. 


 

 Teleworkers and Remote Workers will: 

 

(1) Follow the conditions of their approved telework or remote work agreements; 


 

(2) Follow USDA safety requirements and ensure proper security of USDA equipment, 
information, and materials; 


 

(3) Provide the same level of support, availability, and accessibility to customers, 
coworkers, and their supervisor(s) as if working at a USDA official duty location; 


 

(4) Meet organizational and individual work requirements as established (e.g., 
customer service, timeframe for returning phone calls, voicemail messages, and 
email communication), staff meeting attendance, duty hours, and accurately coding 
time and attendance; 


 

(5) Complete all applicable mandatory training courses; 


 

(6) Ensure appropriate arrangements for the care of dependents while teleworking. 
Telework is not a substitute for dependent care. However, this DR does not 
preclude a teleworking employee from having a caregiver in the home who 
provides care to the dependent(s) while the employee teleworks. Also, a dependent 
may be permitted in the home provided they do not require constant supervision or 



care (i.e., older child or adolescent) and their presence does not disrupt the ability to 
telework effectively; 


 

(7) Ensure the alternate worksite provides adequate connectivity and technology to 
accomplish work tasks. Employees are expected to provide internet service and 
other general utility costs at their own expense unless otherwise negotiated within a 
CBA; 


 

(8) Acknowledge, in the applicable Telework or organizational remote work agreement 
forms that they are bound by the Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the 
Executive Branch while teleworking or working remotely; and 


 

(9) Understand that travel provisions applicable to employees working at an official 
duty station also apply to teleworkers and remote workers. A teleworker or remote 
worker who is directed to travel to another worksite (e.g., official duty station) 
during their regularly scheduled basic tour of duty would have the travel hours 
credited as hours of work. Similarly, teleworkers who are required to travel to the 
official duty location after their regularly scheduled telework basic tour of duty to 
perform irregular or occasional overtime work are entitled to at least 2 hours of 
overtime pay or compensatory time off (5 CFR § 550.112 (h), Call-back overtime 
work, and 5 CFR 551.401(e)). 


 

 

12. INQUIRIES 

 

Direct all inquiries about this DR to your employing organization’s servicing human 
resources office. Organizational human resource directors or CHCOs will manage all 
inquiries coming from their employees. Any inquiries that cannot be satisfactorily responded 
to may be sent to the USDA CHCO for further discussion and resolution. 

 

 

-END- 

 


APPENDIX A 
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 

 

 

AD Agriculture Department (Departmental Form Prefix) 

AWOL Absence Without Leave 

CBA Collective Bargaining Agreement 

CFR Code of Federal Regulations 

CHCO Chief Human Capital Officer 

COOP Continuity of Operations Plan 

CUI Controlled Unclassified Information 

DETO Domestic Employees Teleworking Overseas 

DM Departmental Manual 

DoD Department of Defense 

DOL Department of Labor 

DOS Department of State 

DR Departmental Regulation 

ECOMP Employees’ Compensation Operations and Management Portal (DOL) 

FAM Foreign Affairs Manual (DOS) 

FECA Federal Employees Compensation Act 

GPPA Guide to Processing Personnel Actions 

GRS General Records Schedule 

JOA Job Opportunity Announcement 

LWOP Leave Without Pay 

NARA National Archives and Records Administration 

OHRM Office of Human Resource Management 

OMB Office of Management and Budget 

OPM Office of Personnel Management 

OSHA Occupational Safety and Health Agency 

OWCP Office of Workers’ Compensation Program 

PII Personally Identifiable Information 

P.L. Public Law 

RIF Reduction in Force 

SF Standard Form 

TDY Temporary Duty 

TMO Telework Management Officer 

TPC Telework Program Coordinator 

U.S. United States 

U.S.C. United States Code 

USDA United States Department of Agriculture 


APPENDIX B 
DEFINITIONS 

 

 

Alternate Worksite. A work location, other than the official worksite, that satisfies all requisite 
Federal health and safety laws, rules, and regulations pertaining to the workplace, where an 
employee performs their official duties. Supervisors may authorize telework from several 
alternate worksites. Temporary authorizations or changes in the location of designated 
alternative worksites do not require a new AD-3018, USDA Telework Agreement. 

 

Locality Pay Area. An Office of Management and Budget (OMB) defined metropolitan 
statistical area or combined statistical area that determines certain location-based pay 
entitlements based on the employee’s official duty station as documented on the employee’s SF- 
50, Notification of Personnel Action. 

 

Mobile Work. Work that is characterized by routine and regular travel to conduct work in a 
customer’s or other worksite as opposed to a single authorized alternate worksite. Examples 
include site audits, site inspections, investigations, property management, and work performed 
while commuting, traveling between worksites, or on Temporary Duty (TDY). Mobile work is 
not considered telework; however, mobile workers may be eligible to participate in telework, as 
applicable. 

 

Official Duty Station. For the purposes of this Departmental Regulation, the terms “Duty 
Station”, “Official Duty Station”, and “Official Worksite” are synonymous. The official duty 
station is the management-approved location where employees regularly perform their official 
duties. If an employee physically reports to the employing Mission Area, agency, or staff office 
official worksite at least twice in a bi-weekly pay period, the employing Mission Area, agency, 
or staff office official worksite will be designated as the employee’s official duty station. If the 
employee’s work involves recurring travel or the employee’s work location varies (mobile work) 
on a recurring basis, the official worksite is the location where the work activities of the 
employee’s position of record are based, as determined by the employing Mission Area, agency, 
or staff office, subject to the requirement that the official worksite must be in a locality pay area 
in which the employee is required to regularly perform work. A Mission Area, agency, or staff 
office must document an employee’s official duty station on the employee’s Notification of 
Personnel Action (Standard Form 50 (SF-50) or equivalent). Once the official duty station has 
been officially recorded on the SF-50, Notification of Personnel Action (OPM, Guide to 
Processing Personnel Actions, GPPA, Chapter 23, Change in Duty Station), it cannot be changed 
without prior approval of the employing Mission Area, agency, or staff office accompanied by 
processing a formal, documented personnel action. 

 

Opt-Out. A telework-eligible and ready employee who voluntarily declines to participate in the 
USDA Telework Program. Employees who opt-out must sign and check the voluntary opt-out 
box on the AD-3018, USDA Telework Agreement. 

 


Remote Work. A workforce flexibility arrangement under which an employee is scheduled to 
perform work within or outside the local commuting area of their Mission Area, agency, or staff 
office’s worksite and is not required to report to the Mission Area, agency, or staff office 
worksite on a regular and recurring basis. 

 

Remote Work Arrangement. A work arrangement in which: 

 

a. The employee performs assigned official duties and other authorized activities at an 
approved alternate work location, typically the employee’s residence, within or outside of 
the local commuting area of the Mission Area, agency, or staff office worksite; 


 

b. On a regular and continuing basis; 


 

c. Is not required to physically report to the Mission Area, agency, or staff office worksite on 
any frequent, regular, or recurring basis; and 


 

d. The approved alternate worksite is, for pay and other purposes, the employee’s official duty 
station, as indicated on the employee’s SF-50, per 5 CFR § 531.605, Determining an 
employee’s official worksite. 
Work performed while on official travel status; 
Work performed while commuting to or from work; 
Remote work; or 
Mobile work. 





 

Remote Work Eligibility. A determination that a position’s required duties and tasks can be 
completed away from the Mission Area, agency, or staff office’s worksite with no frequent, 
regular, or recurring requirement to be physically present at the Mission Area, agency, or staff 
office worksite. 

 

Routine Telework. Regularly scheduled telework that occurs no less than 1 day and no more 
than 8 days (without exception) scheduled per biweekly pay period, on a recurring basis and is 
part of an approved work schedule. 

 

Situational Telework (also referred to as ad hoc, episodic, unscheduled, and intermittent). 
Telework that is approved on a case-by-case basis, where the hours worked were not part of a 
previously approved, ongoing, and regular, telework schedule. 

 

Telework. A work arrangement in which an employee performs and completes official duties 
and responsibilities from an alternate worksite. Telework may be authorized for an entire duty 
day or a portion of one. Telework does not include the following: 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Telework Agreement (AD-3018). A written agreement records the terms and conditions of the 
telework arrangement, as approved by the supervisor. 

 

Telework-Ready. Refers to all eligible employees with an approved telework agreement and 
who are prepared and equipped to telework. If unable to telework when required, use of paid or 
unpaid leave may be required. 

 

Teleworker. An eligible employee with an approved telework agreement who performs their 
official duties at an alternate worksite. 

 

Unscheduled Telework. Telework that is authorized in response to specific duty status 
announcements issued by OPM or other authorized USDA officials for use during period of 
inclement weather, a pandemic or public health crisis, or other emergency situations, or with 
prior supervisory approval, telework used to maintain productivity during short-term disruptions 
to normal operating procedures. 

 


APPENDIX C 
AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES 

 

 

Authorization, 5 CFR § 630.1603 

 

Basic Principles, 5 CFR § 551.401 

 

Computation of Overtime Work, 5 CFR § 550.112 

 

Criteria for Determining Compelling Need for Agency Rules and Regulations, 5 CFR § 2424.50, 
Illustrative Criteria 

 

Department of Transportation Appropriations Act of 2001, Public Law (P.L.) Number 106-346, 
Section 359, October 23, 2000 

 

Determining an Employee's Official Worksite, 5 CFR § 531.605 

 

Evacuation Payments During a Pandemic Health Crisis, 5 CFR § 550.409 

 

Federal Employment Compensation Act (FECA), 5 U.S.C. Subpart G, Ch. 81, Compensation for 
Work Injuries 

 

Department of Homeland Security, Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal Continuity 
Directive 1, Federal Executive Branch National Continuity Program and Requirements, January 
2017 

 

DOL, Employees’ Compensation Operations and Management Portal (ECOMP), How to File a 
Form website 

 

DOL, Form CA-1, Federal Employee's Notice of Traumatic Injury and Claim for Continuation 
of Pay/Compensation, Rev. October 2018 

 

DOL, Form CA-2, Notice of Occupational Disease and Claim for Compensation, Rev. October 
2018 

 

DOL, Form CA-2a, Notice of Recurrence, Rev. November 2017 

 

DOL, OSHA, Form 301, Log of Work-Related Injuries and Illnesses, Rev. April 2004 

 

DOS, 3 FAM 2370, Domestic Employee Teleworking Overseas (DETO), August 11, 2021 

 

DOS, Executive Secretary Memorandum, Requirements for Executive Branch Employees 
Teleworking in Foreign Locations, June 7, 2016 

 


NARA, GRS 2.2, Section 080, Supervisor’s personnel files, April 2020 

 

Presidential Directive, National Security Presidential Directive 51 and Homeland Security 
Presidential Directive 20, National Continuity Policy, May 4, 2007 

 

Presidential Memorandum, Expanding Family-Friendly Work Arrangements in the Executive 
Branch, July 11, 1994 

 

Presidential Memorandum, Implementing Federal Family Friendly Work Arrangements, June 21, 
1996 

 

OMB, M-21-25, Integrating Planning for A Safe Increased Return of Federal Employees and 
Contractors to Physical Workplaces with Post-Reentry Personnel Policies and Work 
Environment, June 10, 2021 

 

OPM, Governmentwide Dismissal and Closure Procedures, November 2018 

 

OPM, Guide to Processing Personnel Actions (GPPA), Chapter 23, Change in Duty Station, 
April 2013 

 

OPM, Guide to Telework in the Federal Government, April 2011OPM, 

 

OPM, Memorandum to Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies, Establishing 
Telecommuting Policies, February 9, 2001 

 

OPM, SF-50, Notification of Personnel Action, Rev. July 1991 

 

Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch, 5 CFR Part 2635, as 
amended 

 

Telework Enhancement Act of 2010, P.L. Number 111-292, December 9, 2010 

 

Tort Claims Procedure, 28 U.S.C. §§ 2671-2680 

 

Treasury, Postal Service, and General Government Appropriations Act of 1996, P.L. Number 
104-52, November 19, 1995 

 

USDA, AD-3018, USDA Telework Agreement, November 2021 (as amended) 

 

USDA, AD-xxxx, USDA Remote Work Agreement, forthcoming 

 

USDA, DM 4300-002, Reasonable Accommodation Procedures, July 5, 2002 

 

USDA, DR 3440-002, Control and Protection of "Sensitive Security Information," January 30, 
2003 

 


USDA, DR 3440-003, Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) Program, September 13, 2021 

 

USDA, DR 3445-001, Media Protection, October 30, 2019 

 

USDA, DR 3515-002, Privacy Policy and Compliance for Personally Identifiable Information 
(PII), October 30, 2020 

 

USDA, DR 4040-430, Employee Performance and Awards, June 24, 2020 

 

USDA, DR 4070-771-001, Administrative Grievance System, November 27, 2020 

 

USDA, DR 4300-008, Reasonable Accommodations and Personal Assistance Services for 
Employees and Applicants with Disabilities, October 27, 2020 

 

USDA, DR 4430-004, Workers’ Compensation Program, March 8, 2016 

 

USDA, DR 4430-005, Workers’ Compensation Program: Return to Work, December 17, 2014 

 

USDA, Secretary Vilsack’s Memorandum, Building a Model Workplace with Expanded 
Telework and Work Flexibilities – Our First Steps, March 11, 2021 

 


 