                                U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                       WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                         DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                              Number: 4080-811-3

    SUBJECT:                                          Date September 5, 2003
    Child Care Centers
                                                      OPI: Office of Human Resources
                                                      Management
1        PURPOSE

         This Regulation sets forth the Department-wide policy on Child Care Centers
         for infants, toddlers, pre-school and school-age children of Department of
         Agriculture (USDA) employees.

2        POLICY

         It is USDA’s policy to support quality Child Care Centers for infants, toddlers,
         pre-school and school-age children of USDA employees.

3        DEFINITIONS

         a      Child care provider - An individual or entity that provides or proposes to
                provide child care services for USDA Federal employees. Child care
                providers are independent of USDA and services and fees will vary from
                child care provider to child care provider.

         b      Child Care Center - Space provided for a child care provider to provide
                child care services (1) on property owned by the Government which is
                either controlled by or in the custody of USDA, or (2) on leased property
                in which USDA employees are located. Child Care Center also includes
                space located on property controlled by the General Services
                Administration (GSA) on which property USDA employees are located
                and care centers sponsored by the Forest Service (FS) including home-
                based child care.

         c      Home-based child care - Child care provided by a child care provider
                within the personal residence of the child care provider to children other
                than those of the child care provider.

         d      National Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC) -
                NAEYC is a nonprofit professional organization of more than 90,000
                members dedicated to improving the quality of care and education
                provided to our nation’s young children. The Association administers
                the National Academy of Early Childhood Programs, a voluntary,
                national, Accreditation system for high-quality early childhood
                programs.
DR 4080-811-3                                             September 5, 2003

      e     National Association for Family Child Care (NAFCC) -
            NAFCC is a nonprofit organization dedicated to promoting quality child
            care by strengthening the profession of family child care. The
            Association promotes a professional accreditation program, which
            recognizes and encourages quality care for children.

      f     National Capital Region (NCR) - Consists of the District of Columbia,
            the counties of Montgomery and Prince George’s in Maryland, the city
            of Alexandria and the counties of Arlington, Fairfax, Loudoun, and
            Prince William in Virginia.

      g     Washington Area Headquarters - Is composed of the Headquarters
            Complex (Jamie L. Whitten Building, South Cotton Annex, and Yates
            Building), space leased by GSA on behalf of USDA in the NCR, and the
            George Washington Carver Center in Beltsville, Maryland.

4     AUTHORITIES

      a     40 U.S.C. 590.
      b     41 CFR Part 102-79.
      c     Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Guide for the Implementation
            of Child Care Tuition dated March 2003.
      d     DR 4080-811-1 dated August 23, 2002, subject: USDA Child Care
            Tuition Assistance Program.
      e     OPM Memorandum dated October 29, 1999, subject: Special
            Solicitations Care Centers Located at Federal Installations.
      f     40 U.S.C. 592(e), Recycling Programs.
      g     Presidential Memorandum dated March 10, 1998, subject: Steps to
            Improve Federally Sponsored Child Care.
      h     42 U.S.C. 13041, Section 231 of the Crime Control Act of 1990.
      i     DR 5200-3 dated April 18, 2003, subject: Gift Acceptance Policy.

5     REFERENCES

      a     GSA Facility Management Child Care Resource Book dated July 1999.
      b     GSA Child Care Center Design Guide, Public Buildings Service
            (PBS-P140) dated July 1998.
      c     41 CFR Part 102-79, Assignment and Utilization of Space.
      d     GSA Board of Directors Child Care Resource Book dated July 1999.
      e     GSA Office of Child Care – http://www.gsa.gov/childcare.
      f     OPM Office of Work/Life Programs – http://www.opm.gov




                                       2
September 5, 2003                                        DR 4080-811-3

6     RESPONSIBILITIES

      a      The Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA) will:

             (1)    Provide advice to the Secretary of Agriculture, mission area/
                    agency heads, and staff office directors on the policy and
                    oversight of Child Care Centers identified in 3b; and,

             (2)    Consider authorizing a percentage of the recycling funds
                    received from GSA for use as child care tuition scholarships
                    for eligible USDA employees who have children attending
                    an eligible child care center in 3b.

      b      The Director, Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM) will:

             (1)    Advise the ASA on the development, and implementation of the
                    policy for Child Care Centers; and,

             (2)    Provide and interpret USDA policy as to the management of
                    Child Care Centers.

      c      The Director, Safety, Health and Employee Welfare Division (SHEWD),
             (OHRM) will:

             (1)    Develop Department-wide policy and guidance and provide
                    oversight of the Child Care Centers;

             (2)    Provide agency officials with technical assistance and
                    consultative services on complex child care issues and on the
                    process for obtaining accreditation through NAEYC or NAFCC,
                    whichever is applicable; and,

             (3)    Represent USDA at external child care seminars and conferences
                    that are related to accreditation.

      d      The Director, Office of Ethics (OE) will: Provide agency officials with
             guidance considering the application of ethical rules to USDA
             fundraising activities for the purpose of providing child care tuition
             scholarships to eligible USDA employees whose children are enrolled
             and in attendance at a Child Care Center identified in 3b.




                                         3
DR 4080-811-3                                           September 5, 2003

     e     The Director, Office of Operations (OO) will:

           (1)    Provide technical guidance and oversight of Child Care Centers
                  in the NCR, to include design and new construction, expansion
                  and alteration to existing facilities for improved child care
                  settings; maintenance and repair; equipment; and licensing;

           (2)    Serve as the contracting officer’s representative when a
                  contractor is issued to provide child care services in a Child Care
                  Center located in the NCR.

           (3)    Conduct safety reviews, health inspections and program
                  assessments for Child Care Centers located in the NCR;

           (4)    Ensure an evacuation plan is developed for Child Care Centers
                  located in the NCR;

           (5)    Conduct an annual survey of parent satisfaction; and,

           (6)    Attend GSA NCR quarterly child care meetings.

     f     The Director, Office of Procurement and Property Management (OPPM)
           will:

           (1)    Provide Department-wide guidance and assistance on
                  establishing a Child Care Center in a government-owned or
                  leased space;

           (2)    Provide contracting support when a contractor is used to provide
                  child care services in the NCR; and,

           (3)    Represent USDA at external child care seminars and conferences
                  that are related to real property and contracting.

     g     Mission Areas/Agencies/Staff Offices will:

           (1)    Establish a Child Care Center policy in accordance with
                  applicable laws, guidelines, and this regulation. Provide a copy
                  of the Child Care Center policy to OHRM.

           (2)    Notify and consult with OPPM and OO when considering the
                  establishment of a Child Care Center in the NCR;




                                       4
September 5, 2003                                         DR 4080-811-3

(3)    Notify and consult with GSA when considering the establishment
       of a Child Care Center in GSA-owned or leased space;

(4)    Notify and consult with mission area/agency/staff office facility,
       leasing, and contracting staff when considering the establishment
       of a Child Care Center in USDA-owned or leased space;

(5)    Consider using a contractor to provide child care services in
       agency-owned or leased space, as appropriate;

(6)    Assist the child care provider with the marketing of the Child
       Care Center to the workforce;

(7)    Support fundraising activities, within the policy cited at 4e and in
       accordance with DR 5200-3, to provide child care tuition
       scholarships to eligible USDA employees with children enrolled
       and in attendance at Child Care Centers listed in 3b. Also,
       fundraising activities must be in conformance with the GSA
       Board of Directors Child Care Resource Book dated July 1999,
       Appendix J – Fundraising Guide. The fundraising activity must
       carefully abide by the prohibitions against coercion of
       employees, especially subordinates, and solicitations from
       prohibited sources to USDA; and,

(8)    Consider providing child care tuition assistance in accordance
       with DR-4080-811-01.

(9)    Oversee the daily operations of Child Care Centers;

(10)   Conduct criminal history background checks on ALL Child
       Care Center staff members, to include janitorial staff.

(11)   Conduct safety reviews, health inspections and program
       assessments. (See 7f below.)

(12)   Ensure that an evacuation plan is developed for a Child Care
       Center;

(13)   Respond to inquiries related to child care service issues;

(14)   Develop a budget for replacement of equipment and other
       items in a Child Care Center;




                            5
            (15)   Respond to inquiries related to facilities issues;


DR 4080-811-3                                            September 5, 2003

            (16)   Conduct an annual survey of parents’ satisfaction; and

            (17)   Ensure facility management responsibilities referenced in section
                   5 are followed.

7     MANAGEMENT OF A CHILD CARE CENTER

      a     Licensing – All child care providers providing child care services in a
            Child Care Center must be licensed by the appropriate state and/or local
            agency governing the operation of a child care service in that geographic
            area. Any agreement, lease, or permit for a child care provider to
            provide child care services in a Child Care Center should be made
            contingent upon the child care provider obtaining and maintaining the
            requisite licenses.

      b     Permit – USDA will lease or grant a permit for the use of space for a
            Child Care Center in USDA-owned or controlled space used by a child
            care provider. Mission areas/agencies/staff offices should contact their
            procurement and property offices to ensure compliance with applicable
            procedures for lease or permitting of the space. This includes the
            execution of a licensing agreement with GSA, where appropriate.

      c     Liability – Liability insurance is the responsibility of the child care
            provider. Evidence of insurance is a prerequisite for obtaining a lease
            or permit from USDA.

      d     Occupancy of Centers. At least 50 percent of the children in attendance
            at a Child Care Center located in USDA-owned or controlled space must
            be dependents of Federal employees. However, if there are not sufficient
            dependents of Federal employees available, then the child care provider
            may accept children of non-federal employees on a temporary basis, but
            their enrollment time may not exceed one year when federal employees
            are on the waiting list.

      e     Accreditation of Child Care Provider.

            (1)    A child care provider must apply and be accredited by either the
                   NAEYC or the NAFCC, whichever is applicable, within the
                   timeframes established by these Associations.




                                         6
September 5, 2003                                             DR 4080-811-3

      (2)    A child care provider shall begin the accreditation process
             with the NAEYC or NAFCC accreditation body, whichever
             is appropriate for the Child Care Center, immediately upon the
             date of occupancy; and,

      (3)    A child care provider shall take all actions necessary to be
             accredited within 2 years, but not later than 3 years from the date
             of operation a child care provider must be accredited. Any
             agreement, lease, or permit for a child care provider to operate a
             Child Care Center should be made contingent upon the child care
             provider being accredited within such timeframe.

f     Inspections and Program reviews. Safety inspections will be conducted
      at least annually and health inspections bi-annually. Inspections may be
      accomplished by a mission area/agency/staff office staff member, an
      outside source, or a local, Federal, or state representative. Health
      assessments will address health practices and conditions, and infant,
      toddler, and special needs care.

g     Recordkeeping. Records must be maintained, in accordance with the
      Privacy Act, 5 U.S.C. 552a, by the child care provider on children
      attending the Child Care Center (e.g., attendance, medical, emergency
      contact information and payment information), as well as records of
      accident occurrences, safety and health inspections, licensing, liability
      insurance, accreditation, and parent survey results. The requirement to
      ensure records are established and maintained in accordance with the
      Privacy Act, 5 U.S.C. 552, and should be a part of the child care
      provider’s agreement.

h     Reporting.

      (1)    An accreditation status report is required from mission
             area/agency/staff office semi-annually until initial accreditation is
             obtained. Thereafter, annually on July 31st. The report will be
             submitted to the Director, OHRM with the following
             information:

             (a)     Name of Child Care Center;

             (b)     Address;

             (c)     Total occupancy;




                                   7
                     (d)    Date accreditation process began; and,


DR 4080-811-3                                              September 5, 2003

                     (e)    Date of final accreditation.

              (2)    Complaints will be addressed through an established process,
                     which includes notification of local and Federal partners,
                     exploration of the concern, and corrective action within the
                     specific time frames.

       i      Fund-raising. Fund-raising activities may take place in accordance with
              the OPM memorandum referenced in 4e, except during the Combined
              Federal Campaign period September 1 through December 15th of each
              year, for the purpose of providing child care tuition scholarships to
              eligible USDA employees whose children are enrolled and in attendance
              at a Child Care Center identified in 3b above. In addition, fund raising
              activities must conform to requirements established in the GSA Board of
              Directors Child Care Resource Book dated July 1999, Appendix J –
              Fundraising Guide, referenced in 5d.

   8   INQUIRIES

       Direct all inquiries to the Office of Human Resources Management, Safety,
       Health and Employee Welfare Division; Room 3021 South Building,
       Washington, D.C. 20250; telephone number (202) 720-8248.

                                           -END-




                                          8
9
