                                U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                       WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250



            DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION
                                                                                      Number:
                                                                                      4060-630-001
SUBJECT:                                                   DATE:
                                                            August 8, 2007
Creditable Service for Annual Leave Accrual                OPI:
                                                           Office of Human Capital Management


Section                                                                        Page

 1           Purpose                                                              1
 2           References                                                           1
 3           Special Instructions                                                 1
 4           Policy                                                               2
 5           Authority                                                            2
 6           Definitions                                                          2
 7           Responsibilities                                                     3
 8           Creditable Skills and/or Experience                                  4
 9           Service Credit Documentation                                         4
10           Duration of Credit for Service                                       5
11           Disposition of Accrued Leave upon Separation or Transfer             6
12           Nondiscrimination                                                    6


1.        PURPOSE

          The purpose of this directive is to set forth the Department of Agriculture’s
          (USDA) policy on Creditable Service for Annual Leave Accrual.


2.        REFERENCES

          This directive is issued pursuant to section 202(a) of the Federal Workforce
          Flexibility Act of 2004, Pub. L. 108-411 (2004) (codified at 5 U.S.C. § 6303(e)),
          and 5 C.F.R. 630.205.


3.        SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS

          This directive replaces Departmental Notice 4060-001, Interim Creditable Service
          for Annual Leave Accrual, dated March 13, 2006.
DR 4060-630-001                                                               August 8, 2007


4.     POLICY

       It is USDA’s policy to grant an employee receiving his or her first appointment
       (regardless of tenure) as a civilian employee of the Federal Government or an
       employee who is reappointed following a break in service of at least 90 calendar
       days after his or her last period of civilian Federal employment, credit for prior
       work experience that otherwise would not be creditable for the purpose of
       determining his or her annual leave accrual rate, if:

       a.     The employee’s skills and experience are essential to the new position and
              were acquired in a prior position having duties that directly relate to the
              duties of the position to which the employee is being appointed;

       b.     The employee is appointed to a position that is covered by the Federal
              annual and sick leave program established un 5 United States Code,
              Chapter 63; and

       c.     The Agency or Staff Office Head, or designee, determines, in writing, that
              crediting service to provide a higher annual leave accrual rate is necessary
              to recruit an individual with the skills and experience necessary to achieve
              an important agency mission or performance goal.


5.     AUTHORITY

       The authority to make creditable service for annual leave accrual rate
       determinations is hereby delegated to Agency and Staff Office Heads. Agency
       Heads and Staff Office Heads may re-delegate this authority.


6.     DEFINITIONS

       a.     Agency. An organizational unit of the Department, other than a Staff
              Office as defined below, whose head reports to an Under Secretary.

       b.     Agency Head. The head of a USDA agency or an official who has been
              delegated the authority to act for the head of the agency in the matter
              concerned.

       c.     Employee. For purposes of determining creditable service for annual
              leave accrual, an employee receiving his or her first appointment
              (regardless of tenure) as a civilian employee of the Federal Government or
              an employee who is reappointed following a break in service of at least
              90 calendar days after his or her last period of civilian Federal
              employment.




                                            2
August 8, 2007                                                                  DR 4060-630-001


        d.       Staff Office. A Departmental administrative office whose head reports to
                 the Secretary.

        e.       Staff Office Head. The head of a staff office or an official who has been
                 delegated the authority to act for the head of the staff office in the matter
                 concerned.

        f.       Uniformed Service. The Armed Forces, the Army National Guard and the
                 Air National Guard when engaged in active duty for training, inactive duty
                 training, or full-time National Guard duty, the commissioned corps of the
                 Public Health Service, and any other category of persons designated by the
                 President in time of war or national emergency.


7.      RESPONSIBILITIES

        a.       The Director, Office of Human Capital Management (OHCM) is
                 responsible for:

                 (1)    Establishing USDA’s creditable service for annual leave policy
                        and providing technical assistance and advice on issues that arise;

                 (2)    Monitoring agency and staff office compliance with Departmental
                        policy; and

                 (3)    Reporting to the Office of Personnel Management, as required.

        b.       Agency and Staff Office Heads are responsible for:

                 (1)    Issuing agency- or staff-level policy and procedures that address
                        how creditable service for annual leave accrual determinations will
                        be made in their individual organizations;

                 (2)    Ensuring that service credit determinations are granted in
                        accordance with the requirements set forth in this and other
                        governing regulations;

                 (3)     Monitoring and assessing the program; and

                 (4)    Report to OHCM, as requested.




                                                3
DR 4060-630-001                                                                  August 8, 2007


8.     CREDITABLE SKILLS AND/OR EXPERIENCE

       An employee may be credited only for prior work experience or active duty
       uniformed service that is directly related to the position to which he or she is
       being appointed.

       With respect to a retired member of a uniformed service, credit may be granted
       for any period of active duty service during which he or she performed duties
       directly related to the position to which he or she is being appointed.

       Credit may be granted for the full length of the time the employee performed the
       directly related duties (e.g. full-time credit for full-time service, part-time credit
       for part-time service, etc.). Service credit for less than full-time service must be
       based on the number of hours and the percentage of time the employee actually
       performed the duties. The amount of service credited may not exceed the actual
       amount of service during which the employee performed duties that are directly
       related to the position to which the employee is being appointed.

       In no case should an employee be granted double credit for service that is
       otherwise creditable under existing leave regulations.


9.     SERVICE CREDIT DOCUMENTATION

       The employee must provide acceptable written documentation of his or her prior
       work experience. The documentation must sufficiently describe both the duties
       the employee performed as well as the time period of performance. Agencies and
       Staff Offices are required to document all service credit calculations, in writing,
       and include appropriate backup documentation sufficient for audit purposes.
       Backup documentation may include the following:

       a.      Position or Military Occupational Specialty Descriptions;

       b.      Letters from supervisors indicating duties and time periods the employee
               performed the duties;

       c.      Resumes;

       d.      Employment Records; and

       e.      Other documentation that the Agency or Staff Office deems sufficient to
               verify the creditable service.

       Prior service or active duty uniformed service must be documented on the
       Standard Form (SF)-144A, Statement of Prior Federal Service – Worksheet, or an
       agency equivalent form used in lieu of the SF-144A. Credit is to be granted in



                                              4
August 8, 2007                                                               DR 4060-630-001


        terms of years and months, and the exact number of years and months of credit
        being granted must be recorded in Part I, Column B, of the SF-144A. A reference
        in the “Remarks” section of the SF-144A must indicate that the Service
        Computation Date-Leave (SCD-Leave) includes creditable non-Federal service or
        active duty uniformed service work experience that otherwise would not be
        credited.

        The Agency or Staff Office Head, or designee, must approve all written
        documentation and make determinations on the granting of service credit prior to
        the effective date of the employee’s entry on duty.

        The SF-144A, or equivalent, and the supporting documents should be filed on the
        right side of the Official Personnel Folder. They should be filed directly behind
        the SF-50, Notification of Personnel Action, that gave rise to the granting of the
        service credit. For example, the SF-144A for the initial appointment should be
        filed directly behind the SF-50, Notification of Personnel Action, documenting
        that appointment.


10.     DURATION OF CREDIT FOR SERVICE

        Credit granted to an employee for prior work experience or active duty uniformed
        service remains to the credit of the employee unless he or she fails to complete
        1 full year (52 calendar weeks) of continuous service with USDA. If an employee
        separates from Federal service or transfers to another Federal Department prior to
        completing 1 full year of continuous service with USDA, the employee is not
        entitled to retain service credit for prior non-Federal service or active duty
        uniformed service. The USDA agency that is losing the employee must subtract
        the additional service credit from the employee’s total creditable service, and a
        new service computation date for leave must be established before the employee
        separates or transfers to the new Department. The SF-50 documenting the change
        in service credit must be coded with remark code B75 that states “Changes SCD-
        Leave from (date) because employee failed to complete 1 full year of continuous
        service with the appointing agency”.

        Once an employee completes 1 full year of continuous service with USDA, the
        period of service for which he or she was granted service credit is permanently
        creditable for the purpose of determining his or her annual leave accrual rate for
        the duration of the employee’s career.

        If an employee is placed in a leave without pay status during the 1-year period of
        continuous service required by this section, the 1-year period of continuous
        service must be extended by the amount of time the employee is in a leave
        without pay status unless:




                                             5
DR 4060-630-001                                                                     August 8, 2007


       a.      The employee separates or is placed in a leave without pay status to
               perform service in the uniformed services (as defined in 38 U.S.C. 4303
               and 5 CFR 353.102) and later returns to civilian service in USDA through
               the exercise of a reemployment right provided by law, Executive order, or
               regulation; or

       b.      The employee separates or is placed in a leave without pay status because
               of an on-the-job injury with entitlement to injury compensation under
               5 U.S.C. Chapter 81 and later recovers sufficiently to return to work.


11.    DISPOSITION OF ACCRUED LEAVE UPON SEPARATION OR TRANSFER

       Annual leave accrued by an employee remains to the credit of the employee, even
       if he or she fails to complete 1 full year of continuous service with USDA. The
       USDA agency must transfer the annual leave balance to the new employing
       Department if the employee is transferring to a position to which annual leave
       may be transferred, or provide a lump-sum payment for unused annual leave if the
       employee is separating from Federal service or moving to a new position to which
       annual leave cannot be transferred. The service computation date should be
       adjusted in accordance with Section 11 of this regulation, as necessary.


12.    NONDISCRIMINATION

       Determinations for granting credit for prior work experience will be made in
       accordance with the Department’s civil rights anti-discrimination policy that
       states in part:

       In accordance with Federal civil rights law and U.S. Department of
       Agriculture (USDA) civil rights regulations and policies, the USDA, its
       Agencies, offices, and employees, and institutions participating in or
       administering USDA programs are prohibited from discriminating based on
       race, color, national origin, religion, sex, disability, age, marital status,
       family/parental status, income derived from a public assistance program,
       political beliefs, or reprisal or retaliation for prior civil rights activity, in any
       program or activity conducted or funded by USDA (not all bases apply to
       all programs).


                                             -END-




                                                6
