                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                             NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                     DR 4020-511-001
                                                             DATE:
 SUBJECT: Position Management and Classification             August 15, 2023
                                                             EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of Human Resources Management
                                                             August 15, 2028



Section                                                                               Page

1.  Purpose                                                                              1
2.  Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                   2
3.  Scope                                                                                2
4.  Policy                                                                               2
    a. Delegated Authority for Position Management and Classification                    2
    b. Position Management and Vacancy Control                                           3
    c. Position Classification                                                           5
    d. Special Provisions                                                               15
5. Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Appellate Procedures                          16
6. Appeals for General Schedule and Federal Wage System Positions                       16
7. Appeals for Research Positions                                                       20
8. Roles and Responsibilities                                                           22
9. Compliance                                                                           25
10. Policy Exceptions                                                                   25
11. Inquiries                                                                           26

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                               B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                C-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of Agriculture
     (USDA) policy for position management and classification. The DR supplements the Office
     of Personnel Management’s (OPM) regulations, classification standards, guides, and
     Classification under the General Schedule, 5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 511
     and Prevailing Rate Systems, 5 CFR Part 532.
  2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This DR supersedes DR 4020-511-001, Position Classification, dated October 17, 2016.

  b.   All Mission Area, agency, and staff office Chief Human Capital Officers (CHCO) will
       align their policies and procedures within 6 months of the publication date.

  c.   This DR is effective immediately and remains in effect until it is either superseded or
       expires.


3. SCOPE

  a.   This DR applies to all General Schedule (GS) and Federal Wage System (FWS) Mission
       Areas, agencies, and staff offices personnel and others working for, or on behalf of,
       USDA.

  b.   This DR does not apply to personnel not covered by Definitions; application, 5 United
       States Code (U.S.C.) § 5102(c).


4. POLICY

  a.   Delegated Authority for Position Management and Classification.

       (1) The Assistant Secretary for Administration’s classification authority is delegated to
           the Director, Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM), serving as the
           CHCO. The CHCO delegates authority through the Mission Area Under
           Secretaries, Agency Directors, and Staff Office Directors to their Human Resources
           (HR) Directors.

       (2) The Mission Area, agency, and staff office HR Directors may re-delegate authority
           to Human Resources Operations (HRO) employees who have successfully
           completed formal training in position management and classification and
           demonstrated a high level of proficiency.

       (3) Classification authority will not be delegated to individuals to classify positions for
           persons who are in the direct line of supervision above them or to classify their own
           positions.

       (4) The CHCO may revoke or suspend an HR Director’s classification authority if, in
           the CHCO’s judgment, the authority is not being exercised consistently or
           accurately.

       (5) Mission Area, agencies, and staff offices HR Directors will maintain records of
           delegations of authority, including the jurisdictional area.



                                               2
b.   Position Management and Vacancy Control.

     Position management is a part of human capital planning and involves a carefully
     designed position structure that combines the skills and assignments of employees with
     the organization's mission or function. Sound position management strikes a balance
     between employees needed to carry out the major functions of the organization, as well
     as those needed to provide adequate support, between professional employees and
     technicians, between fully trained employees and trainees, and between supervisors and
     subordinates. The need for and size of teams should be based upon a sound analysis of
     the supervisor’s span of control (i.e., supervisor-to-employee ratio) and the costs and
     benefits of the resulting structure in meeting organizational requirements. Supervisors
     and managers should structure positions to clearly delineate assigned duties and
     responsibilities within the framework established by mission and function statement and
     avoid conflict or overlap with other positions; they should use the structure as an
     effective tool for recruitment, workforce planning, training, advancement, and
     evaluation of a quality workforce.

     (1) Position management will be conducted in a manner that:

         (a) Optimizes productivity and organizational effectiveness;

         (b) Improves the supervisory span of control;

         (c) Assigns work consistent with the occupational series and grade of the position;

         (d) Eliminates duplicative functions or unnecessary organizational layering;

         (e) Minimizes costs, space, equipment, and utilities for those resources; and

         (f) Lends maximum support to equal employment opportunity, upward mobility,
             and competitive merit promotion programs.

     (2) General Principles of Effective Position Management Decisions.

         (a) Organizational changes should improve efficiency through the optimal use of
             staff. Reducing unnecessary subdivisions and supervisory levels will often
             accelerate workflow by broadening the span of control, reducing the number of
             reviews, and shortening the lines of communication.

         (b) The assignment of subordinates to a supervisor will be based on the needs of
             the organization’s function rather than the effect of additional employees on
             the supervisor’s grade.

         (c) The number of organizational entities should be based on factors such as
             complexity of the work, span of control, and geographic dispersion.



                                            3
    (d) Assigning higher-grade work to existing lower-grade positions should be
        avoided whenever possible. Higher-grade work should be concentrated in the
        fewest number of positions to accomplish the work and not spread to support
        higher grades for more employees.

    (e) Whenever possible, establish paraprofessional or bridge positions in lieu of
        certain professional or specialist positions. This will enrich lower-grade
        positions, provide upward mobility opportunities, and allow higher-grade
        employees more time to perform work appropriate to their grade level.

    (f) Vacated positions will not be backfilled, and the position description (PD) will
        be abolished if the duties can be redistributed or eliminated without
        significantly affecting the accomplishment of essential functions.

(3) Span of Control Guidelines.

    The primary goal of maximizing the span of control for supervisors, measured as
    the supervisor-to-employee ratio, is to ensure that organizations function effectively
    and efficiently while ensuring the appropriate level of employee supervision and
    guidance (for example, a ratio of 1:9). An optimal span of control will foster
    employee development, advancement opportunities, communication, and
    management efficiencies.

    (a) Analyzing customer needs and workload distribution can help achieve the right
        balance of supervisory and non-supervisory positions to support their missions.

    (b) When determining an appropriate span of control, the following factors are to
        be considered:

        1    Job complexity.

             Subordinate jobs that are complex, ambiguous, dynamic, or otherwise
             complicated may require more management involvement and a narrower
             span of control.

        2    Similarity of subordinate jobs.

             The more similar and routine the task that subordinates are performing, the
             easier it may be for a manager to supervise employees which may result in
             a wider span of control.

        3    Diversity of assigned functions.

             An office having several unique functions and skill sets to accomplish that
             function may result in a wider span of control.



                                       4
              4    Physical proximity of subordinates and technology.

                   The more geographically dispersed a group of subordinates, the more
                   difficult it may be for a manager to be in regular contact with them, which
                   may result in a narrower span of control. Depending on the functions and
                   situation, use of technology such as cell phones, email, and video
                   conferencing flexibilities may facilitate communication and the exchange
                   of information to alleviate span of control issues.

     (4) Human Capital Plans.

         Staff Office Directors and Agency Heads will develop strategic human capital
         operating plans that include workforce risks, succession planning, performance
         metrics, and strategies that will be used to accomplish action items and goals.

         (a) The strategic human capital plan will be aligned with the USDA Strategic Plan
             Fiscal Years 2022-2026;

         (b) The funding needed to support the strategic human capital plan will be
             included in the staff office’s or agency’s budget planning cycle; and

         (c) The strategic human capital plan will focus on performance. All action items
             will be measured by performance metrics.

c.   Position Classification

     Pay is based on the principle of equal pay for substantially equal work. Differences in
     pay are in proportion to differences in the difficulty, responsibility, and level-of-
     qualification requirements of the work performed for each class of positions.

     (1) Implementing OPM Standards.

         New or revised OPM classification standards and guides become effective when
         issued. Mission Area, agency, and staff office HR Directors will review affected
         positions and make needed changes within 1 year after the date of the OPM
         issuance.

     (2) Position Description.

         The supervisor will review the official record of a classified job for accuracy as
         needed and ensure that it is adjusted if deficiencies are found. A classified PD does
         not negate a supervisor’s authority to assign work on a temporary basis or change
         an employee’s work assignment consistent with organizational goals, merit
         principles, and classification standards. A PD will be classified prior to a
         reorganization that involves establishing a new position or a personnel action to



                                            5
appoint, promote, reassign, demote, or transfer an employee. The position’s final
classification will be based on grade-level criteria in the appropriate OPM
classification standards and guides and not based on volume or quality of work,
efficiency of performance, length of service, financial need, temporary duties,
difficulty in filling a position, or in comparison with other positions. A PD is
written in the format appropriate for the occupational series and in accordance with
OPM classification and job grading standards, regulations, guides, and principles.
The following guidelines apply when developing a PD:

(a) Evaluation Statement (ES).

    An ES will be prepared for all newly established positions, occupations with no
    published OPM standard or guide, positions where the duties and
    responsibilities are classified above or below the grade level criteria in the
    OPM standard, or positions where more than one series is applicable. The ES
    will contain a detailed analysis of the duties and responsibilities of the position
    in comparison to an appropriate OPM standard or guide. The ES will show
    how the assigned factor level is met, how it exceeds, and how it does not meet
    the higher factor level. The ES will be signed by the HRO employee with
    delegated classification authority.

(b) PD Cover Sheet.

    The Agriculture Department (AD) Form 332, Position Description Cover Sheet
    will be certified by the supervisor and the HRO employee with delegated
    classification authority. A PD will not be certified or approved by non-Federal
    employees, (e.g., contractors). The HRO employee will complete the form to
    include all personnel system information and codes.

    1    Competitive Level Code.

         Codes that represent groups of interchangeable positions in the agency or
         staff office that are the same grade and series, sufficiently alike in duties,
         responsibilities, pay schedules, working conditions, terms of appointment,
         and qualification requirements. The incumbent of any one position could
         be moved to any other position with the same competitive level code
         without undue interruption. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices HR
         Directors will establish and assign codes when the position is classified
         and reviewed when there is a change in the classification or an
         amendment. Codes will be established and maintained by the HRO.

    2    Position Sensitivity Designation.

         Codes are used to designate the level of security risk and required
         background investigation based on the duties of classified PDs. OPM’s
         Position Designation Tool (PDT) will be used to make an accurate



                                   6
         assessment of all classified positions. The PDT results will be attached to
         the classified PD to ensure that an accurate entry of this information is
         entered into the personnel system.

    3    Cybersecurity Code.

         Codes used to describe and document cybersecurity work by category,
         specialty area, and work role. An accurate and consistent assessment is
         required for all positions in information technology, cybersecurity, and
         cybersecurity-related work.

    4    Title Code.

         Codes that are established and assigned to official and working titles for
         classified PDs. Requests for new title codes or to reactivate codes must be
         sent to HR.Policy@usda.gov.

(c) Position Titles.

    HROs will follow OPM standards for constructing official titles. Certain
    occupational series have prescribed official and parenthetical titles to identify
    the line of work within a job family that will not be modified. When the series
    has no prescribed title, the official title will be most descriptive of the work.
    OHRM, Policy Division will approve and provide oversight in the
    establishment of all titles to ensure adherence to prescribed official titles,
    prevent redundancy, and ensure consistency in titling across Mission Areas,
    agencies, and staff offices.

    1    Working titles such as “Branch Manager,” “Division Director” or “Chief”
         will not be used as official titles in lieu of a “Supervisory” prefix. The
         word, “Supervisor” will not be used as a working title.

    2    The prefix “Supervisory” will only be added to the official title of
         positions classified using OPM’s General Schedule Supervisory Guide
         (GSSG).

    3    Parenthetical modifiers to official titles will not be used in official titles
         unless OPM instructions specifically permit them.

    4    Titles such as “Confidential Assistant,” “Executive Assistant,” or “Special
         Assistant” are titles normally reserved for use with Schedule C positions
         that provide principal support to political appointees and will not be used
         to refer to any other position.




                                    7
(d) Unclassified Duties.

    These duties represent assigned work that is not classifiable to an occupational
    series, title, and grade level (also referred to as a statement of duties). An
    employee may be detailed to unclassified duties in increments of 120 calendar
    days up to 1 year but will not be officially assigned to unclassified duties.
    When it is necessary to detail an employee to unclassified duties, management
    is responsible for describing the duties and responsibilities that will be
    performed and ensuring the duties are not aligned to a higher graded position.
    Details to unclassified duties should be made only on rare occasions.

(e) Collateral Duties.

    These assignments are separate official duties that are assigned to an employee
    in addition to the primary duties of their position. With respect to position
    classification, collateral duties will have the following characteristics:

    1    Assignments are distinct and separate from the primary duties of the
         affected position and do not constitute the primary purpose for
         establishing or continuing the position;

    2    Assignments do not constitute a grade controlling duty or responsibility;

    3    Assignments are not a primary duty of the position (they constitute less
         than 25 percent of the employee’s work time);

    4    Assignments are specific to the affected individual employee, not all
         incumbents of the same PD; and

    5    Management is responsible for initiating and completing collateral duty
         statements in consultation with the HRO employee. The approved
         collateral duty will become part of the official PD of the impacted
         employee. An official change to a PD is required when the collateral duty
         requires a specific skill that is different from those in the original PD and
         is paramount in influence and weight, or when the collateral duty results in
         a change to the series, grade, job elements, or performance standards of
         the original PD.

(f) Full Performance Level (FPL) and Career Ladders.

    The FPL of a position is the highest grade at which enough work exists on a
    continuing basis to support the employees’ position at that grade level. The PD
    is established at the highest level of work available. The sequence of lower-
    graded positions leading to the FPL is a career ladder. Career ladders are
    established to allow for entry at a lower grade level than the FPL and are used
    to develop or train candidates for the target position. Career ladders should



                                   8
only be established when there is available senior staff with the breadth and
scope of technical knowledge necessary to train the incumbent. When a
position is filled at a grade lower than the FPL, the employee will be advised
that promotions will not be automatic and that they will be eligible for non-
competitive career ladder promotions to the FPL in compliance with OPM
merit promotion regulations.

1   GS-14 and GS-15 Grade Level Positions.

    Positions at the GS-14 and GS-15 grade levels require unique
    combinations of technical, managerial, and leadership skills. Therefore, it
    is inconsistent with OPM classification policy to establish developmental
    or career ladder positions for the GS-14 and GS-15 grade levels. Requests
    for exceptions will be made to the Mission Area, agency, or staff office
    HR Directors. Factors to consider in the determination will be:

    a    Availability of Training Staff.

         Career ladders should only be established when there is available
         senior staff with the breadth and scope of technical knowledge
         necessary to train the incumbent.

    b    Uniqueness of Duties.

         Positions that require unique, specialized qualifications in cases
         where there is no staff available or the available staff lacks the
         knowledge to train the incumbent. In these instances, career ladders
         will not be established.

2   Career ladder lead positions.

    Leader positions will be classified under OPM’s General Schedule
    Leader Grade Evaluation Guide (GSLGEG). Developmental or trainee
    positions are established for non-leader, non-supervisory and non-
    management positions. Creating a career ladder leader position is
    inconsistent with the intent of such positions, as well as with performance
    expectations and sound position classification. There is no mechanism to
    legitimately create lead positions as “trainee” or “developmental.” Per the
    GSLGEG, classification of a lead position is one grade above the highest
    non-supervisory grade level of the work led. This is not subject to further
    interpretation or manipulation. Creating developmental lead positions is
    prohibited.




                              9
    3    Career ladder supervisory positions.

         Creating a supervisory position as “trainee” or “developmental” is
         inconsistent with the intent of such positions, as well as with performance
         expectations and sound position classification. Creating a career ladder
         supervisory PD does not comply with classification policy where the
         grade-controlling standard is the GSSG. The GSSG has six factors; only
         Factor 3 describes duties assigned and performed. The other five factors
         describe the nature of the work supervised, the supervisor’s reporting
         chain, the complexity of the work supervised, the contacts with others that
         flow from the work directed, and the supervisory difficulties associated
         with supervising in that particular environment. Because five of the six
         GSSG factors are absolute, there is no mechanism to legitimately
         construct a trainee or developmental supervisory position that leads to a
         higher-graded supervisory position.

(g) If an organization plans to fill the position at a lower or entry grade level, a
    Statement of Difference (SOD) will be used in combination with a classified
    PD. The SOD will summarize the duties and requirements at the lower grade
    level and:

    1    State how the duties and responsibilities in the target position grade or the
         FPL are modified for the developmental levels.

    2    Address individual factors that are affected at the entry grade level, if the
         occupational series standard is written in Factor Evaluation System (FES)
         format; and

    3    Be attached to the fully described target grade level classified PD.

(h) Special Education, Skills, or Licensures.

    It is an accepted practice to include special education, skills, or licensures in
    the PD only if they are required qualifications and directly tied to the
    knowledge, skill, and ability required to be appointed to the position.

(i) Standard PDs.

    Standard PDs can be used to cover identical positions within an organizational
    unit. They follow the same format as the basic PD and describe a specific set
    of duties and responsibilities at various grade levels. They are generally not
    appropriate for supervisory positions or for positions at the GS-13 and above.




                                   10
(j) Identical Additional.

    Positions assigned to a standard PD are termed “Identical Additional,” (I/A)
    which means that the positions assigned to the same standard PD have the
    same major duties, responsibilities, qualification requirements, organizational
    patterns, and reporting relationships. Any proposed classification action that
    impacts one I/A position will impact all I/A positions on that PD. Therefore,
    the classifier will review all impacted positions as part of the position
    evaluation and before effecting any action.

(k) Interdisciplinary Professional Positions.

    Interdisciplinary classification is used only for positions in professional
    occupational series such as mathematical, scientific, or engineering disciplines
    and is not appropriate for administrative positions. The interdisciplinary
    approach is an alternate method for determining the series for some
    professional positions where the duties and responsibilities of more than one
    professional series are closely related. Related disciplines often have a
    common core of education and experience where the qualifications can be met
    by persons in either professional series. Generally, when a position involves
    work or knowledge pertaining to more than one profession, classification to the
    predominate series is preferable and the most practical solution.

(l) Grade Stacking.

    Establishing subordinate positions at the same grade as the supervisor
    (classified using the GSSG) is to be documented as an exception to
    classification and position management principles. This practice is referred to
    as “grade stacking” and will not be used unless a complete evaluation is
    prepared and approved by the Mission Area, agency, or staff office HR
    Director.

(m) Amendments.

    When major duties of a PD have undergone changes which are material but not
    enough to warrant a complete rewrite of the description, the changes are
    reported by preparing a PD amendment. Amendments can be used if there is
    no change in title, series, or grade as a result. PDs are amended by means of an
    AD-332 and an attached statement containing only what is necessary to explain
    what has been taken from or added to the original PD.




                                  11
(3) Desk Audits and Reviews.

    (a) Desk Audits.

        Desk Audits are part of a comprehensive review of a position conducted by the
        HRO employee with classification authority. The desk audit is a thorough
        examination of the position that includes an interview with the affected
        employee and their supervisor. A review and analysis are conducted to assess
        the major duties and responsibilities to determine the appropriate classification
        of the title, series, and grade. The HRO conducting the review is required to
        write a report of their findings in a complete ES and maintain the original with
        the official files.

        Requesting a Desk Audit. If an employee has reason to believe that there are
        continuing differences between the work assigned and the official PD which
        substantially affect the accuracy of the official PD, they should first discuss
        this with their supervisor. If the supervisor believes the position should be
        reevaluated because the duties have significantly evolved since the position
        was classified, they should consult with their HRO to determine if a desk audit
        and review is warranted. A desk audit and review may also be conducted as
        the result of a grievance filed by the employee. Bargaining unit employees
        will comply with negotiated agreement classification appeal and grievance
        procedures.

    (b) Position Maintenance Review.

        HROs will, on a cyclical basis, conduct a position management and
        classification review of an organization’s positions in partnership with Mission
        Areas, agencies, and staff office management. The objective of the review will
        be to ensure the existence of current, adequate, and accurate PDs; ensure
        management’s awareness and accountability for accuracy in assigning work
        commensurate with assigned PDs; monitor position workload and grade
        structure; maintain consistency of PDs with appropriate standards; and identify
        issues with questionable positions and structures. Reviews should be
        conducted every 3 to 5 years.

    (c) Classification Consistency Reviews.

        HROs are required to conduct these reviews when OPM issues a new or
        revised classification standard or guide. This review is to be completed within
        1 year of the date of issue. In addition, the Department or OPM may require a
        review when, as the result of an adjudicated classification appeal, it has reason
        to believe that identical, similar, or related positions may be classified
        inconsistently with the appealed position. The Mission Area, agency, or staff
        office HR Director will receive written instructions from either the Department
        or OPM regarding the reporting requirements and timeframes for completion.



                                      12
        The review and report are intended to provide the Department or OPM with
        information to ensure that Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are
        complying with statutory requirements.

(4) Reclassifying Encumbered Positions to Lower Grades.

    If the desk audit results in the position being classified at a lower grade level, the
    HRO will advise the employee in writing of the action and the proposed date of the
    change to the lower grade prior to taking the action. The written memorandum will
    also include information about the employee’s right to file a classification appeal in
    accordance with OHRM and OPM policy and specify the time limits for doing so.

    (a) Reclassification to a lower-grade position will not interfere with the
        employee’s rights under the laws and regulations regarding reduction in force
        (RIF), adverse, or performance-based actions.

    (b) RIF regulations do not apply when the downgrading of the position is the result
        of the application of a new or revised OPM standard, correction of a
        classification error, or the erosion of duties.

    (c) The downgrade will become effective within six pay periods of the
        determination, or the employee will be reassigned to a position that is
        accurately classified at the employee’s original grade level.

    (d) A classification action cannot be made retroactive unless the employee was
        wrongfully demoted as the result of a prior misclassified action and filed an
        appeal within 15 calendar days of the effective date of the demotion, in
        accordance with Retroactive Effective Date, 5 CFR § 511.703 and Job Grading
        Reviews and Appeals; General, 5 CFR § 532.701.

        If the desk audit resulted in a lower grade level determination, the HRO will
        review all I/A and similar positions in the organization for consistency prior to
        taking the action. As appropriate, positions will be reclassified consistent with
        the decision, in accordance with OPM classification regulations and standards.

(5) Reclassifying Encumbered Positions to Higher Grades.

    A desk audit may result in the classification of duties at a higher grade level or basic
    rate of pay. This can occur as the result of a natural evolution of work, impact of
    person in the position, new or revised OPM classification standards, or a
    misclassified position. Assigning a specific set of higher-grade work to an
    employee for the purpose of upgrading the employee’s position is a planned
    management action and should be avoided since the employee could not be
    noncompetitively promoted.




                                       13
    The concept of “impact of the person” on the job is based on the premise that the
    special knowledge, skills, abilities, and accomplishments of the incumbent may
    influence the duties, responsibilities, and expectations of the job. As such, the
    impact of the person on the job is reflected in the classification when the
    performance of an individual makes the job materially different from what it
    otherwise would be, i.e., a higher-grade position.

(6) Reclassifying Duties and Noncompetitive Promotions.

    As a result of a desk audit, if the classification determination demonstrates that
    there has been a natural evolution based on the impact of the person (as opposed to
    a planned management action), then the duties of the position will be reclassified at
    the higher grade level or different series. The supervisor, in consultation with the
    HRO, has the option and authority to assign the higher-level work to an appropriate
    position, reassign the incumbent to an equivalent position at the current grade level,
    or noncompetitively promote the incumbent in their reclassified position to the
    higher grade level. Noncompetitive promotions based on the impact of the person
    in the position are not retroactive. All the following conditions will be met before
    approving a noncompetitive promotion action based on reclassified duties:

    (a) The new duties are grade controlling and are regular and recurring (performed
        at least 25 percent of the time);

    (b) There is demonstrated evidence of higher-level duties and responsibilities;

    (c) The major duties and basic functions of the former position are absorbed in the
        new position;

    (d) The noncompetitive action will not result in the creation of a new position and
        the former position is abolished;

    (e) The successor position will not have any known promotion potential beyond
        the accreted grade level;

    (f) The addition of the higher-level duties will not result in the abolishment of
        another position, reduce the FPL of a vacant position, or otherwise adversely
        impact another occupied position;

    (g) No other employee in the same organizational unit or functional area who
        occupies an identical or similar position is performing identical or similar
        duties as the position under review;

    (h) The GS employee meets time-in-grade and qualification requirements;

    (i) The FWS employee meets qualification standard requirements; and




                                       14
         (j) GS employees will not be accreted more than one grade level above the
             position under review nor accreted more than once in the same position.

         Noncompetitive promotions will not be based on:

         (k) Reclassification of a position from one-grade interval position to a two-grade
             interval position;

         (l) Reclassification of a position from one occupational series to another
             occupational series;

         (m) Movement of the incumbent from their existing position to a vacant, higher-
             level position;

         (n) Reclassification of a position from an I/A position in the same organizational
             unit or functional area;

         (o) Reclassification of a position from a non-supervisory to a supervisory position;

         (p) Reclassification of a position from a non-leader to a leader position; or

         (q) Reclassification of duties that cross organizational units or functional areas.

d.   Special Provisions

     (1) Research organizations will obtain Departmental approval and delegated position
         classification authority to establish a research panel evaluation system to evaluate
         and classify grade levels for their research positions classified using the RGEG.

     (2) Attorney positions will not be established in an organization outside of the Office of
         the General Counsel (OGC) without concurrence of OGC.

     (3) Criminal Investigator positions will not be established in an organization outside of
         the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) without concurrence of OIG.

     (4) Positions performing firefighting and law enforcement work will meet the standard
         for Special Retirement Coverage under Applicability and Purpose, 5 CFR §
         831.901 or Applicability and Purpose, 5 CFR § 842.801. Once classified, the
         Mission Area, agency, or staff office HR Director will submit a cover
         memorandum, a copy of the PDs, and documentation to support the request for
         special retirement coverage approval to OHRM. All documents for approved
         positions will be sent to OPM and the applicable Mission Area, agency, or staff
         office will be notified of the approval.

     (5) The establishment of a Team Leader position is not appropriate unless it is part of a
         team-based organizational structure implemented to empower front line employees



                                            15
           and eliminate supervisory layers. Team Leaders are not supervisors or management
           officials. These positions will not be established to address pay issues.


5. MISSION AREA, AGENCY, AND STAFF OFFICE APPELLATE PROCEDURES

  a.   Mission Area, agency, and staff office HR Directors are encouraged to establish
       classification and job grading appeal procedures. If a process is established, written
       procedures will be made available to all employees and will align with policy and appeal
       rights contained in this DR.

  b.   Mission Area, agency, and staff office classification and job grading appellate
       procedures will not interfere with the right of the employee to file an appeal directly to
       the Department or OPM, but not both at the same time.

  c.   Mission Area, agency, and staff office classification and job grading decisions will be
       issued promptly and include a notice of appeal rights and time limits to file in order to
       preserve their rights to retroactive adjustment. If the employee is not entitled to grade
       retention, the employee will be notified of the right to appeal the action to the Merit
       Systems Protection Board. Such appeals are appropriate only if the appealed action does
       not comply with the law or regulations.


6. APPEALS FOR GENERAL SCHEDULE AND FEDERAL WAGE SYSTEM POSITIONS

  a.   GS Employees.

       Employees in the GS pay system may file a classification appeal at any time with their
       Mission Area HRO, OHRM, or OPM. If the GS employee is dissatisfied with the
       Mission Area or OHRM decision, they may file an appeal with OPM within 15 calendar
       days of receiving the decision.

  b.   FWS Employees.

       Employees in the FWS pay system (Wage Grade, Wage Leader, or Wage Supervisor)
       will first file an appeal within their Mission Area. If an FWS employee is dissatisfied
       with the Mission Area decision, they may file a subsequent appeal with OHRM or OPM
       within 15 calendar days of receiving the Mission Area decision.

  c.   Departmental Administration (DA) Employees.

       DA employees may file a classification appeal directly to the CHCO.

  d.   An employee may not file an appeal with OHRM and OPM at the same time.

  e.   Bargaining Unit Employees.



                                               16
     Bargaining unit employees will comply with classification appellate procedures in their
     negotiated agreement.

f.   Appealable Items.

     Mission Area, agency, and staff office employees may appeal decisions made by their
     Mission Area or OHRM relative to the grade, occupational series, title, or pay system of
     their position.

g.   Pay System Appeal.

     The employee may appeal the pay system of their current position. The CHCO will
     review the position to determine the appropriate pay system issue only. Following the
     determination, the appeal will be returned to the Mission Area, agency, or staff office for
     a classification determination within the specified pay system. If the employee
     disagrees with the determination, the employee may then file an appeal with OPM.

h.   Non-Appealable Items.

     Mission Area, agency, and staff office employees may not appeal: the content or
     accuracy of the duties assigned in their official PD, the accuracy of a classification
     standard, rate of pay, or propriety of a wage schedule of a Mission Area’s, agency’s, or
     staff office’s proposed classification decision; the classification of positions to which an
     employee is not officially assigned; the classification of an employee’s position based on
     comparison with other positions; or the classification of positions to which an employee
     is detailed or temporarily promoted for a period of less than 2 years.

i.   Designating Representatives.

     The employee may file personally or through a designated representative of their choice.
     The designated representative must not pose a potential conflict of interest or position.
     The employee will notify the Department in writing of the selection of a designated
     representative.

     (1) The employee’s representative cannot be a supervisor with authority over the
         position, an official of the Mission Area, agency, or staff office who has
         classification authority over the position, or an employee who occupies a position in
         the human resources management GS-0201 occupational series.

     (2) The representative will cooperate with OHRM in processing the appeal, provide
         information in a timely manner, and submit position information relevant to the
         classification.

     (3) The employee or the representative may review the official appeal file maintained
         in OHRM by contacting the Deciding Official. OHRM will establish the date, time,



                                             17
         and place where the file can be reviewed. The representative does not have the
         right to be present during any fact-finding sessions or determine the way in which
         the facts are gathered about the position.

j.   Classification appeals must contain the following information:

     (1) The employee’s name and the address where the employee wants to receive
         information concerning the appeal.

     (2) The current classification of the employee’s position and the requested
         classification.

     (3) The employing agency or staff office name, division, branch, work address, and
         work telephone number of the employee’s immediate supervisor.

     (4) A copy of the official PD and a statement indicating which portions, if any, the
         employee feels are inaccurate or insufficiently detailed.

     (5) A narrative explaining why the employee feels that the current classification should
         be changed and any additional information; and

     (6) DA employees will address a letter to the CHCO. The letter of appeal will include
         the employee’s name, office, organizational unit, position title, series, and grade
         level. The appeal will state the reason the employee believes the position is
         incorrectly classified and the requested title, series, and grade.

k.   Acknowledgement and Request for the File.

     Upon receiving the appeal, the CHCO will send a letter to the employee (or
     representative) acknowledging receipt. The CHCO will request the administrative file
     from the Mission Area, agency, or staff office HR Director. The CHCO will forward a
     copy of the information in connection with the adjudication of the appeal to CHCO,
     within 30 calendar days of the request. They will also make it available to the employee
     (or representative) within the same timeframe. If the administrative file, such as an ES
     or current PD are not available, the Mission Area, agency, or staff office HR Directors
     will prepare the missing documents within 30 calendar days of the OHRM notice of
     appeal.

l.   Mission Area, agency, or staff office Classification Actions.

     If an employee files an appeal with OHRM or OPM, this does not automatically stop the
     classification action taken by the Mission Area, agency, or staff office on its own
     decision. In such cases, the Mission Area, agency, or staff office policies govern.
     Organizations are encouraged not to postpone, delay, or take alternative personnel
     actions solely because an employee has filed an appeal with OHRM or OPM.




                                            18
m. Basis for an Appeal Decision.

     OHRM will decide appeals based on the duties assigned and performed by the
     employees in comparison with OPM position classification standards and guides.

n.   Decisions.

     Decisions issued by OHRM are final within USDA unless the employee files an appeal
     with OPM no later than 15 calendar days following the date of OHRM’s decision.
     Decisions are not based on volume or quality of work, efficiency of performance,
     temporary duties, difficulty in filling the position, employee’s length of service, or
     financial need.

o.   Consistency Review.

     If, during the review of the appeal, the OHRM Deciding Official uncovers substantial
     information indicating inconsistent classification practices, the Mission Area, agency, or
     staff office HR Directors will be directed to conduct a consistency review of similar
     positions. Either OPM or OHRM will also require a review when the appeal decision
     impacts identical and similar positions in the organization. Once the review is complete,
     the HR Director will prepare a formal written report for the CHCO. The report will
     outline the findings of the consistency issue and corrective actions. The CHCO will
     work with the Mission Area, agency, or staff office HR Directors to establish mutually
     acceptable timeframes for any actions to be taken.

p.   Compliance.

     Mission Area, agency, or staff office HR Directors are expected to comply with CHCO
     or the OPM appellant decision. If the decision changes the classification of the
     employee’s position, the Mission Area, agency, or staff office HR Director will provide
     a copy of the employee’s Standard Form 50 (SF-50), Notification of Personnel Action to
     OHRM or to the OPM Adjudicator. The SF-50 will state the nature of action taken, new
     position information, and effective date.

q.   Effective Dates.

     The Mission Area, agency, or staff office HR Directors will make CHCO decisions
     effective within four pay periods if it results in a higher-grade position and six pay
     periods if it results in a lower-grade position.

r.   OPM Appeals.

     Employees who choose to file an appeal with OPM will follow OPM classification
     appellant procedures found at OPM Classification and Qualifications Filing
     Instructions. OPM appellant decisions are final and there is no further appeal process.




                                             19
  s.   Reconsideration of OHRM Appeal Decisions.

       An OHRM classification decision may be reopened when information is presented that
       establishes a basis such as new, relevant, and substantive facts which were not
       previously considered. The CHCO may, at their discretion, reopen and reconsider any
       decision. Requests for reconsideration will be submitted in writing to the CHCO no
       later than 45 calendar days following the date of the original CHCO decision. If either
       the employee or the Mission Area, agency, or staff office HR Director wants to request a
       stay of the final decision (pending the outcome of the reconsideration request), the
       reconsideration request will state the reasons why the request should be granted. If, after
       reconsideration, the CHCO sustains the original decision, it will be implemented by the
       Mission Area, agency, or staff office HR Director as of the date specified in the original
       decision. If the original OHRM decision directs the downgrading of an employee who
       was not entitled to retained grade or pay, a new effective date will be established in the
       reconsideration decision.

  t.   Where to File the Appeal.

       Employees will submit classification and job-grading appeals in writing with their
       original signature to: HR.Policy@usda.gov.

  u.   Cancellation of an Appeal.

       OHRM will cancel an employee’s appeal when the employee requests a cancellation in
       writing, it is learned that the employee is no longer officially assigned to the position,
       the employee dies, the position is abolished, the employee appeals to OPM, or the
       employee or representative does not exercise due diligence in moving the appeal
       forward to final resolution. A cancelled appeal cannot be reopened unless the employee
       is able to show that circumstances beyond their control prevented the timely movement
       of the appeal.

  v.   Retroactive Actions.

       For a decision to be retroactively effective, the employee will appeal the Mission Area,
       agency, or staff office classification decision to the CHCO no later than 15 calendar
       days after the effective date of the demotion action. In addition, the OHRM decision
       will correct any error in the Mission Area’s, agency’s, or staff office’s classification
       decision that resulted in an actual decrease in the employee’s pay.


7. APPEALS FOR RESEARCH POSITIONS

  a.   OHRM’s appeal process for research and development positions is intended as a review
       of Mission Area, agency, and staff office classification determinations. The work
       situation changes frequently in such positions and appellate decisions should be based
       on the current work situation.



                                              20
b.   When the classification of such a position is appealed, the CHCO will direct the
     employee’s Mission Area, agency, or staff office to review the work situation to
     determine if it has changed since the most recent peer review by the Mission Area,
     agency, or staff office. If no change has occurred, the Mission Area, agency, or staff
     office will be expected to issue an administrative report reaffirming the accuracy of their
     original decision. However, if there are changes that affect the classification, the
     Mission Area, agency, or staff office has the obligation to act on them (i.e., re-panel the
     case and issue an explanatory administrative report).

c.   CHCO will coordinate with the Mission Area’s, agency’s, or staff office’s HRO to
     obtain a list of peers and schedule a peer review of an appealed position. The
     employee’s HRO will be required to submit a copy of the following documentation for
     OHRM’s use in adjudicating the appeal:

     (1) The employee’s current official PD certified by the supervisor and HRO
         classification specialist;

     (2) A classification evaluation summarizing the recommendations of the HRO peer
         panel and explaining the rationale for the series, title, and grade-level allocations by
         comparing the position to the applicable OPM standards and guides;

     (3) The certified PD and ES for the employee’s immediate supervisor;

     (4) Applicable functional statements and organization staffing charts;

     (5) The official project description covering the research which the employee conducts
         or leads. The project description should address the objective, the expected
         outcome, the approaches to be taken, milestones, and official progress reports of the
         work;

     (6) Copies of three to five publications which best demonstrate the employee’s overall
         qualifications and contributions. More than five publications may be reviewed if
         the employee is convinced they are needed to adequately characterize the
         contributions;

     (7) The official certified PDs for research and development positions supervised by the
         employee and for other positions supervised if they are graded at GS-11 or higher;
         and

     (8) Any other pertinent information which OHRM, the Mission Area, agency, staff
         office or the employee wish to have considered and which existed at the time of the
         HRO’s most recent review of the position.




                                             21
8. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The CHCO will:

       (1) Provide position management and classification guidance and support for DA
           employees, including the Office of the Secretary and staff office employees;

       (2) Revoke or suspend a Mission Area’s, agency’s, or Staff Office’s HR Director
           classification authority if, in the CHCO’s judgment, the authority is not being
           exercised consistently or accurately;

       (3) Facilitate the accomplishment of the human capital action planning process with
           Agency Heads and Staff Office Directors;

       (4) Provide advice and assistance to Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices on the
           effective management of resources through the position management and
           classification process;

       (5) Develop, administer, and evaluate position management and classification policies
           and programs;

       (6) Provide overall management and oversight of USDA’s classification program;

       (7) Coordinate OHRM’s response to OPM’s guidance and standards development
           activities;

       (8) Review and adjudicate classification appeal cases upon request by employees in the
           appeal process; and

       (9) Review and determine the approval of classification policy exception requests.

  b.   Mission Area Under Secretaries, Agency Heads, and Staff Office Directors will:

       (1) Assess workforce characteristics and needs to align hiring and position management
           practices and procedures with their organization’s mission, strategic goals, and
           performance objectives;

       (2) Work with their HR Directors to ensure compliance with this DR when establishing
           and evaluating positions;

       (3) Consult with their HR Directors to ensure that staffing decisions comply with merit
           promotion laws and OPM classification regulations;

       (4) Conduct workforce analysis and organizational efficiency studies to support sound
           position management;




                                              22
     (5) Maximize the span of control to ensure that organizations function effectively and
         efficiently while ensuring the appropriate level of supervision and guidance;

     (6) Develop and implement effective strategies to attract, develop, manage, and retain
         skilled employees as detailed in their Mission Area’s annual human capital action
         plan;

     (7) Maintain staffing plans to document authorized and budgeted position allocations;

     (8) Communicate all policies, practices, and business processes in standard operating
         procedures;

     (9) Ensure proper internal controls are established and documented at all levels of the
         organization to determine the need for replacement or new positions;

     (10) Continuously review business processes to ensure they are being performed as
          efficiently as possible;

     (11) Work with their HR Directors to ensure PDs are updated and consistent with any
          organizational changes that may impact the position; and

     (12) Develop human capital plans that align with the USDA strategic and human capital
          operating plan.

c.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office HR Directors and HROs will:

     (1) Work with senior-level staff and managers to provide guidance and assistance to
         complete documents that justify positions, update PDs, and comply with all
         Departmental directives and guidance on organizational planning and approval;

     (2) Ensure that staffing and classification decisions are valid and consistent with merit
         promotion laws and OPM classification regulations, standards, and policies;

     (3) Ensure accountability of position management and classification and partner with
         supervisors and managers to support USDA and OHRM efforts;

     (4) Ensure classification programs are carried out consistently within the laws,
         regulations, policies, delegated authorities, and OPM classification standards and
         guides. This includes establishing and assigning competitive levels, determining
         Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) exemption status, designating position
         sensitivity, cybersecurity and other codes related to the position;

     (5) Align policies and procedures with this DR;

     (6) Provide advice and assistance on development of the human capital action plan;




                                            23
     (7) Conduct workload and workforce analysis studies as needed to provide a
         framework for skills needed in making position management, classification, and
         staffing decisions;

     (8) Establish and communicate procedures for reviewing and deciding classification
         appeals at the Mission Area, agency, and staff office level;

     (9) Conduct desk audits and reviews and prepare evaluation statements for new and
         existing positions;

     (10) Classify PDs and initiate a review of vacant positions. Work with supervisors and
          managers to determine whether vacant positions need to be reclassified, inactivated,
          or abolished and take the appropriate action;

     (11) Interpret OPM classification standards and guides; review positions and implement
          new or revised standards within 1 year of publishing;

     (12) Train personnel and supervisors within the guidelines that have been established in
          this DR;

     (13) Issue classification appeal decisions: implement OPM and OHRM decisions and
          required actions as determined by the decision; and

     (14) Provide administrative files to OHRM or OPM in the appeal process.

d.   The Associate Chief Information Officers, Information Security Center will advise
     Mission Area, agency, and staff office HR Directors on the appropriate cybersecurity
     codes to assign to information technology, cybersecurity, and other positions requiring
     cybersecurity work.

e.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Supervisors and Managers will:

     (1) Define major duties and responsibilities of positions and draft PDs;

     (2) Ensure effective and efficient management of individual positions and certify the
         accuracy of those PDs in compliance with OPM Classification under the General
         Schedule, 5 CFR Part 511 and Prevailing Rate Systems, 5 CFR Part 532;

     (3) Ensure that PDs are prepared for each employee and kept current and accurate. PDs
         will provide a clear and definitive description of the primary duties of all positions
         under their scope of responsibility, including FLSA exemption status; and

     (4) Work with Mission Area, agency, or staff office HR Directors on workforce
         planning and position management when establishing new positions and deciding to
         fill, reclassify or abolish vacant positions.




                                            24
  f.   Employees will:

       (1) File a classification appeal or designate a person to file the appeal on their behalf, in
           compliance with Section 6, Appeals for General Schedule and Federal Wage
           System Positions, and Section 7, Appeals for Research Positions; and

       (2) Discuss the accuracy of their PD with their supervisor when there is reason to
           believe that there are continuing differences between the work assigned and the
           official PD.


9. COMPLIANCE

  The accuracy and efficiency of Mission Area, agency, and staff office HR Director
  classification determinations and position management structure will be subject to review by
  the CHCO during Departmental evaluations, targeted compliance reviews, and assistance
  visits. The CHCO may revoke or suspend a Mission Area’s, agency’s, or staff office’s HR
  Director’s classification authority if, in the CHCO’s judgment, the authority is not being
  exercised consistently or accurately.


10. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  a.   Mission Area, agency, and staff office HR Directors may only re-delegate classification
       authority to non-HRO employees with written approval from the CHCO. The Mission
       Area, agency, and staff office HR Director will request approval in writing and certify
       that the non-HRO employee has completed formal training and demonstrated a high
       level of proficiency to reliably and accurately classify positions. The request will also
       certify that the proposed delegation will not reduce classification accuracy and that the
       Mission Area, agency, and staff office HR Director will periodically conduct
       compliance reviews of classifications performed by non-HRO employees to ensure
       consistency and accuracy. The CHCO will provide a written response to the request.

  b.   Mission Area, agency, and staff office HR Directors will direct all other written requests
       for exceptions to this policy to the CHCO. Requests will include the specific policy
       exception requested, any organizational studies, position reviews, or other background
       information that supports the reason for the request. The request will also certify that
       the proposed exception will not reduce classification accuracy and that compliance
       reviews of classification affected will be consistent. The CHCO will provide a written
       response to the request.




                                               25
11. INQUIRIES

  Questions pertaining to this policy should be directed to HR.Policy@usda.gov.


                                              -END-




                                            26
                             APPENDIX A

                 ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AD       Agriculture Department
CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
CHCO     Chief Human Capital Officer
DA       Departmental Administration
DR       Departmental Regulation
ES       Evaluation Statement
FLSA     Fair Labor Standards Act
FPL      Full Performance Level
FWS      Federal Wage System
GSLGEG   General Schedule Leader Grade Evaluation Guide
GS       General Schedule
GSSG     General Schedule Supervisory Grade Evaluation Guide
HRO      Human Resources Operations
I/A      Identical Additional
OGC      Office of the General Counsel
OHRM     Office of Human Resources Management
OIG      Office of the Inspector General
OPM      Office of Personnel Management
PD       Position Description
PDT      Position Designation Tool
RGEG     Research Grade Evaluation Guide
RIF      Reduction in Force
SOD      Statement of Difference
SF       Standard Form
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture
WG       Wage Grade
WL       Wage Leader
WS       Wage Supervisor




                                  A-1
                                           APPENDIX B

                                          DEFINITIONS


Agency. Organizational units of the Department, other than staff offices, whose heads report to
officials within the Office of the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Under Secretaries, Assistant
Secretaries, and Assistant to the Secretary.

Appeal. A written request from an employee to their Mission Area, agency, or staff office HR
Director or the CHCO to review and adjudicate a classification decision as a result of a desk
audit. An appeal may also be made to OHRM or OPM.

Certified. An official signature that attests to the accuracy of required duties and responsibilities
described in the PD or an official signature that attests to the accuracy of the classified PD in
compliance with OPM classification regulations, standards, and guides.

Classification Action. Any official action taken under proper authority to establish a new
position or to change an existing position by assignment to the appropriate series and grade
under the provisions of 5 U.S.C. Chapter 51, Classification.

Consistency Review. A review of the classification of positions directed by OPM or OHRM to
determine the impact of an appeal decision on similar, identical, or related positions when there
is a probability that positions are inconsistently classified. Reviews are also conducted when
new or revised OPM classification standards and guides are issued.

Deciding Official. The person with delegated authority to make classification and job grading
appeal determinations. This person is also referred to as the Adjudicating Officer and can be in
OHRM or at OPM.

Desk Audit. A review of the major duties and responsibilities of the position to determine the
classification of the title, series, and grade. The HRO employee carries out the audit through
written and oral interviews with the employee and their supervisor to gather, review and evaluate
information about the position and prepare an ES. A desk audit may result in the position being
upgraded, downgraded, or having duties reassigned.

Federal Wage System (FWS). A uniform classification and pay-setting system that governs
Federal appropriated and non-appropriated trades and labor positions and ensures those located
within the same local wage area and performing the same duties and responsibilities receive the
same hourly pay. This includes Wage Grade (WG), Wage Leader (WL) and Wage Supervisor
(WS) positions.

Full Performance Level (FPL). The highest grade level or known promotion potential of a given
position.




                                                B-1
General Schedule (GS). A Federal civilian classification and pay system that covers white collar
federal professional, technical, administrative, and clerical positions.

Human Resources Operations (HRO). A component of a Mission Area that provides day-to-day
oversight and management of personnel management (e.g., recruitment, position management
and classification, qualification and job analysis, and advisory services).

Mission Area (MA). One or more agencies with related functions that report to the same Under
or Assistant Secretary. Research, Education and Economics is an example.

Position Description (PD). An official written statement of the major duties, responsibilities, and
organizational relationships of a position certified by the supervisor and classified by the HRO
employee or those with delegated classification authority.

Position Maintenance Review. A formal, periodic review of all positions in an organization to
ensure the PDs are current, accurate, and that obsolete PDs are abolished. This review does not
negate the responsibility of managers to keep PDs up to date, but rather serves as a systematic
approach to ensure gradual changes in assignments have not been overlooked.

Position Management (PM). The continuous and systematic process for determining the number
of positions needed, the skill and knowledge requirements of those positions, and the
organizational grouping of positions to carry out the organizational work of the unit consistent
with its function.

Reclassification. Any official action taken under proper authority to change either the title,
series, pay system, or grade of an existing position.

Span of Control. The number of subordinates a supervisor can directly control. The appropriate
span of control varies depending on job complexity, similarity of subordinate positions, diversity
of assigned functions, and the physical proximity of subordinates and technology.

Staff Office. A Departmental administrative office whose head reports directly to the Secretary.
All staff offices, except for the Office of Hearings and Appeals, National Appeals Division, and
OIG report directly to the Secretary of Agriculture.

Standardized PD. A classified PD that describes primary regular and recurring work
assignments that are general enough to cover identical positions in an occupation. PDs are
standardized at different grade levels to describe varying levels of responsibility, knowledge,
complexity, and supervision required.

Strategic Human Capital Plan. A streamlined plan that documents actions to mitigate succession
and workforce risks identified. The human capital plan aligns with the USDA Strategic Plan and
with Mission Area, agency, and staff office HRO strategic plans.




                                                B-2
Supervisory Ratio. The ratio derived by subtracting the number of permanent supervisors from
the number of total subordinates and then dividing the remainder by the number of permanent
supervisors.

USDA Strategic Plan. The Department’s quadrennial roadmap that details strategic goals and
objectives in accomplishing the mission of USDA.

Workforce Analysis. The comprehensive and systematic process for determining the number of
people needed with the right skills and competencies necessary to perform the work in an
organization. This analysis provides the framework for making staffing decisions based on the
mission, strategic plan, and budgetary resources.

Workload Analysis. The descriptive baseline of the resource requirements by discipline,
priorities, skill sets, and training to perform work in a business unit.




                                             B-3
                                        APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Agriculture Department (AD)332, Position Description Coversheet

Authorities Delegated to the Assistant Secretary for Administration, 7 CFR § 2.24

Authorities Delegated to the Director, Office of Human Resources Management, 7 CFR § 2.91

Civil Service Special Retirement Coverage, Applicability and Purpose, 5 CFR § 831.901

Classification, 5 U.S.C. Chapter 51

Classification Appeals, 5 CFR 511 §§ 601-616

Classification Under the General Schedule, 5 CFR Part 511

Definitions; Application, 5 U.S.C. § 5102

Fair Labor Standards Act; Labor; Definitions, 29 U.S.C. § 203

Federal Employees Retirement Special Retirement Coverage, Applicability and Purpose, 5 CFR
§ 842.801

Job Grading Under the Prevailing Rate Systems, 5 CFR Part 532

Job Grading Reviews and Appeals; General, 5 CFR § 532.701

OPM, Classification and Job Grading Appeal Filing Instructions website

OPM, TS-107, The Classifier’s Handbook, August 1991

OPM, HRCD-5, General Schedule Leader Grade Evaluation Guide (GSLGEG), June 1998

OPM, HRCD-5, General Schedule Supervisory Guide (GSSG), April 1998

OPM, Introduction to the Position Classification Standards, TS-134, July 1995; TS-107, August
1991; Revised August 2009

OPM, Position Designation Tool (PDT) website

OPM, Research Grade Evaluation Guide (RGEG), September 2006

OPM, SF-50, Notification of Personnel Action



                                               C-1
Pay Administration Under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), 5 CFR Part 551

Pay and Allowances, 5 U.S.C. Chapters 51 – 53

Retroactive Effective Date, 5 CFR § 511.703

USDA, USDA Strategic Plan Fiscal Years 2022-2026, March 2022




                                              C-2
