                          U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                           Number:
            DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                        4040-430-004
SUBJECT                                            DATE:
                                                   August 25, 2015
Senior Executive Service (SES) Performance
Management                                         OPI:
                                                   Office of Human Resources
                                                   Management



Section                                                                        Page

1.    PURPOSE                                                                     2
2.    APPLICABILITY                                                               2
3.    SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS                                          2
4.    POLICY                                                                      2
5.    ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES                                                  3
6.    SYSTEM PROVISIONS                                                           6
7.    SYSTEM PROTOCOL                                                             7
8.    DEALING WITH POOR PERFORMANCE                                               23
9.    LINKING PERFORMANCE TO OTHER PERSONNEL ACTIONS                              25
10.   PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT TRAINING REQUIREMENTS                                26
11.   PERFORMANCE APPRAISAL SYSTEM EVALUATION                                     27

Exhibits

Exhibit 1   Senior Executive Service Executive Performance Agreement              28
Exhibit 2   Clarification of Rating Official                                      36
Exhibit 3   Request for a Higher-Level Review                                     37
Exhibit 4   Higher-level Reviewer Response                                        38

Appendix A Authorities, References, and Abbreviations                             A-1
Appendix B Definitions                                                            B-1
1.   PURPOSE

     To establish the policies and procedures for the Department of Agriculture’s (USDA)
     Senior Executive Service (SES) performance appraisal system.

2.   APPLICABILITY

     Applies to all USDA SES regardless of appointment type (career, non-career, limited-term,
     or limited-emergency) or position type occupied (general or career reserved). Members of
     the USDA Office of Inspector General are excluded from this directive.

3.   SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) replaces DR 4040-430-003, dated December 28, 2011.
     The DR format is intended to guide the reader through the performance process through the
     stages of performance management: planning, monitoring, developing, evaluating, and
     rewarding performance.

4.   POLICY

     It is USDA’s policy to establish a SES System that promotes excellence and a results-
     oriented performance culture that contributes to individual and organizational effectiveness
     and supports the Department’s mission and goals. The system integrates performance,
     executive development and training, pay and recognition, and links to other related
     personnel decisions.

     To pay senior executives above Executive Level III and up to Level II and also have access
     to the higher aggregate pay limit, USDA must demonstrate meaningful distinctions based
     on performance. This is demonstrated through a certified SES performance appraisal
     system that meets the criteria set forth in Title 5, CFR 430.404; and that receives approval
     from OPM with concurrence from OMB and:

     a.   Aligns individual performance expectations with organizational goals,
     b.   Involves senior leaders to encourage ownership of their performance appraisal
          system,
     c.   Links all pay decisions to individual and organizational performance,
     d.   Reflects meaningful distinctions between performance rating levels, and
     e.   Provides for transparency in the process for making all pay decisions.

     In January 2012, a joint memorandum from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM)
     and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) announced the issuance of a new
     Governmentwide SES performance appraisal system. The new system was developed to
     meet the SES performance management needs of Executive Branch agencies and the senior
     executives by providing a more consistent and uniform framework to communicate
     expectations and evaluate senior executives particularly focusing on the role and
     responsibility of senior executives achieving agency results through effective executive
                                                2
     leadership. On June 24, 2013, OPM approved USDA’s basic SES appraisal system
     description. USDA’s SES performance management policy is in compliance with the SES
     basic appraisal system requirements:

     f.    Planning and communicating performance elements and requirements that are linked
           with strategic planning initiatives.
     g.    Consulting with senior executives on the development of performance elements and
           requirements.
     h.    Monitoring progress in accomplishing elements and requirements.
     i.    Appraising each senior executive’s performance, at least annually, against
           requirements using measures that balance organizational results with customer and
           employee perspectives.
     j.    Holding senior executives with responsibility for hiring accountable for recruiting and
           hiring highly qualified employees and supporting their successful transition into
           Federal service.
     k.    Using performance information to adjust pay, reward, reassign, develop, remove
           senior executives or make other personnel decisions.
     l.    Monitoring the development of Executive Development Plans (EDPs) for each senior
           executive.

5.   ROLES and RESPONSIBILITIES

     a. The Secretary shall:

          (1)   maintain oversight and approve all aspects of the performance management
                system;
          (2)   approve all recommendations made by the PRB on annual summary ratings,
                performance awards, and pay adjustments; and
          (3)   appoint members of the Executive Resources Board and Mission Area and Staff
                Office PRBs.

     b. The Secretary’s Executive Resources Board (ERB):

          (1)   provides recommendations on SES performance management policy and
                compensation guidelines for the Secretary’s approval.
          (2)   This includes establishing the minimum weight values for the critical elements.

     c. Subcabinet Officials, Agency and Staff Office Heads communicate information to
        senior executives throughout the performance year concerning the SES performance
        management system and the accountability of performance management
        responsibilities within their organization. Information and accountability shall include:

          (1)   developing and communicating the Department and Agency or Staff Office
                organizational goals and priorities used in developing individual performance
                plans;
          (2)   ensuring that senior executive performance plans reflect clear and transparent
                                                  3
         alignment to the Department’s strategic plan, organizational goals and objectives,
         and include the performance requirements and measures as required by this
         policy;
   (3)   assessing organizational performance, communicating assessment results to senior
         executives, and providing formal guidance to rating officials and reviewing
         officials on how the organizational performance is considered for ratings and
         awards;
   (4)   ensuring the required proper documentation of annual organizational and
         individual performance reviews; and
   (5)   ensuring that appropriate performance management training and retraining in the
         implementation and operation of performance management occurs for all senior
         executives within their organization as required by 5 CFR, Section 430.209.

d. The Assistant Secretary for Administration:

   (1)   serves as the Senior Performance Official and manages and implements
         performance management policies,
   (2)   oversees the PRB process,
   (3)   evaluates the SES performance management system for effectiveness and
         certification compliance, and
   (4)   in coordination with Departmental Staff and the Office of Human Resources
         Management, provides oversight for conducting SES personnel and performance
         matters.

e. The Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights:

   (1)   ensures the SES performance management system reflects the Secretary’s Civil
         Rights Policy,
   (2)   advises on all aspects for rating senior executives with regard to civil rights, and
   (3)   provides guidance to Agency civil rights directors regarding their roles in the
         performance appraisal process.

f. The Director, Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM):

   (1)   develops and administers, on behalf of the Assistant Secretary for Administration,
         the regulatory requirements of the SES performance management system,
   (2)   evaluates the system for compliance with applicable laws and OPM regulations,
   (3)   ensures that appropriate and adequate training in the implementation and policy of
         the performance management system occurs for all senior executives, and
   (4)   Establishes Departmental SES performance management deadlines that must be
         met to ensure proper and timely review by the PRB’s.

g. The Director, Executive Resources Management Division (ERMD):

   (1)   provides technical assistance, advice, and develops policy and written guidance
         on the SES performance management system,
                                          4
   (2)   monitors the system for compliance with USDA policy and applicable laws and
         regulations,
   (3)   manages USDA’s PRBs, and
   (4)   provides adequate training to all senior executives as applicable.

h. The Reviewing Official is the second-level of the senior executive:

   (1)   ensures the rating official carries out his/her performance management
         responsibilities as specified in this USDA policy,
   (2)   establishes and supports a high performing organization to ensure both individual
         and organizational performance meet the overall needs and goals of the
         organization, and
   (3)   ensures consistency, fairness, objectivity, and completeness of the senior
         executive’s performance plan.

i. The Rating Official is the immediate supervisor of the senior executive:

   (1)   creates a performance culture and environment that fosters high performance and
   (2)   carries out his/her performance management responsibilities throughout the
         appraisal period. Specific responsibilities are:

         (a)   Planning Performance: Establishes the senior executive performance plan
               in accordance with USDA performance management policy, engages the
               senior executive in developing his/her performance requirements, clearly
               communicates performance expectations, and ensures performance
               accountability.
         (b)   Monitoring Performance: Monitors performance, provides ongoing
               feedback during the appraisal period, and conducts the required formal
               progress review. Takes appropriate action to address performance that
               does not meet expectations.
         (c)   Developing Performance: As an ongoing part of the performance
               management process, develops performance that includes holding
               meaningful performance-related discussions and providing developmental
               opportunities. Works with senior executives to develop their executive
               development plans.
         (d)   Rating Performance: Assigns the initial summary rating based on
               performance, informing the senior executive of his/her right to provide a
               written response to the initial rating, ensures completion of the
               performance appraisal and required documentation for performance awards
               and performance-based pay adjustments, and submits the appraisal
               package to the Executive Resources Management Division (ERMD) by
               the due date prescribed by the Director, OHRM.
         (e)   Rewarding Performance: Fosters and rewards excellent performance and
               takes appropriate action to address performance that does not meet
               expectations. The rating official does not discuss performance pay
               adjustments or awards with the senior executive until approved by the
                                           5
                   Secretary.

     j. The Senior Executive manages his/her performance by participating in discussions with
        the rating official specifically to:

        (1)   ensure a clear understanding of performance expectations (individual
              performance) and how his/her performance contributes to the mission of the
              organization (organizational performance),
        (2)   continue ongoing communication of outside factors that may negatively or
              positively impact his/her performance,
        (3)   improve his/her performance, perform at his/her full potential, support team
              endeavors, and continue his/her professional development, and
        (4)   complete the progress review, identify work problems and cooperate with the
              rating official, and seek performance feedback from internal and external
              customers.

     k. The Higher Level Reviewing Official:

        (1)   reviews any written comments provided by the senior executive, rating and/or
              reviewing official regarding the disagreement of an initial rating,
        (2)   renders a suggested recommendation or analysis to the PRB, and
        (3)   should be an individual who was not involved in the initial summary rating
              process and at a higher organizational level than both the rating and reviewing
              officials, but not necessarily in the same organization. For example,
              Under/Assistant Secretary or Agency Administrator.

     l. The Performance Review Board (PRB):

        (1)   reviews the initial summary ratings of senior executives and
        (2)   makes recommendations for annual summary ratings, performance awards,
              performance-based pay adjustments, and other performance related matters.

6.   SYSTEM PROVISIONS

     a. Ensuring that senior executives are held accountable for individual and organizational
        performance through an effective performance management program that should
        incorporate planning, monitoring, developing, evaluating, and rewarding individual
        performance.

     b. System Design. USDA’s SES performance management system requires a
        performance plan for all senior executives regardless of appointment type (career, non-
        career, or limited-term/emergency) or position type occupied (general or career
        reserved).

     c. Executive Performance Agreement. All senior executives are required to use the
        standard Exhibit 1, USDA Executive Performance Agreement (also referred to as the
                                            6
   performance plan) to establish and develop their performance plans. It contains the
   required critical elements and performance requirements including the specific
   measures that the senior executive is expected to accomplish during the appraisal
   period.

d. Element and Summary Rating Performance Levels. The system provides for five
   element and summary rating performance levels:

   (1)   Level 5 (Outstanding)
   (2)   Level 4 (Exceeds Fully Successful)
   (3)   Level 3 (Fully Successful)
   (4)   Level 2 (Minimally Satisfactory)
   (5)   Level 1 (Unsatisfactory)

e. Appraisal Period. Senior executives must be appraised at least annually on their
   performance and an annual summary rating must be assigned for the relevant period of
   performance of each year. USDA’s appraisal period begins October 1 and ends
   September 30 each year. Performance should be managed and rated, to the extent
   possible, within the official appraisal period.

f. Minimum Appraisal Period. The minimum appraisal period is 90 days that the senior
   executive must have served under an approved performance plan to receive an annual
   summary rating. At the end of the annual appraisal period, if the senior executive has
   not served under an officially approved performance plan for at least 90 days, his/her
   appraisal period must be extended. For example, new senior executive appointments
   that are effective after June 30, the appraisal period will be extended to the end of the
   following appraisal period, e.g., July 1, 2013 to September 30, 2014. However, the
   rating official may end the appraisal period at any time after the completed minimum
   appraisal period if there is an adequate basis on which to appraise and rate the senior
   executive’s performance (e.g., end of probationary period or poor performance).

g. Reassignment or Transfer, Details, Changes in Supervisors, and Transition Period

   (1)   Reassignment or Transfer. When a senior executive is reassigned or transfers to a
         new Federal agency and had been in the former position for the 90-day minimum
         appraisal period, the former supervisor must appraise the senior executive’s
         performance in writing before the senior executive leaves and the appraisal will
         be forwarded to the gaining agency. Senior executives who are appointed without
         a break in service from another USDA agency must be issued a performance
         rating upon leaving their position.

   (2)   Transferred Ratings. When a senior executive is transferred or reassigned before
         the end of the appraisal period (e.g., reassigned August 1) and will not have
         served in the new position for the minimum appraisal period, the rating official
         may close out the appraisal period as scheduled and assign the initial rating based
         on the interim rating(s) if received from the former position. In the case where no
                                            7
      interim rating(s) was provided from the former agency or position, the rating
      official must extend the appraisal period to the end of the following appraisal
      period on September 30, (e.g., August 1, 2013 to September 30, 2014).

(3)   Details. When a senior executive is detailed or temporarily assigned to another
      organization inside or outside of USDA of 120 days or longer, the gaining
      organization must set performance goals and requirements no later than 30
      calendar days after the effective date of the detail. The gaining organization must
      also appraise the performance in writing and provide the appraisal to the senior
      executive’s rating official of record. The senior executive’s rating official of
      record will factor this appraisal into the initial summary rating. The USDA
      agency must make a reasonable effort to obtain appraisal information from the
      organization that the senior executive was serving the detail.

(4)   Changes in Supervisor. A departing supervisor must provide an interim appraisal
      for all senior executives who have been under their supervision for the minimum
      90-day appraisal period. If at the end of the appraisal period, the new supervisor
      has served for less than the minimum appraisal period, the following options are
      available (See Exhibit 2, Clarification of Rating Official):

      (a)    The new supervisor may give the initial summary rating based on the
             senior executive’s accomplishment narratives, available interim appraisals,
             and other measurable data;

      (b)    The next level supervisor may assign the initial summary rating, if that
             supervisor has been present for the minimum appraisal period; or

      (c)    The appraisal period may be extended to allow a minimum appraisal
             period under the new supervisor before the initial summary rating is given.

      (d)    In all cases, when deriving the initial summary rating at the end of the
             appraisal period, the new supervisor must take into account the interim
             appraisals prepared by previous supervisors.

(5)   Transition Period (Moratorium) – A career executive may not be appraised within
      120 days after the beginning of a new Presidential administration (i.e., the
      administration of a President other than the one in office immediately before the
      beginning of the current administration). When the new President is inaugurated
      on January 20, appraisal actions may not be taken until May 20. The moratorium
      applies to all phases of the formal appraisal process leading to an annual summary
      rating as outlined in Section 10, System Procedures, of this directive. The length
      of the performance appraisal period is not extended by the moratorium, which
      merely delays the appraisal and rating actions.

      The moratorium does not preclude issuing a written appraisal when the senior
      executive changes positions or when the supervisor leaves. A progress review is
                                      8
              not subject to the moratorium. Additionally, a reduction in pay based on a less
              than Fully Successful annual summary rating assigned prior to the beginning of a
              new Presidential administration is not subject to the moratorium.

7.   SYSTEM PROTOCOL

     a. Planning Performance. Supervisors must establish and communicate, in consultation
        with the senior executives, performance plans on or before the beginning of the
        appraisal period. To ensure the plan is an accurate reflection of work, the position
        description, operation/work plan, or any other source that assigns responsibility
        should be reviewed on a regular basis.

        (1)    Performance Plans. The “USDA Executive Performance Agreement”
               establishes a senior executive’s performance expectations on an annual basis.
               All senior executive performance plans must align to the Department’s or
               Agency’s strategic goals and objectives, include balanced and credible measures
               of performance within the standards for the critical element, and identify the
               accomplishment of organizational objectives. Performance plans can be
               modified, as appropriate, during the appraisal period, but no later than June 30
               to reflect changing priorities, programs and objectives or shifts in workload.
               Revisions to the plan made with less than the minimum period (i.e., 90 days)
               left in the official appraisal period will require an extension of the appraisal
               period so the rating official can take into account performance under the revised
               plan. Otherwise, the revised performance requirements cannot be used during
               the current appraisal period.

        (2)    Formally Communicating Expectations. The supervisor or rating official must
               provide each senior executive with a written performance plan at the beginning
               of each appraisal period or within 30 days of an appointment or when the senior
               executive is assigned to a different position with substantially different duties
               and responsibilities (e.g., reassignment or a detail or temporary position for
               more than 120 days).

        (3)    Consultation. Rating officials must involve senior executives in the
               development of their performance plans. Establishing meaningful performance
               plans requires participation of both the supervisor and the senior executive. The
               joint development and participation may occur in the following ways:

               (a)   Senior executive and supervisor discuss and develop the performance plan
                     together;
               (b)   Senior executive provides supervisor with a draft performance plan;
               (c)   Senior executive comments on draft performance plan prepared by the
                     supervisor; or
               (d)   Senior executives who occupy similar positions prepare draft performance
                     plan(s), with the supervisor's approval.

                                              9
      (e)   The final authority for establishing performance plans rests with the rating
            official.

(4)   Certifying the Plan. The senior executive and rating official must sign and date
      the performance plan in Part I. Consultation to certify that it has been discussed
      and the senior executive participated in the development of the performance
      plan. The performance plan is officially established when both signatures
      are completed.

(5)   Critical Elements and Performance Requirements. All senior executive
      performance plans shall include, as a minimum, the following mandatory
      Government-wide critical elements and performance requirements as written
      that describe performance at the fully successful level.

      (a)   Leading Change. Develops and implements an organizational vision that
            integrates key organizational and program goals, priorities, values, and
            other factors. Assesses and adjusts to changing situations, implementing
            innovative solutions to make organizational improvements, ranging from
            incremental improvements to major shifts in direction or approach, as
            appropriate. Balances change and continuity; continually strives to
            improve service and program performance; creates a work environment
            that encourages creative thinking, collaboration, and transparency; and
            maintains program focus, even under adversity.

      (b)   Leading People. Designs and implements strategies that maximize
            employee potential, connects the organization horizontally and vertically,
            and fosters high ethical standards in meeting the organization’s vision,
            mission, and goals. Provides a workplace that fosters the development of
            others to their full potential; allows for full participation by all
            employees; facilitates collaboration, cooperation, and teamwork, and
            supports constructive resolution of conflicts. Ensures employee
            performance plans are aligned with the organization’s mission and goals,
            that employees receive constructive feedback, and that employees are
            realistically appraised against clearly defined and communicated
            performance standards. Holds employees accountable for appropriate
            levels of performance and conduct. Seeks and considers employee input.
            Recruits, retains, and develops the talent needed to achieve high quality
            workforce that reflects the nation, with the skills needed to accomplish
            organizational performance objectives while supporting equal
            employment policies and programs.

      (c)   Business Acumen. Assesses, analyzes, acquires, and administers human,
            financial, material, and information resources in a manner that instills
            public trust and accomplishes the organization’s mission. Uses
            technology to enhance processes and decision making. Executes the

                                     10
            operating budget; prepares budget requests with justifications; and
            manages resources.

      (d)   Building Coalitions. Solicits and considers feedback from internal and
            external stakeholders or customers. Coordinates with appropriate parties
            to maximize input from the widest range of appropriate stakeholders to
            facilitate an open exchange of opinions from groups and strengthen
            internal and external support. Explains, advocates, and expresses facts
            and ideas in a convincing manner and negotiates with individuals and
            groups internally and externally, as appropriate. Develops a professional
            network with other organizations and identifies the internal and external
            politics that affect the work of the organization.

      (e)   Results Driven. This critical element includes specific performance
            results expected from the executive during the appraisal period, focusing
            on measurable outcomes from the strategic plan or other measurable
            outputs and outcomes clearly aligned to organizational goals and
            objectives. At a minimum, the performance plan will include performance
            requirements (including measures, targets, timelines, or quality
            descriptors, as appropriate) describing the range of performance at Level 3
            for each result specified.

            The Results-Driven critical element must also identify clear, transparent
            alignment to relevant Agency or organizational goals/objectives, page
            numbers, from the Strategic Plan, Congressional Budget
            Justification/Annual Performance Plan, or other organizational planning
            document in the designated section for each performance result specified.

(6)   Additional Performance Requirements. Additional Agency-specific
      performance requirements may be included for a critical element. These may be
      written as competencies or specific results/commitments associated with the
      element(s), but must be written at the fully successful level.

      (a)   Descriptions of additional performance requirements for Levels 5 and 2
            are permitted, especially when describing results. The senior executive, in
            collaboration with his/her supervisor, should establish and clarify
            thresholds or measures/targets for these levels.

      (b)   The Secretary reserves the right to establish additional USDA
            performance requirements that apply to all senior executives such as
            addressing USDA priorities for improving leadership initiatives or
            conducting and managing USDA programs as regulated by the EEOC, and
            Federal law or OPM or OMB regulations. OHRM will provide guidance
            on how these requirements should be incorporated into the senior
            executive’s performance plan.

                                     11
(7)   Critical Element Weights.

      (a)   The ERB will establish the minimum weight values for each critical
            element prior to the beginning of the appraisal period for the Secretary’s
            approval. Based on Agency priorities, these weight value requirements
            may vary on an annual basis and will generally be consistent for all senior
            executives in USDA.
      (b)   The OHRM will provide Agency-wide guidance on how these
            requirements are assigned to the critical elements.
      (c)   Each critical element must be assigned a weight value, with the total
            weights equaling 100 percent.
      (d)   The minimum weight that can be assigned to the Results Driven critical
            element is 20 percent; and the minimum weight that can be assigned to the
            other four critical elements is 5 percent. No single performance element
            can be assigned a greater weight than the Results Driven element.

(8) Performance Standards.

      The performance standard for each critical element is specified below.

      (a)   Level 5: The executive demonstrates exceptional performance, fostering a
            climate that sustains excellence and optimizes results in the executive’s
            organization, agency, department or government-wide. This represents
            the highest level of executive performance, as evidenced by the
            extraordinary impact on the achievement of the organization’s mission.
            The executive is an inspirational leader and is considered a role model by
            agency leadership, peers, and employees. The executive continually
            contributes materially to or spearheads agency efforts that address or
            accomplish important agency goals, consistently achieves expectations at
            the highest level of quality possible, and consistently handles challenges,
            exceeds targets, and completes assignments ahead of schedule at every
            step along the way. Performance may be demonstrated in such ways as
            the following examples:

            o    Overcomes unanticipated barriers or intractable problems by
                 developing creative solutions that address program concerns that
                 could adversely affect the organization, agency, or Government.
            o    Through leadership by example, creates a work environment that
                 fosters creative thinking and innovation; fosters core process re-
                 engineering; and accomplishment of established organizational
                 performance targets.
            o    Takes the initiative to identify new opportunities for program and
                 policy development and implementation or seeks more opportunities
                 to contribute to optimizing results; takes calculated risks to
                 accomplish organizational objectives.
            o    Accomplishes objectives even under demands and time pressure
                                      12
           beyond those typically found in the executive environment.
      o    Achieves results of significant value to the organization, agency, or
           Government.
      o    Achieves significant efficiencies or cost-savings in program delivery
           or in daily operational costs of the organization.

(b)   Level 4: The executive demonstrates a very high level of performance
      beyond that required for successful performance in the executive’s
      position and scope of responsibilities. The executive is a proven, highly
      effective leader who builds trust and instills confidence in agency
      leadership, peers, and employees. The executive consistently exceeds
      established performance expectations, timelines, or targets, as applicable.
      Performance may be demonstrated in such ways as the following:

      o    Advances progress significantly toward achieving one or more
           strategic goals.
      o    Demonstrates unusual resourcefulness in dealing with program
           operations or policy challenges.
      o    Achieves unexpected results that advance the goals and objectives of
           the organization, agency, or Government.

(c)   Level 3: The executive demonstrates the high level of performance
      expected and the executive’s actions and leadership contribute positively
      toward the achievement of strategic goals and meaningful results. The
      executive is an effective, solid, and dependable leader who delivers high-
      quality results based on measures of quality, quantity, efficiency, and/or
      effectiveness within agreed upon timelines. The executive meets and often
      exceeds challenging performance expectations established for the position.
      Performance may be demonstrated in such ways as the following:

      o      Seizes opportunities to address issues and effects change when
             needed.
      o      Finds solutions to serious problems and champions their adoption.
      o      Designs strategies leading to improvements.

(d)   Level 2: The executive’s contributions to the organization are acceptable
      in the short term but do not appreciably advance the organization towards
      achievement of its goals and objectives. While the executive generally
      meets established performance expectations, timelines and targets, there
      are occasional lapses that impair operations and/or cause concern from
      management. While showing basic ability to accomplish work through
      others, the executive may demonstrate limited ability to inspire
      subordinates to give their best efforts or to marshal those efforts
      effectively to address problems characteristic of the organization and its
      work.

                               13
         (e)   Level 1: In repeated instances, the executive demonstrates performance
               deficiencies that detract from mission goals and objectives. The senior
               executive generally is viewed as ineffectual by agency leadership, peers,
               or employees. The executive does not meet established performance
               expectations/timelines/targets and fails to produce – or produces
               unacceptable – work products, services, or outcomes.

b. Monitoring Performance. Monitoring performance includes offering regular and
   recurring feedback, conducting progress reviews, and providing and/or arranging for
   training.

   (1)   Monitor and Provide Feedback. A supervisor must monitor performance in
         accomplishing the critical elements and performance requirements in the senior
         executive’s performance plan. This entails providing ongoing, timely, and
         honest feedback, including advice and assistance on improving performance
         when needed, and encouragement and positive reinforcement, as appropriate. If
         the rating official feels that the senior executive’s performance in one or more
         of the critical elements is lacking, he/she should discuss possible corrective
         actions as well as the ramifications of unimproved performance.

   (2)   Progress Review. Rating officials must conduct at least one progress review
         during the appraisal period. At a minimum the senior executive must be
         informed how well he/she is performing against performance requirements.
         These reviews will also be used as an opportunity to give advice and assistance
         on how to improve performance, identify developmental needs, and/or update
         performance plans.

         Rating officials may revise a senior executive’s performance plan whenever
         they determine there is a need, provided that the revision occurs at least 90 days
         prior to the end of the performance year, or no later than June 30. For example,
         plans may be revised to reflect:

         (a)   New organizational goals and objectives,
         (b)   Outside influences beyond a senior executive’s control that make the
               original goals and standards unachievable,
         (c)   Changes in work assignments, and/or
         (d)   New organizational or management priorities.

         Approval of such modifications must be recorded on the original performance
         plan with the initials and dates of both the rating official and senior executive.
         Senior executives and rating officials must acknowledge in writing in the
         appropriate area on the Executive Performance Agreement that this review has
         occurred.

c. Developing Performance. Senior executives must establish and regularly update an
   Executive Development Plan for continued learning and development as required by
                                     14
   5 CFR 412.401. Developing performance is an ongoing part of the performance
   management process. Developmental opportunities may include classroom training,
   on-the-job-training, mentoring, special assignments, and details/reassignments,
   participating in professional and technical organizations, group performance
   meetings, process improvement teams, and self-development activities. Supervisors
   will encourage employees to seek professional and technical development
   opportunities to enhance their contribution to the Department, Agency and/or Staff
   Office goals.

d. Evaluating Performance. Rating officials must appraise each critical element
   (Leading Change, Leading People, Business Acumen, Building Coalitions, and
   Results Driven) by assessing the senior executive’s accomplishments against the
   performance standards defined in the performance plan. The element ratings will
   determine the initial summary rating for the senior executive’s performance.

   (1)   When preparing to rate senior executives, the rating official shall:

         (a)   Evaluate the senior executive’s performance in comparison to the
               established performance plan,
         (b)   Consider both individual and organizational performance during the
               appraisal,
         (c)   Base the rating on actual accomplishments while the senior executive was
               performing the work,
         (d)   Not assign a presumptive or assumed rating (i.e., the senior executive had
               insufficient opportunity to demonstrate performance),
         (e)   Factor any relevant Agency-wide assessment ratings, e.g., leadership, civil
               rights, organizational, etc., as appropriate, into the element rating, and
         (f)   Appraise the senior executive realistically and fairly to make meaningful
               distinctions based on relative performance.

   (2)   Results Driven. This element holds the senior executive accountable for
         achieving business results. Rating officials are required to rate each
         performance requirement for the Results Driven element by assessing the senior
         executive’s accomplishments for each performance requirement against the
         performance standards. In addition, both individual and organizational
         performance needs to be considered. To determine the element rating, the rating
         official will use the following criteria:

         (a)   Outstanding – All performance requirements for Results Driven are rated
               Outstanding.
         (b)   Exceeds Fully Successful – A majority of the performance requirements
               for Results Driven are rated at least Exceeds Fully Successful or
               Outstanding with none below Fully Successful.
         (c)   Fully Successful – A majority of the performance requirements for Results
               Driven are rated at least Fully Successful with none below Fully
               Successful.
                                         15
      (d)   Minimally Satisfactory – One or more performance requirements for
            Results Driven are rated Minimally Satisfactory.
      (e)   Unsatisfactory – One or more performance requirements for Results
            Driven are rated Unsatisfactory.
      (f)   When no majority exists, the rating official will use all performance
            information to determine the rating of the critical elements (applies to
            Levels 3 and 4).

(3)   Executive Accomplishment Narrative. Senior executives must provide an
      accomplishment report to their rating officials near the end of the appraisal
      period as instructed in OHRM guidance. This report will address the
      completion of any objectives and goals identified in the performance plan as
      well as the accomplishments and achievements made during the appraisal
      period. The senior executive may use Part 7: Executive’s Accomplishment
      Narrative or attach his/her accomplishments.

(4)   Rating Official Narrative. Rating officials must provide an overall narrative
      justification of the initial summary rating in Part 6: Summary Rating Narrative
      of the performance plan. A written justification is required in the senior
      executive’s plan for any critical element rated Level 5 or below Level 3.

(5)   Element Rating Levels and Initial Summary Rating. Once the element ratings
      are determined, rating officials will assign the corresponding points for the
      performance level to derive the initial summary rating on “Part 4. Derivation
      Formula and Calculation of Annual Summary Rating” of the senior executive’s
      performance plan.

      (a)   Level 5 = 5 points
      (b)   Level 4 = 4 points
      (c)   Level 3 = 3 points
      (d)   Level 2 = 2 points
      (e)   Level 1 = 0 points

      (NOTE: If any critical element is rated Level 1 (Unsatisfactory), the overall
      summary rating is Unsatisfactory.)

      To derive the “initial point score” for each critical element, multiply the
      performance level point value by the assigned weight value then add the initial
      point scores for each of the five critical elements to derive at the total score.
      Use the total score to assign the initial summary rating using the ranges below
      and record the initial summary rating on “Part 3. Summary Rating” of the senior
      executive’s performance plan:

      (f)   475-500 = Level 5
      (g)   400-474 = Level 4
      (h)   300-399 = Level 3
                                      16
                (i)   200-299 = Level 2
                (j)   Any critical element rated Level 1 = Level 1

                The table below provides an example, which derives at an initial summary
                rating of Level 4 (Exceeds Fully Successful): Leading Change was rated Level
                4 (4 points) and weighted at 15% = 60; Leading People was rated Level 5 (5
                points) and weighted at 15% = 75. Once all elements are scored, they were
                added together for a sum of 400. As indicated in the “Summary Level Range”, a
                sum of 400 falls within the Level 4 range; therefore, the initial summary rating
                will be Level 4.

                      Initial Element                    Initial Point
                                                                          Summary Level Range
 Critical Element      Rating Level        Weight           Score
1. Leading
                             4               15          4 x 15 = 60
Change
2. Leading People            5               15          5 x 15 = 75        475-500 = Level 5
3. Business                                                                 400-474 = Level 4
                             3               15          3 x 15 = 45        300-399 = Level 3
Acumen
4. Building                                                                 200-299 = Level 2
                             4               15          4 x 15 = 60      Any CE rated Level 1 =
Coalitions
5. Results Driven            4               40         4 x 40 = 160             Level 1
 Total                                      100%             400

      e. Approval of Ratings. The rating official determines the initial summary rating in
         writing, and must also get the reviewing official’s concurrence before communicating
         the initial summary rating to the senior executive. The concurrence should include
         discussions to:

          (a)   Ensure the assessment of senior executive’s performance is consistent with the
                organization’s overall performance,
          (b)   Consider additional information regarding the senior executive’s performance
                that may further impact the rating,
          (c)   Resolve any issues regarding the senior executive’s performance, and
          (d)   Obtain the reviewing official’s signature in “Part 3. Summary Rating” of the
                senior executive’s performance plan.

          The rating official will prepare the required documentation and informs the senior
          executive of his/her initial summary rating. If the senior executive disagrees with the
          initial rating, then the rating official must advise that he/she may respond in writing to
          any aspect of the initial rating within 5 calendar days after receiving the initial
          summary rating. The senior executive should sign his/her performance plan.
          Signature constitutes receipt of the initial rating, not agreement. If the discussion
          cannot take place or the senior executive refuses to sign, the rating official must
          document the reason for not having the senior executive’s signature.


                                                17
   The rating and reviewing officials must consider the additional information and
   decide whether or not it warrants changing the initial summary rating. If no
   agreement is reached, the senior executive may request a higher-level review of
   his/her initial summary rating.

f. Opportunity for Higher-Level Review. A senior executive may request a higher-level
   review by indicating on the appraisal form that he/she would like the review
   conducted. The higher-level review will be conducted unless it is not possible (e.g.,
   the initial rater is the head of an executive agency and there is no employee at a
   higher level in the agency). Upon the request of an affected senior executive, USDA
   must provide a complete explanation of its basis for concluding that the higher-level
   review, as defined by law, is not possible.

   (a)   Senior Executive. The senior executive only has one opportunity for a higher-
         level review of his/her initial summary rating prior to commencement of the
         PRB. He/she must complete the “higher-level review” section of the
         performance plan and provide a written request via e-mail or memorandum
         using, Exhibit 3 - Request for a Higher-Level Review, to the rating official.
         ERMD in conjunction with the ASA’s office will determine the higher-level
         reviewer.

   (b)   Rating Official. The rating official will forward the senior executive’s
         performance plan, accomplishments report, written response, and any other
         documentation provided by the senior executive to ERMD.

   (c)   Higher-Level Reviewer. In conjunction with the ASA’s office, ERMD will
         determine and coordinate with the designated higher-level reviewer to conduct
         the review. The higher-level review will be conducted:

         1    At a higher organizational level than the rating official, but not necessarily
              within the same organization (should one exist);

         2    By someone who was not involved in the initial summary rating process;

         3    To review all documentation and present findings that may result in
              recommending a different rating to the PRB, but cannot change the rating
              official’s initial summary rating; and

         4    For the higher-level reviewer to provide a written recommendation to
              ERMD within 5 days of receiving the senior executive’s request.

         The higher-level reviewer will complete the Exhibit 4, Higher-Level Reviewer
         Response and provide it to ERMD. ERMD will forward the entire appraisal
         package (performance plan, accomplishment report, senior executive’s written
         response, and the higher-level reviewer’s recommendation) to the PRB. ERMD

                                        18
         will also provide a copy of the higher-level reviewer’s recommendation to the
         senior executive, rating official and reviewing official.

g. Distribution of Ratings. A forced or prescribed distribution of rating levels for senior
   executives is prohibited. USDA administers the SES performance management
   system to ensure that policies and practices do not lead to pre-determined ratings.

h. Rewarding Performance. Pay adjustments and cash awards based on the results of the
   appraisal process should demonstrate meaningful distinctions by accurately reflecting
   and recognizing individual performance and/or contributions to the Agency’s
   performance.

   (1)   Annual compensation guidelines for performance-based pay adjustments and
         awards must be approved by the Secretary prior to the Performance Review
         Board process. These guidelines will be reviewed and recommended by the
         ERB.

   (2)   The “USDA Executive Performance Agreement” is the official form to
         document the senior executive’s performance rating. The annual summary
         rating of a senior executive is the basis for individual performance recognition,
         i.e., performance-based pay adjustment or performance award.

   (3)   A written justification is required for a recommendation for performance-based
         pay adjustment and/or performance award. The mandatory “Summary Rating
         Narrative” submitted by the rating official in Part 6 of the Executive
         Performance Agreement in addition to the executive’s accomplishment report
         will serve as the written justification.

   (4)   Eligibility for performance-based pay adjustments will be consistent with
         USDA’s “SES Pay Policy” for adjusting individual pay for senior executives.
         Performance-based adjustments will be based on demonstrated individual
         performance and contributions to organizational and mission success. These
         adjustments should make meaningful distinctions based on relative
         performance. The White House Liaison must be consulted on any adjustments
         to basic pay for noncareer senior executives. Performance-based pay increases
         restart the clock under the 12-month rule.

   (5)   Eligibility for a performance award requires:

         (a)   A career SES appointee as of the end of the appraisal period with an
               annual summary rating of at least Level 3 (Fully Successful),
         (b)   A former SES career appointee who elected to retain award eligibility
               under 5 CFR 317, subpart H (e.g., political appointee),
         (c)   A reemployed annuitant with an SES career appointment, or
         (d)   An individual who is no longer in the SES at the time the performance
               award decision is made, but who was an SES career appointee at the end
                                       19
               of the appraisal period.

         Receiving a performance award does not preclude the senior executive from
         receiving other forms of recognition provided the recognition is not for the same
         accomplishment.

   (6)   Ineligibility for a performance award:

         (a)   Senior executives on limited term or limited emergency appointments and
               non-career senior executives are not eligible for performance awards, but
               may be eligible for performance-based salary adjustments.
         (b)   Any senior executive who is rated Level 2 (Minimally Satisfactory) or
               Level 1 (Unsatisfactory) and is recommended for corrective action. The
               rating official is required to provide a written narrative/justification.

   (7)   The Senior Performance Official will review and analyze all recommendations
         by the PRB before it goes to the Secretary for final approval. Any issues will be
         resolved by the Senior Performance Official in consultation with the chair of the
         PRB prior to submission of recommendations to the Secretary.

   (8)   ERMD initiates obtaining the Secretary’s approval of the initial summary
         ratings, proposed performance awards, performance-based pay adjustments, and
         any other personnel actions, as applicable. ERMD provides copies of the final
         approved performance appraisals to the senior executives and the rating
         officials. The original appraisals will be processed and retained in the Official
         Personnel File (OPF) or Employee Performance File (EPF).

i. Performance Review Boards (PRB).

   (1)   Eligibility for PRB review. To be eligible for PRB evaluation, a senior
         executive should be on Agency rolls as of September 30, and have been on an
         established plan for the minimum appraisal period, and received a performance
         rating. This includes a senior executive serving their 1-year probationary
         period.

         A senior executive, who is newly appointed to their position after June 30, will
         not be eligible for PRB evaluation, since he/she will not have an established
         plan for the minimum appraisal period at the end of the appraisal period.

   (2)   PRB. USDA shall establish one or more PRBs to make written
         recommendations on annual summary ratings and performance compensation to
         the appointing authority on the performance of senior executives. Members
         shall be appointed in accordance with 5 CFR 430.310.

   (3)   Membership Number. Each PRB must have 3 or more members selected by the
         agency head or designee(s) in a manner that ensures consistency, stability, and
                                       20
         objectivity in SES performance appraisal. Members will be appointed by the
         PRB Chair(s) and approved by the Secretary. PRB appointments shall be
         published in the Federal Register before service begins.

   (4)   Career Membership. More than one-half of the PRB members shall be career
         appointees when considering a career appointee’s appraisal or performance
         award. PRB members must not be engaged in deliberations involving their own
         appraisals.

   (5)   Review Ratings. The PRB shall review and evaluate the initial appraisal and
         summary rating, the senior executive’s response, any recommendation by a
         higher-level reviewer, and conduct any additional review necessary to make
         written recommendations to the Secretary of Agriculture on annual summary
         ratings, performance awards and, as applicable, performance-based pay
         adjustments for each senior executive. The Secretary makes the final decision
         with regard to the annual ratings to be assigned and related personnel actions
         after considering PRB recommendations. The annual summary rating approved
         by the Secretary becomes the senior executive’s official rating of record.

   (6)   Executive Response. The PRB shall not be provided a proposed initial
         summary rating to which the senior executive has not been given an opportunity
         to respond in writing.

   (7)   Agency/Organizational Performance. The PRB must be provided and take into
         account appropriate assessments of the Agency/organization’s performance
         when making recommendations.

j. Authority for Annual Summary Rating. The annual summary rating shall be assigned
   by the appointing authority, i.e., the Secretary of Agriculture and may not be
   delegated to an official who does not have authority to make SES appointments, and
   only after considering the recommendations of the PRB.

k. Processing and Retention of Performance Ratings.

   (1)   Due dates established by Departmental guidance must be adhered to ensure
         proper and timely review by PRBs.

   (2)   Performance records must be maintained in accordance with the procedures set
         forth in 5 CFR 293, Personnel Records; 5 CFR 297, Privacy Act Procedures for
         Personnel Records; and any Departmental Directives and Regulations
         concerning the Privacy Act and Freedom of Information Act. Annual summary
         ratings and the supporting performance plans must be maintained for 5 years
         from the date the annual summary rating is issued. Rating officials must
         comply with the above authorities in their maintenance and distribution of
         performance records.

                                       21
   (3)   When a senior executive’s OPF is sent to another Federal Department, or the
         National Personnel Records Center, ERMD must include the last five annual
         summary ratings and performance plans, including the most recent rating and
         the interim appraisal rating prepared when the senior executive changes
         positions. The ERMD Performance Management Branch will purge all
         performance ratings, performance plans, and the supporting performance-related
         documents that are more than 5 years old from the eOPF or EPF.

l. Other System Requirements.


   (1)   Appraisal Results. Results of performance appraisal will be used as a basis for
         adjusting pay, granting awards, determining training needs and making other
         personnel decisions. The appraisal results of the average rating, pay, and
         awards of the previous appraisal period are communicated to all senior
         executive members.

   (2)   Organizational Assessment and Guidelines. USDA must assess organizational
         performance (overall and with respect to each of the particular missions,
         components, programs, policy areas, and support functions). USDA agencies
         must also ensure the assessment results and evaluation guidelines based upon
         them are communicated by the agency head (or another official designated by
         the agency head) to senior executives, rating officials, higher level review
         officials and PRBs so that they may be considered in preparing performance
         appraisals, ratings and recommendations.

   (3)   Oversight. The Secretary, or his/her designee, provides organizational
         assessments and evaluation guidelines and is responsible to oversee the system
         and to certify: 1) the appraisal process makes meaningful distinctions based on
         relative performance; 2) executive ratings take into account assessments of
         organizational performance; and 3) pay adjustments, awards and pay levels
         accurately reflect individual and organizational performance. The responsible
         official designated to provide evaluation guidelines and oversee the appraisal
         system must do so for the entire USDA agency.

   (4)   Performance Distinctions. Rating officials and PRBs must make meaningful
         distinctions based on relative performance that take into account assessment of
         the Agency’s performance against relevant program performance measures.

   (5)   Differences in Pay Based on Performance. Senior executives who have
         demonstrated the highest levels of performance must receive the highest annual
         summary ratings and the largest corresponding pay adjustments, cash awards
         and levels of pay, and be appropriately positioned in the pay range.

   (6)   Savings Provision. Administrative actions initiated against employees whose
         performance is “Unsatisfactory” under 5 U.S.C. 4303 and the USDA
                                       22
              Performance Management Plan or another program in existence prior to the
              effective date of this Program, shall continue to be processed consistent with
              that pre-established set of procedures and requirements.


8.   DEALING WITH POOR PERFORMANCE

     a. During the appraisal period, if the rating official determines a senior executive’s
        performance to be less than fully successful in one or more of the established
        elements, the rating official must discuss possible corrective actions as well as the
        ramifications for unimproved performance. Senior executives with an annual
        summary rating of “Minimally Satisfactory” or “Unsatisfactory” may have their base
        salary decreased by a percentage, as determined by the Secretary. Written notice of at
        least 15 days in advance of the reduction in pay is required by law.

     b. Contact Human Resources. Supervisors and managers are strongly encouraged to
        contact OHRM for additional advice and guidance when addressing less than fully
        successful performance.

     c. Minimally Satisfactory Performance. If a senior executive receives a “Minimally
        Satisfactory” rating of record, the rating official must provide advice and assistance to
        improve his/her performance before the next annual summary rating. Minimally
        satisfactory performance permits a 1 year period to show improvement.

     d. Addressing Unacceptable Performance. At any time during the performance
        appraisal period where a senior executive’s performance is determined to be
        unacceptable in one or more critical elements, the rating official must:

        (1)   Notify the senior executive, in writing, of the critical element(s) for which
              performance is unacceptable,
        (2)   Inform the senior executive of the performance requirement(s) that must be
              attained to demonstrate acceptable performance, and
        (3)   Inform the senior executive that unless his/her performance in the critical
              element(s) improves to and is sustained at an acceptable level, the senior
              executive may be reassigned, reduced in pay or removed.

     e. Performance or Misconduct. When deciding whether the actions of a senior executive
        are misconduct or performance related, the following laws shall be reviewed: 5
        U.S.C. 3592 (Removal from the Senior Executive Service) and 5 U.S.C. 7543 (Cause
        and Procedure).

     f. Performance Actions. The Agency shall:

        (1)   Optional Removal – One Unsatisfactory rating: Reassign, transfer or remove a
              senior executive from the SES who has been assigned an “Unsatisfactory” final
              rating of record. The senior executive must be placed in a position outside the
                                              23
      SES or in another position in the SES for which he/she is qualified.

(2)   Mandatory Removal – Two Less-than-Fully Successful Ratings: Remove a
      career senior executive from the SES when he/she receives the final ratings of
      record:

      (a)   Two ratings of “Unsatisfactory” within 5 consecutive years,
      (b)   Two ratings of “Minimally Satisfactory” within 3 consecutive years, or
      (c)   One rating of “Unsatisfactory” and one rating of “Minimally Satisfactory”
            within 3 consecutive years.

(3)   The final ratings of record used to support the removal action may have been
      assigned under two different SES performance appraisal systems, or by two
      different agencies.

(4)   A career appointee who has completed his/her probationary period and who is
      being removed from the SES for less than fully successful performance is
      entitled to a 30-day advance written notice of such action. A career appointee
      who is removed from SES for less than fully successful performance is entitled
      to be placed in a civil service position (other than a SES position) at the GS-15
      or above, or equivalent.

(5)   The removal of a career senior executive for performance reasons is subject to
      the 120-day moratorium, except for a removal based on an “Unsatisfactory”
      rating given before the appointment of a new agency head or non-career
      supervisor that initiated the action. This covers:

      (a)   An optional removal based on one “Unsatisfactory” rating,
      (b)   A mandatory removal based on two “Unsatisfactory” ratings in 5 years,
            and
      (c)   A mandatory removal based on two less than fully successful ratings in 3
            years.

(6)   Senior executives that are noncareer, limited emergency or limited term, and
      reemployed annuitants holding any type of appointment under the SES may be
      reassigned or removed at any time. However, limited emergency or limited
      term senior executives removed for disciplinary reasons are covered under 5
      CFR 752.601(c)(2). Regulations require that non-career and limited term SES
      receive notice in writing at least one day before the effective date of a removal.

(7)   Probationary career appointees are removed under procedures in 5 CFR 359
      subpart D. (Nothing here shall be interpreted to limit removal of probationary
      senior executives as permitted by current regulations.) Non-probationary career
      appointees are removed under procedures in 5 CFR 359 subpart E. Guaranteed
      placement in a non-SES position will be provided under 5 CFR 359 subpart G
      when applicable.
                                     24
        (8)   Appeal Rights. Senior executive performance appraisals and ratings may not be
              appealed. The senior executive may file a complaint about any aspect of the
              rating process the senior executive believes to involve unlawful discrimination
              (EEOC) or a prohibited personnel practice (Office of Special Counsel). A
              career appointee being removed from the SES under 5 U.S.C. 3592(a)(2) shall,
              at least 15 days preceding the date of removal, be entitled upon request to an
              informal hearing before an official designated by the Merit Systems Protection
              Board (MSPB).

        (9)   A removal for performance is not appealable to the MSPB. However, a career
              senior executive may request an informal hearing before MSPB at least 15 days
              before the effective date of removal. A career senior executive and/or a
              representative may appear and present arguments. The conduct of an informal
              hearing does not delay the effective date of the removal. MSPB has indicated
              that it lacks authority to change a performance rating or to order a specific
              remedy, however, it can comment on the senior executive’s arguments and
              recommend appropriate action if a serious defect in the personnel action is
              manifest (e.g., misapplication of relevant statutory provisions, departure from
              important procedural rights).

9.   LINKING PERFORMANCE TO OTHER PERSONNEL ACTIONS

     a. Annual Summary Rating. The rating of record has a bearing on various other
        personnel actions, such as probationary periods, promotions, training and
        development, pay adjustments, performance awards, and determining additional
        retention service credit in a reduction in force. A summary rating of at least “Fully
        Successful” will provide the basis for a senior executive’s retention in the SES pay
        system and will establish the senior executive’s eligibility for consideration for
        performance awards and performance-based pay increases.

     b. Probationary Period. An assessment of the appointee’s performance during
        the probationary period by the appointing authority is required to make an
        official determination that the appointee is performing at the level of
        excellence expected of a senior executive. The probationary period provides a
        method by which supervisors should initiate action to remove the executive
        from the SES if it becomes apparent, after full and fair consideration, that the
        executive's performance is not suitable for satisfactory work.

        (1)   New career SES must serve a 1-year probationary period. Satisfactory
              completion of the probationary period is a pre-requisite for retention in
              the SES. The probationary period begins on the effective date of the
              initial SES career appointment and ends one calendar year later.

        (2)   The supervisor of the new career SES has the following responsibilities
              during the probationary period:
                                            25
               (a)   Must follow through on Agency initiated or Qualifications Review Board
                     recommended training,

               (b)   Observe the employee’s performance and conduct,

               (c)   Hold periodic, documented discussions of progress with the employee
                     clearly outlining strengths and weaknesses of the employee in relation to
                     the performance requirements,

               (d)   Complete Form AD-3073, Senior Executive Service Probationary Period
                     Certification, and an interim rating on the SES Appraisal Record, and
                     submit to OHRM at least 60 days prior to completion of the employee’s
                     probationary period. If the employee’s performance is evaluated as less
                     than fully successful, appropriate supporting documentation must be
                     submitted with the probationary period package, and

               (e)   If the probationer’s managerial or professional/technical performance is
                     unacceptable, consider whether remedial action (such as specialized
                     training or assignment to other SES duties) or removal action, is
                     appropriate.

10.   PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT TRAINING REQUIREMENTS

      a. ERMD will provide annual training to rating and reviewing officials and senior
         executives on performance management, including the process and procedures for
         planning and appraising performance. Once the rating process is completed,
         information will be communicated on the overall rating distributions and average
         performance awards and pay adjustments that were approved.

      b. ERMD is responsible for training new senior executives upon entering SES; for
         including content on SES performance management in supervisory training sessions;
         and for providing refresher training, briefings, and information on all aspects of the
         performance management system on a regular recurring basis for all senior
         executives.

      c. Performance management training must include the following components:

         (1)   The concepts and practical use of performance management,
         (2)   Managing performance for results,
         (3)   Linking individual performance to organizational goals,
         (4)   The performance appraisal process,
         (5)   Establishing and applying objective measures of performance,
         (6)   Using rewards and recognition to achieve and sustain higher levels of
               performance,
         (7)   Addressing performance deficiencies,
                                             26
         (8) Developing competencies,
         (9) Giving and receiving feedback, and
         (10) Communicating organizational performance with employees.

      e. Methodologies used to train senior executives may include:
         (1)   Classroom;
         (2)   Automated or online training modules such as AgLearn;
         (3)   Distance learning programs;
         (4)   Formal and informal discussions between supervisors and employees;
         (5)   Senior executive briefings;
         (6)   Supervisory and leadership training;
         (7)   Webcast training; and
         (8)   Senior executive orientation materials.

11.   PERFORMANCE APPRAISAL SYSTEM EVALUATION

      a. The Senior Performance Official is responsible for evaluating data and feedback from
         the PRBs and advising the Secretary and the Secretary’s ERB along with other key
         officials of any changes or corrective actions associated with the performance
         management system. Changes and corrective action are taken in collaboration with
         the Office of Human Resources Management.

      b. USDA shall evaluate its SES performance appraisal system as required for OPM and
         OMB system certification.


                                           -END-




                                             27
Exhibit 1
                               SES Performance Management System
                                 Executive Performance Agreement

Part 1. Consultation. I have reviewed this plan and have been consulted on its development.
Executive’s Name (Last, First, MI):                                                   Appraisal Pd:
Executive’s Signature:                                                                Date:
Title:                                                                                Organization:
Rating Official’s Name (Last, First, MI):                                             CA       NC      LT/LE
Rating Official’s Signature:                                                          Date:
Part 2. Progress Review
Executive’s Signature:                                                                Date:
Rating Official’s Signature:                                                          Date:
Reviewing Official’s Signature (Optional):                                            Date:
Part 3. Summary Rating
Initial         Level 5                  Level 4                     Level 3           Level 2           Level 1
Summary      Outstanding              Exceeds Fully              Fully             Minimally          Unsatisfactory
Rating                                Successful                 Successful        Satisfactory
Rating Official’s Name (Last, First, MI):
Rating Official’s Signature:                                                          Date:
Reviewing Official’s Signature (second-level official’s concurrence):
                                                                                      Date:

Executive’s Signature:                                                                Date:
Higher Level Review (if applicable)
    I request a higher level review.     Executive’s Initials:                        Date:
Higher Level Review Completed                                                         Date:
Higher Level Reviewer Signature:

                                                             Level                 Level
Performance Review Board Recommendation                              Level                    Level      Level 1
                                                        5                      3
                                                                     4                        2
PRB Chair Signature:                                                                          Date:

                                                             Level                 Level
Annual Summary Rating                                                Level                    Level      Level 1
                                                        5                      3
                                                                     4                        2
Appointing Authority Signature:                                                               Date:


                                                        28
Part 4. Derivation Formula and Calculation of Annual Summary Rating
                    Element Rating                               Score
                                  Final                               Final
  Critical                         (if                                 (if
 Element           Initial      changed)    Weight     Initial      changed)   Summary Level Ranges
1. Leading
                                           x
Change
2. Leading
                                           x
People
3.                                                                               475-500 = Level 5
Business                                   x                                     400-474 = Level 4
Acumen                                                                           300-399 = Level 3
4.                                                                               200-299 = Level 2
Building                                   x                                   Any CE rated Level 1 =
Coalitions                                                                            Level 1
5. Results
                                           x
Driven
Total                                      100%
Part 5. Critical Elements

    ▪   Performance Standards for Critical Elements (The performance standard for each
        critical element is specified below; examples for the top three performance levels can be
        found in the system description). Level 5: The executive demonstrates exceptional
        performance, fostering a climate that sustains excellence and optimizes results in the
        executive’s organization, agency, department or government-wide. This represents the
        highest level of executive performance, as evidenced by the extraordinary impact on the
        achievement of the organization’s mission. The executive is an inspirational leader and is
        considered a role model by agency leadership, peers, and employees. The executive
        continually contributes materially to or spearheads agency efforts that address or
        accomplish important agency goals, consistently achieves expectations at the highest
        level of quality possible, and consistently handles challenges, exceeds targets, and
        completes assignments ahead of schedule at every step along the way.


    ▪   Level 4: The executive demonstrates a very high level of performance beyond that
        required for successful performance in the executive’s position and scope of
        responsibilities. The executive is a proven, highly effective leader who builds trust and
        instills confidence in agency leadership, peers, and employees. The executive
        consistently exceeds established performance expectations, timelines, or targets, as
        applicable.


    ▪   Level 3: The executive demonstrates the high level of performance expected and the

                                                  29
       executive’s actions and leadership contribute positively toward the achievement of
       strategic goals and meaningful results. The executive is an effective, solid, and
       dependable leader who delivers high-quality results based on measures of quality,
       quantity, efficiency, and/or effectiveness within agreed upon timelines. The executive
       meets and often exceeds challenging performance expectations established for the
       position.


   ▪   Level 2: The executive’s contributions to the organization are acceptable in the short
       term but do not appreciably advance the organization towards achievement of its goals
       and objectives. While the executive generally meets established performance
       expectations, timelines and targets, there are occasional lapses that impair operations
       and/or cause concern from management. While showing basic ability to accomplish work
       through others, the executive may demonstrate limited ability to inspire subordinates to
       give their best efforts or to marshal those efforts effectively to address problems
       characteristic of the organization and its work.


   ▪   Level 1: In repeated instances, the executive demonstrates performance deficiencies that
       detract from mission goals and objectives. The executive generally is viewed as
       ineffectual by agency leadership, peers, or employees. The executive does not meet
       established performance expectations/timelines/targets and fails to produce – or produces
       unacceptable – work products, services, or outcomes.


Element Rating Level Points
                                                                                    Level 5 = 5 points
                                                                                    Level 4 = 4 points
                                                                                    Level 3 = 3 points
                                                                                    Level 2 = 2 points
                                                                                    Level 1 = 0 points



Critical Element 1. Leading Change
Develops and implements an organizational vision that integrates key organizational and program goals,
priorities, values, and other factors. Assesses and adjusts to changing situations, implementing
innovative solutions to make organizational improvements, ranging from incremental improvements to
major shifts in direction or approach, as appropriate. Balances change and continuity; continually
strives to improve service and program performance; creates a work environment that encourages
creative thinking, collaboration, and transparency; and maintains program focus, even under adversity.




                                                  30
Agency-Specific Performance Requirements




Rating Official Narrative: (Mandatory for Level 5 and below Level 3 Element Ratings)




Critical Element Rating – Leading
                                          Level 5        Level 4      Level 3      Level 2       Level 1
Change


Critical Element 2. Leading People                                                              Weight
Designs and implements strategies that maximize employee potential, connects the organization
horizontally and vertically, and fosters high ethical standards in meeting the organization's vision,
mission, and goals. Provides a workplace that fosters the development of others to their full potential;
allows for full participation by all employees; facilitates collaboration, cooperation, and teamwork, and
supports constructive resolution of conflicts. Ensures employee performance plans are aligned with the
organization’s mission and goals, that employees receive constructive feedback, and that employees are
realistically appraised against clearly defined and communicated performance standards. Holds
employees accountable for appropriate levels of performance and conduct. Seeks and considers
employee input. Recruits, retains, and develops the talent needed to achieve a high quality, workforce
that reflects the nation, with the skills needed to accomplish organizational performance objectives
while supporting equal employment policies and programs.

Agency-Specific Performance Requirements




Rating Official Narrative: (Mandatory for Level 5 and below Level 3 Element Ratings)




                                                    31
Critical Element Rating – Leading
                                          Level 5         Level 4      Level 3         Level 2    Level 1
People


Critical Element 3. Business Acumen                                                          Weight
Assesses, analyzes, acquires, and administers human, financial, material, and information resources in a
manner that instills public trust and accomplishes the organization's mission. Uses technology to
enhance processes and decision making. Executes the operating budget; prepares budget requests with
justifications; and manages resources.
Agency-Specific Performance Requirements




Rating Official Narrative: (Mandatory for Level 5 and below Level 3 Element Ratings)




Critical Element Rating – Business
                                           Level 5        Level 4     Level 3          Level 2    Level 1
Acumen


Critical Element 4. Building Coalitions                                                         Weight
Solicits and considers feedback from internal and external stakeholders or customers. Coordinates with
appropriate parties to maximize input from the widest range of appropriate stakeholders to facilitate an
open exchange of opinion from groups and strengthen internal and external support. Explains,
advocates, and expresses facts and ideas in a convincing manner and negotiates with individuals and
groups internally and externally, as appropriate. Develops a professional network with other
organizations and identifies the internal and external politics that affect the work of the organization.
Agency-Specific Performance Requirements




                                                     32
Rating Official Narrative: (Mandatory for Level 5 and below Level 3 Element Ratings)




Critical Element Rating – Building
                                           Level 5        Level 4       Level 3        Level 2      Level 1
Coalitions


Critical Element 5. Results Driven                                                       Weight
Agency Goals/Objectives for current FY: Must have at least 1 result (may have more than 5)

This critical element includes specific performance requirements expected of the executive during the
appraisal period, focusing on measurable outcomes from the strategic plan or other measurable outputs
and outcomes clearly aligned to organizational goals and objectives. At a minimum, the performance
plan will include performance requirements (including measures, targets, timelines, or quality
descriptors, as appropriate) describing the range of performance at Level 3 for each result specified. It is
recommended to also establish the threshold measures/targets for Levels 5 and 2.

Alignment--cite relevant goals/objectives, page numbers, from the Strategic Plan, Congressional Budget
Justification/Annual Performance Plan, or other organizational planning document in the designated
section for each performance requirement specified.

Performance Requirement 1:                                          Strategic Alignment:




Performance Requirement 1
                                          Level 5         Level 4      Level 3         Level 2      Level 1
Rating
Performance Requirement 2:                                          Strategic Alignment:




Performance Requirement 2
                                          Level 5         Level 4      Level 3         Level 2      Level 1
Rating

                                                     33
Performance Requirement 3:                                         Strategic Alignment:




Performance Requirement 3
                                         Level 5        Level 4       Level 3        Level 2     Level 1
Rating
Performance Requirement 4:                                         Strategic Alignment:




Performance Requirement 4
                                         Level 5        Level 4       Level 3         Level 2    Level 1
Rating
Performance Requirement 5:                                         Strategic Alignment:




Performance Requirement 5
                                          Level 5        Level 4      Level 3        Level 2    Level 1
Rating
Rating Official Narrative: (Mandatory for Level 5 and below Level 3 Element Ratings)




Critical Element Rating – Results
                                        Level 5          Level 4        Level 3      Level 2    Level 1
Driven


Part 6: Summary Rating Narrative (Mandatory)




Part 7: Executive’s Accomplishment Narrative (Mandatory)




                                                   34
Part 8: Agency Use




                     35
Exhibit 2
Clarification of Rating Official

Purpose: To clarify/specify appropriate rating officials when executives have worked on various
assignments during the performance cycle (e.g., details, reassignment to different position, new
position for less than 90 days; new supervisor for less than 90 days; transfer from different
Federal agency, etc.)

Universal Factors:
   • The executive is rated for all service in the SES during the performance cycle, including
       all SES positions held and details that were for 120 days or more. However, there will be
       one official appraisal for the performance cycle. Due weight should be given to the
       interim ratings, based on the time spent in the various assignments.
   • Executives who have performance plans in place 90 days prior to the end of the
       performance cycle (September 30) will be reviewed by a Performance Review Board
       (PRB). Extensions beyond September 30 to meet the 90-day minimum requirement may
       be granted for a short period of time if the extension does not delay the PRB process.
   • Executives who do not meet the 90-day minimum appraisal period will be rated at the
       end of the following appraisal period.
   • Only performance as a SES member would be considered for the SES appraisal. (If an
       employee entered the SES in February, the executive would be rated on accomplishments
       made since entry into the SES. Accomplishments as a GS-15, prior to entry into the SES
       are not considered in the SES appraisal.

          Performance Cycle Scenario                                  Rating Official
 Reassigned or transferred to new position less      If reassignment does not result in change in
 than 90 days prior to end of performance cycle.     supervisor, the current supervisor rates.

                                                     If reassignment results in a new supervisor,
                                                     new supervisor rates employee based on
                                                     interim rating from previous supervisor.

                                                     If transferred to USDA and there is no interim
                                                     rating, the executive would be rated the next
                                                     performance cycle.

 Detailed to different position or assignment for    Executive would be rated by supervisor of
 120 days or more.                                   position of record with input from interim
                                                     rating from the detail.




                                                36
          Performance Cycle Scenario                                      Rating Official
Detailed for most of the performance appraisal           Executive would be rated by supervisor of
period and remains on that detail as of the end          record to include accomplishments for entire
of the performance cycle.                                performance period, including detail.
                                                         Performance during detail would be given the
                                                         most weight since most of the performance
                                                         period was spent on detail. In some instances,
                                                         the interim rating from the detail may become
                                                         initial rating.

Detailed for entire rating cycle.                        The supervisor for the detail would appraise
                                                         the executive and that appraisal would
                                                         become the initial rating.

New supervisor for less than 90 days.                    New supervisor may complete the appraisal
                                                         based on the interim rating from previous
                                                         supervisor; or

                                                         Appraisal may be completed by higher level
                                                         supervisor.

Extended details (during transition) to                  Executives in this situation would be reviewed
positions that are usually held by SES                   by the PRB that covers the executive’s
noncareer appointees.                                    position of record.

If detailed for most of the appraisal period to a        Executive should be appraised (interim) by
position that is above the position held by the          the supervisor of record up to the time of the
supervisor of record (exception to #3).                  detail. The supervisor of the detailed position
                                                         would consider the interim rating along with
                                                         the detail and provide one initial rating for the
                                                         appraisal period.

For any other situation that is not covered by           A higher level official should do the appraisal
the above.                                               to prevent any perception of conflict of
                                                         interest.




                                                    37
Exhibit 3
Request for a Higher-Level Review

To:            Rating Official’s Name
               Position Title
               Agency


Departmental Regulation 4040-430-004 permits one higher level review of my initial summary
rating prior to review by the Performance Review Board (PRB). The [Agency] PRB is
scheduled for [Date]. Based on the initial summary rating of [List the rating] that was issued to
me on [Date], I am requesting a higher-level review of my rating based on the following reasons:

[Provide a bulleted list or a statement summarizing the reasons you do not agree with the initial
rating. Additional evidence or accomplishments may be included as attachments to this request.]



Signature and Date
Employee’s Name
Position Title
Agency

Acknowledgement of Request:



Signature and Date
Supervisor’s Name
Position Title
Agency

This request will be forwarded to [Position Title/Agency] to conduct the higher-level review and
will be completed by [Date]. This request will be included with your performance plan to the
PRB.




                                               38
Exhibit 4
Higher-Level Reviewer Response

To:            Rating Official’s Name
               Position Title
               Agency


In response to the request to review [Name]’s appraisal on [Date], my review resulted in the
following findings:

[Provide a bulleted list of findings or a statement summarizing the findings.]

Based on the above information, I recommend a change/no change to the initial summary of [List
the rating].



Signature and Date
Higher-Level Reviewer’s Name
Position Title
Agency

This written response will be provided to the PRB as part of the senior executive’s performance
appraisal package.




                                                39
                                          Appendix A
                           Authorities, References, and Abbreviations

This directive must be used within the context of the following authorities:

a. Title 5, United States Code (U.S.C.), Chapter 43 – Performance Appraisal;
b. Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 430-C, Managing Senior Executive
   Performance;
c. SES Pay and Performance Awards - 5 U.S.C. Chapter 45 (Incentive Awards); 5 CFR Part
   451, Subpart A (Agency Awards); 5 CFR 534, Subpart D (Pay and Performance Awards) and
d. The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2004 (Public Law 108-136,
   November 24, 2003).

The following related resources provide additional guidance on performance management:

e.   5 CFR, Part 293 – Personnel Records;
f.   5 CFR, Part 297 - Privacy Act Procedures for Personnel Records;
g.   5 CFR, Part 359 – Removal from the Senior Executive Service;
h.   5 CFR, Part 412 – Supervisory, Management, and Executive Development;
i.   5 CFR, Part 430-D, Performance Appraisal Certification for Pay Purposes;
j.   5 CFR, Part 752-F – Adverse Actions;
k.   DR 1061-003, USDA Executive Resources Board; and
l.   OPM Senior Executive Service Desk Guide

Abbreviations

CFR             Code of Federal Regulations
DR              Departmental Regulation
EPF             Employee Performance File
ERB             Executive Resources Board
ERMD            Executive Resources Management Division
GPRA            Government Performance and Results Act
OHRM            Office of Human Resources Management
OPF             Official Personnel Folder
OMB             Office of Management and Budget
OPM             Office of Personnel Management
PRB             Performance Review Board
PII             Personally Identifiable Information
PIO             Performance Improvement Officer
SES             Senior Executive Service
SPO             Senior Performance Official
USC             United States Code
USDA            U.S. Department of Agriculture


                                               A-1
                                          Appendix B
                                          Definitions

a.   Agency – An organizational unit of the Department, other than a staff office, whose
     Agency Administrator reports to an Under Secretary.

b.   Annual summary rating - The final overall rating level that the appointing authority assigns
     at the end of the appraisal period after considering a Performance Review Board’s
     recommendation. This is the official rating of record.

c.   Appraisal period – The established period of time for which a senior executive’s
     performance will be appraised and rated. In USDA, the appraisal period is October 1 to
     September 30.

d.   Appointing authority – The agency head or designee with authority to make appointments
     in the Senior Executive Service. In USDA, the Secretary of Agriculture is the appointing
     authority.

e.   Balanced measures – An approach to performance measurement that balances
     organizational results with the perspectives of distinct groups, including customers and
     employees.

f.   Critical element – A key component of a senior executive’s work that contributes to
     organizational goals and results and is so important that unsatisfactory performance of the
     element would make the senior executive’s overall job performance unsatisfactory. Such
     elements must only be used to measure individual performance.

g.   Element rating – The level of performance assigned to a specific critical element that will
     be used to derive the initial summary rating. These are Level 5 (Outstanding), Level 4
     (Exceeds Fully Successful), Level 3 (Fully Successful), Level 2 (Minimally Satisfactory),
     and Level 1 (Unsatisfactory).

h.   Executive Resources Board (ERB) – A group comprised of USDA career and non-career
     senior executives who review and provide recommendations to the Secretary or designee
     on various Senior Executive Service policies and programs. Pertinent to this DR are
     performance and compensation management.

i.   Higher-level review – A review conducted at a higher-level organizational level than the
     rating and reviewing officials, but not necessarily within the same organization. This
     review must precede action by the Performance Review Board.

j.   Initial summary rating - An overall rating level the supervisor derives from appraising the
     senior executive’s performance during the appraisal period and forwards to the
     Performance Review Board.
                                               B-1
k.   Interim appraisal - An appraisal of performance by the rating official during a detail or
     temporary assignment of 120 days or more or a change in position during the appraisal
     period.

l.   Performance – The accomplishment of the work described in the senior executive’s
     performance plan.

m.   Mission Area – A Mission Area is a USDA agency or group of USDA agencies with
     related functions that report to the same Under or Assistant Secretary.

n.   Performance appraisal - The review and evaluation of a senior executive’s performance
     against performance elements and requirements.

o.   Performance award – A lump-sum cash payment granted to a career senior executive on the
     basis of a current rating of record, which recognizes and rewards excellent performance
     over a one year appraisal period. Non-career, limited-term, and emergency limited-term
     senior executives are not eligible for performance awards.

p.   Performance-based pay adjustment – A salary increase or decrease resulting from a senior
     executive’s annual summary rating approved by the appointing authority. Pay may be
     adjusted once in any 12-month period.

q.   Performance Improvement Officer (PIO) – A senior executive designated to advise and
     assist the agency head and the Chief Operating Officer in the development and use within
     the agency on performance measures in personnel performance appraisals, and, as
     appropriate, other agency personnel and planning processes and assessments. The PIO
     also assists and supports achieving the mission and goals through strategic and
     performance planning, measurement, analysis, regular assessment of progress, and use of
     performance information to improve the results achieved as well as to provide support in
     the conduct of regular reviews of agency performance.

r.   Performance management system – The framework of policies and practices that an agency
     establishes under subchapter II of chapter 43 of title 5, United States Code, for planning,
     monitoring, developing, evaluating, and rewarding both individual and organizational
     performance and for using resulting performance information in making personnel
     decisions.

s.   Performance requirement – A statement of the performance expected for a critical element.

t.   Performance Review Board (PRB) – A group of career and non-career senior executives
     appointed by the Secretary responsible for the oversight of the performance management
     and compensation processes for senior executives. The PRB also provides
     recommendations to the Secretary regarding senior executive performance ratings, awards,
     pay adjustments, and other performance-related matters for the senior executives. More
                                              B-2
      than half of the members must be career senior executives when evaluating career senior
      executives.

u.    Progress review – A review of the senior executive’s progress in meeting the performance
      requirements. A progress review is not a performance rating.

v.    Rating official – The senior executive’s immediate supervisor who is responsible for
      carrying out the performance management responsibilities throughout the appraisal period.
      Also referred to as the “supervisor” in this regulation.

w.    Reviewing official - The senior executive’s second level supervisor who is responsible for
      ensuring the rating official carries out his/her performance management responsibilities.

x.    Senior Performance Official (SPO) - Senior Agency Official who evaluates and analyzes
      the PRB recommendations for ratings, performance awards and base salary increases, and
      submits recommendations to the Secretary. The SPO is the Assistant Secretary of
      Administration.

y.    Senior executive performance plan – The written summary of work the senior executive is
      expected to accomplish during the appraisal period and the requirements against which
      performance will be evaluated. The plan addresses all critical elements established for the
      senior executive.

z.    Staff Office – A Departmental administrative office whose head reports to the Secretary or
      Assistant Secretary, e.g., the Office of the Chief Financial Officer and Office of Human
      Resources Management.

aa.   Strategic planning initiatives - Agency strategic plans, annual performance plans,
      organizational work plans, and other related initiatives.




                                               B-3
