                             U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                   WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

      DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                          NUMBER:
                                                                       4040-534-002
SUBJECT:                                                               DATE:
                                                                       September 30, 2015
Senior Executive Service Pay and Compensation Policy                   OPI:
                                                                       Office of Human Resources
                                                                       Management


Section                                                                             Page

1.        Purpose                                                                   2
2.        Special Instructions/Cancellations                                        2
3.        Delegations of Authority                                                  2
4.        Responsibilities                                                          2
5.        SES Rate Range for Setting and Adjusting Pay                              3
6.        Effect of Annual Pay Increase                                             3
7.        Initial Salary Determinations                                             4
8.        USDA SES Position Structure                                               4
9.        Setting Pay for Senior Executives                                         4
          a. Initial Appointment to the SES
          b. Reappointments and Reinstatements
          c. Transfers
10.       Adjusting Individual Pay Rates                                            6
          a. Performance-Based Pay Increase
          b. Twelve-Month Rule
          c. Exceptions to the Twelve-Month Rule
11.       Restrictions on Reducing Pay                                              8
12.       Aggregate Limitation on Pay                                               9
13.       Other Pay Provisions                                                      9
          a. Premium Pay
          b. Retention of SES Pay Provisions
          c. Pay Following Placement Outside the SES
          d. Pay Flexibilities
          e. Pay for Military and Civilian Retirees
          f. Critical Position Pay
14.       Prior Approval Procedures for Pay Recommendations                         12
15.       Pay for Performance Salary Setting Determinations                         12
16.       Pay and Performance for Comparable Level (AD) Positions                   13

Exhibit 1 – SES Position Levels (Characteristics, Indicators, and Positions)        14
Exhibit 2 – Guidelines – Initial Pay Setting Pay Recommendation                     17
Exhibit 3 – Guidelines – Reassignment/Transfer Pay Recommendation                   18
Exhibit 4 – Guidelines – Reappointment/Reinstatement Pay Recommendation             19
Exhibit 5 – Guidelines – Request for Recruitment Incentive                          20
Exhibit 6 – Guidelines – Request for Relocation Incentive                           21
Exhibit 7 – Guidelines – Request for Retention Incentive                            22
Exhibit 8 – Sample Executive Resources Personnel Action Selection                   23
              Request Form

Appendix A – Authorities and References                                             A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                            B-1
1.   PURPOSE

     The purpose of this directive is to set forth the Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) pay
     policy for setting and adjusting the rates of basic pay and other pay provisions for the
     Senior Executive Service (SES) and other comparable level Administratively Determined
     (AD) positions. Applies to all USDA SES regardless of appointment type (career, non-
     career, limited-term, or limited-emergency) or position type occupied (general or career
     reserved). Members of the USDA Office of Inspector General are excluded from this
     directive.


2.   SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     This policy supersedes Departmental Regulation 4040-5340-001; Senior Executive Pay
     Setting Policy dated March 1, 2012.

     This directive provides policies and procedures for setting and adjusting the SES rate of
     basic pay for SES members in accordance with the provisions of Title 5 United States
     Code (U.S.C.), Section 5381 – 5385 and the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), 5 CFR
     Part 534, Subpart D, Pay and Performance Awards Under the Senior Executive Service.

     This policy is effective upon issuance and may not be retroactive.


3.   DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY

     a. The Secretary retains the authority to approve final salary determinations for setting
        and adjusting the pay for all SES members and other comparable level positions. The
        Secretary also retains the authority to review and approve payment of recruitment,
        relocation, and retention incentives to SES members.

     b. The Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA) retains the authority to receive,
        review, and recommend action on all salary decisions for the Secretary’s approval in
        the pay administration of the SES.


4.   RESPONSIBILITIES

     a.     The Director, Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM) is responsible
            for setting policy and providing overall technical guidance and direction for this
            policy. OHRM shall provide staff assistance to Agencies and Staff Offices and
            monitor compliance with Departmental policy. OHRM will report to the Office
            of Personnel Management (OPM) as required.

     b.     The Secretary’s Executive Resources Board (ERB) is responsible for
            recommending the executive resources policies and actions associated with
            executive pay and compensation guidelines and other related activities as the
            Secretary deems necessary.
                                           2
     c.     The Performance Review Board (PRB) is responsible for making
            recommendations for annual summary ratings, performance-based pay
            adjustments, performance awards, and other performance related matters.

     d.     Agency and Staff Office Heads are responsible for recommending and justifying
            the salary levels for SES employees appointed, reassigned, and transferred to their
            Agency or Office and for recommending position level designations for positions
            under their area of authority in accordance with the guidance set out in this
            regulation. They are responsible for ensuring compliance with the provisions of
            this policy so that the processes associated with applying the policy are fair,
            equitable, credible, and transparent.

     e.     The USDA White House Liaison (WHL) is responsible for recommending the
            rates of basic pay for Noncareer SES appointees in accordance with the laws and
            guidance set forth during the Presidential administration based on the President’s
            goals, objectives and priorities.

     f.     The Executive Director, Executive Resources Management Division (ERMD),
            OHRM is responsible for providing Departmental and technical guidance to
            agencies and staff offices regarding the prior approval packages for SES staffing,
            position management and classification, pay and compensation, performance
            management, recognition, and personnel action processing for the SES as it
            relates to pay setting and adjusting SES rates of pay.


5.   SES RATE RANGE FOR SETTING AND ADJUSTING PAY

     The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2004 (Public Law 108-136,
     November 24, 2003) established a performance-based pay system for members of the
     SES. The SES pay range has a minimum rate of basic pay equal to 120 percent of the rate
     for GS-15, step 1, and the maximum rate of basic pay is equal to the rate for Level III of
     the Executive Schedule (EX). Agencies certified under 5 U.S.C. 5307(d) as having a
     performance appraisal system which, as designed and applied, makes meaningful
     distinctions based on relative performance, have a maximum rate of basic pay equal to
     the rate for Level II of the Executive Schedule.

     The minimum rate of basic pay for the SES rate range will increase consistent with any
     increase in the rate of basic pay for GS 15, step 1. The applicable maximum rate of basic
     pay for the SES rate range will increase with any increase in the rate for levels EX-II or
     EX-III under 5 U.S.C. 5318.

     For a chart of the salaries and wages for SES members visit
     http://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/pay-leave/salaries-wages/.


6.   EFFECT OF AN ANNUAL PAY INCREASE


                                              3
     The Legislation provides for an increase to the minimum and maximum executive pay
     ranges, but does not provide for an automatic or across-the-board increase in pay of
     individual SES members. This increase will be determined under the applicable pay rules
     in this policy and with compensation guidelines approved by the Secretary in accordance
     with the USDA’s SES performance management system.

     Since the minimum rate of basic pay payable under 5 U.S.C. 5376 must not be less than
     120 percent of the minimum rate of basic pay for GS-15 of the General Schedule, any
     SES member’s salary that falls below the new minimum range must receive an increase
     that will at least meet the new range minimum.

     Annual pay adjustments are made during the first applicable pay period beginning on or
     after the first day of the month in which an adjustment takes effect in accordance with
     annual pay adjustments to pay schedules.


7.   INITIAL SALARY DETERMINATIONS

     All SES employees receiving an initial appointment, reappointment, or reinstatement to a
     USDA position will have their salary set using a three-position level structure as a means
     of ensuring comparability and transparency in Executive positions and compensation
     management across the Department. Additionally, SES members being transferred or
     reassigned to a position designated in a higher position level may be recommended for a
     pay increase as an exception to the 12-month rule under the authority of 5 CFR
     534.404(c)(4)(ii) and Section 10, Adjusting Individual Pay Rates. The position level
     limits act as a control point when determining the appropriate pay rates for Executives.


8.   USDA SES POSITION STRUCTURE

     All USDA SES positions will be sorted into 3 levels based upon the position
     characteristics described in Exhibit 1 (SES Position Levels). The position structure is a
     tool to promote a common understanding of position differences, a common perspective
     about the relationship of these differences on mission outcomes, and a common language
     to identify these positions.

     Pay will be set based on the position level structure. Each level will consist of a salary
     range of a minimum rate of basic pay up to a maximum rate of basic pay. The salary
     levels will be adjusted commensurate with any annual adjustment awarded by
     Legislation. The current rates for USDA SES members may be found at OHRM/ERMD
     website, http://www.dm.usda.gov/employ/exec/pl-emp.htm, or by contacting the
     servicing human resources specialist, ERMD.


9.   SETTING PAY FOR SENIOR EXECUTIVES

     a.     Initial Appointment to the SES. Initial pay for new appointments to the SES will
            be set at 8 percent from the individual’s previous salary or to the bottom of the
            salary range for the SES position, whichever is greater. In no case, can the pay
                                              4
     exceed the top of the salary range or exceed EX-III. See exception below
     regarding pay above EX-III. For pay-setting purposes, initial SES appointment
     includes first SES appointment from outside the Federal Government and
     conversions from GS or other non-SES pay systems from inside the Federal
     Government.

     The following guidelines apply:

     (1) Pay above EX-III or equal to the rate for EX-II are reserved for those newly
         appointed senior executives who possess superior leadership or other
         competencies, as determined by the agency within the context of its strategic
         human capital plan. Proposed salaries exceeding this level must be justified
         based on appropriate factors, such as the scope and impact of the position, or
         the special or unique qualifications of the selectee. Exceptions must be
         requested in writing.

     (2) Individuals, who have at least 5 years of current continuous service in one or
         more positions in the competitive service and are appointed without any break
         in service, cannot have their basic pay rate set lower than their current salary.

     (3) In setting a new senior executive’s rate of basic pay, Agencies and Staff
         Offices must consider:

         (a)    The nature and the quality of the individual’s experience;

         (b)    Qualifications, and accomplishments as they relate to the requirements
                of the SES position; and

         (c)    The individual’s current responsibilities.

     In addition, a recruitment incentive may also be offered. See DM-4050-575-001,
     Pay Administration – Recruitment, Relocation and Retention Incentives for
     additional guidance at
     http://www.ocio.usda.gov/sites/default/files/docs/2012/DM4050-575-001.pdf.

b.   Reappointments and Reinstatements. It is USDA’s policy to use Highest Previous
     Rate (HPR) to set pay for former senior executives upon reappointment or
     reinstatement. Such actions apply to reappointment following a break in SES
     service of more than 30 days or reinstatement from a Presidential appointment
     (12-month rule applies). Note: If there has been a break in SES service of 30
     days or less, the senior executive’s rate of basic pay may not be set higher than
     the senior executive’s former SES rate of basic pay. For more details regarding
     pay involving a Presidential appointee, See Section 13b. Retention of SES Pay
     Provisions regarding retaining SES pay.

     The Secretary may approve a higher rate than the former or existing rate of basic
     pay for these individuals to support where necessary to:


                                        5
             (1) Recruit an executive with superior leadership or other competencies from a
                 position outside USDA; or

             (2) To reacquire the service of an executive whose services are critical to the
                 mission of USDA.

             If a higher rate is warranted, pay may be set up to 8 percent from the individual’s
             previous salary. In no case, can the rate of basic pay exceed the top of the salary
             range designated for the SES position.

             Agency and Staff Office Heads must consider the individual’s qualifications and
             accomplishments as they relate to the requirements of the SES position.

      c.     Transfers. Career SES appointees may be transferred from one Agency to another
             upon approval of the gaining agency. Pay for these individuals typically remains
             unchanged however, the Secretary may approve a higher rate than their existing
             rate of pay to recruit an executive with superior leadership or other competencies.

             If pay is set at the same SES rate the executive received in his or her former
             agency, the action is not considered a pay adjustment and does not begin a new
             12-month period. Adjustments to pay for these executives will be considered
             during the annual performance process.

             If a higher rate is warranted, pay may be set up to 8 percent from the individual’s
             previous salary. In no case, can the rate of basic pay exceed the top of the salary
             range designated for the SES position. Note: If pay is set at a rate higher than that
             received in the executive’s former agency, the action restarts the clock under the 12-
             month rule.

             In addition, a senior executive whose rate of basic pay is higher than the rate for
             EX-III may not suffer a reduction in pay when the maximum rate of basic pay for
             the applicable SES rate range is equal to the rate for EX-III. If the agency’s
             performance appraisal certification has been suspended, the employee would not
             be eligible for a pay adjustment until the performance appraisal system is
             certified.

10.   ADJUSTING INDIVIDUAL PAY RATES

      The Secretary may adjust (increase or reduce) the rate of basic pay of a senior executive
      consistent with this policy for adjusting SES rates of basic pay.

      a.     Performance-Based Pay Adjustments

             Adjustments in pay will be made based on demonstrated individual performance
             and contributions to organizational and mission success in accordance with
             USDA’s performance management system. The annual summary rating of a
             senior executive is the basis for individual performance recognition, i.e.,
             performance-based pay adjustment or performance award. A senior executive
             who receives an annual summary rating of Outstanding or equivalent must be
                                                6
     considered for an annual pay increase. Executives who are paid consistent with
     their current level of responsibilities and performance and who receive an
     acceptable (“Fully Successful” or better) annual summary rating may receive a
     performance-based pay increase. Executives who receive a rating below Fully
     Successful may be considered for a pay decrease.

     Executives who meet all of the following guidelines may receive a performance-
     based increase effective the first pay period in January:

     (1) Has completed at least 90 days under an approved SES performance plan.

     (2) Has received an official rating of record of at least Fully Successful as
         approved by the Secretary.

     (3) Has not received a performance-based increase in the last 12 months.

     The Assistant Secretary for Administration serves as the Senior Performance
     Official and oversees the Performance Review Board process. Performance-
     based pay adjustments for SES members are recommended by their Agency and
     Staff Office Heads, reviewed by the PRB, and approved by the Secretary.

b.   12-Month Rule

     Pursuant to 5 CFR 534.404(c), a senior executive’s rate of basic pay may not be
     adjusted more than once during a 12-month period. This is commonly referred to
     as the 12-month rule. Setting of an individual’s rate of basic pay upon initial
     appointment, reappointment, or reinstatement is considered a pay adjustment for
     the purpose of applying the 12-month rule.

c.   Exceptions to the 12-Month Rule

     The Secretary may approve an increase more than once during a 12-month period
     where he or she determines an additional increase is warranted. The executive’s
     most recent performance rating, current position, and earlier pay adjustments will
     be factored into the decision. An additional increase may be warranted for the
     following reasons:

     (1) For an exceptionally meritorious accomplishment that significantly
         contributes to the Agency’s performance;

     (2) When it is necessary to reassign a USDA executive to a position with
         substantially greater scope and responsibility or to recruit a senior executive
         with superior leadership or other competencies;

     (3) For the retention of a senior executive who is critical to the mission of USDA
         and who would be likely to leave in the absence of a pay increase; or

     (4) To align a senior executive with USDA’s senior executive appraisal and pay
         adjustment cycle (e.g., in the case of a senior executive who was appointed to
                                        7
                 an SES position within the past 12 months or a senior executive who was
                 transferred to an SES position from an agency with a different senior
                 executive appraisal and pay adjustment cycle within the past 12 months).

             In setting the rate of basic pay for these individuals, the following guidelines
             apply:

             (a) If a higher rate is warranted, pay may be set up to 8 percent from the
                 individual’s previous salary. In no case, can the rate of basic pay exceed the
                 top of the salary range designated for the SES position.

             (b) A reassignment to a position with substantially greater scope and
                 responsibility is movement from a lower position level into a higher position
                 level in accordance with USDA’s position structure.

             (c) A reassignment to a position assigned to the same position level (of equal
                 stature), in accordance with USDA’s position level structure does not warrant
                 a pay increase. Adjustments to pay for these executives will be considered
                 during the annual performance process.

             (d) If a higher rate is warranted to align an individual to USDA' SES performance
                 management system, pay will be set in accordance with the compensation
                 guidelines used in the PRB process. Such actions apply to any senior
                 executive, who was appointed to a new SES position or was reassigned or
                 transferred to a different SES position within the past 12 months.

             (e) Agency and Staff Office Heads must consider the individual’s qualifications,
                 accomplishments, and most recent performance appraisal.

             (f) Relocation and retention incentives may be granted, when applicable. See
                 DM-4050-575-001, Pay Administration – Recruitment, Relocation and
                 Retention Incentives for additional guidance at
                 http://www.ocio.usda.gov/sites/default/files/docs/2012/DM4050-575-001.pdf.

             (g) A pay increase made as a result of a determination to approve an exception to
                 the 12-month rule must be documented in writing and is considered a pay
                 adjustment and begins a new 12-month period.


11.   RESTRICTIONS ON REDUCING PAY

      Decisions concerning performance-based pay decreases are limited to a 10 percent
      decrease and will be made at the discretion of the Secretary, with prior discussion with
      OHRM. The Secretary must provide the senior executive with at least a 15-day advance
      written notice prior to effecting the downward adjustment.

      Adjustments to decrease base pay may also occur with disciplinary actions resulting from
      conduct-related activities (e.g., misconduct, neglect of duty, or malfeasance). Any such
      action must be coordinated with OHRM and the Office of the General Counsel.
                                                8
12.   AGGREGATE LIMITATION ON PAY

      In accordance with 5 CFR 530.201, the aggregate annual compensation of employees in
      the SES pay system may not exceed the rate payable for EX-I or the Vice President’s
      salary on the last day of that calendar year. The rate payable is based on the certification
      status of USDA’s performance appraisal system. USDA’s performance appraisal system
      must be certified for senior executives to receive the higher aggregate limitation on pay,
      up to the Vice President’s salary. Aggregate compensation for SES employees includes
      basic pay and certain payments made under the authority of title 5, United States Code,
      such as rank and performance awards, physicians’ comparability allowances, recruitment,
      relocation, and retention incentives, and other similar payments.

      If a performance award, rank award, or other additional payment, when added to basic pay,
      would cause an executive’s aggregate compensation to exceed the applicable aggregate
      limitation by the end of the calendar year, the excess amount is withheld from the award or
      other additional payment subject to the aggregate pay limit, rather than from the individual’s
      basic pay. Basic pay itself is not reduced or withheld. The amount so paid shall be
      considered part of the executive’s aggregate compensation for the new calendar year. If
      the executive transfers to another agency or leaves the Federal service, the agency
      responsible for making the payment is the agency that employed the executive when the
      excess amount was created.

      ERMD is responsible for managing all personnel actions regarding pay and compensation
      for all senior executives. If an executive is due a lump-sum payment of an excess
      amount, the human resources specialist (ERMD) will manage the payment process.


13.   OTHER PAY PROVISIONS

      a.     Premium Pay

             SES members are excluded from the premium pay provisions of 5 U.S.C. chapter
             55, subchapter V (such as overtime pay, Sunday premium pay, holiday premium
             pay, night pay, standby duty pay, and hazardous duty pay) by 5 U.S.C.
             5541(2)(xvi). SES members are also excluded from earning compensatory time
             off in lieu of overtime pay under 5 U.S.C. 5543 for the work performed as an SES
             member.

      b.     Retention of SES Pay Provisions

             Career SES members who, without a break in service, accept a Presidential
             appointment to an Executive Schedule position (or a position whose pay is set by
             reference to an Executive Schedule rate) may elect to retain SES benefits (e.g.,
             pay, leave, performance awards and Presidential Rank Award eligibility). This
             will apply as if the career senior executive remained in the career SES position
             from which he/she was appointed. This election must be made in writing and shall

                                                 9
     remain in effect for at least one year, unless the appointee leaves the position
     sooner. New elections may be made on an annual basis.

c.   Pay Following Placement Outside the SES

     (1) Saved Pay. Saved pay is used when a career senior executive is guaranteed
         placement in a position outside the SES if he/she is removed during his/her
         probationary period due to performance or as a result of a reduction in force,
         (See 5 USC 3594). If the individual is placed in a General Schedule position,
         saved pay is subject to the limitation on SES position under 5 USC 5382 of
         Executive Schedule Level II.

     (2) Retained Pay. If an appointee is not eligible for saved pay under 5 U.S.C.
        3594 following separation from the SES and is placed in a General Schedule
        position, the individual may still be eligible for pay retention under 5 CFR
        536.104(b).

        An appointee is not eligible for pay retention if placement in the General
        Schedule is at the employee’s request. The employee’s request is defined as
        an action initiated by an employee for his/her benefit, convenience, or
        personal advantage and that is not caused or influenced by a management
        action.

        An appointee is not eligible for retained pay if he/she declines a reasonable
        offer, as defined in 5 CFR 536.206.

     (3) Maximum payable rate. In setting pay for an SES member who is moving to
         a position in the General Schedule, the following guidelines apply.

        (a) If an SES member takes a position in the General Schedule at the
            member’s request and is not eligible for saved pay, the individual may be
            paid under the “maximum payable rate” rule.

        (b) Individuals serving on a limited term appointment who return to the
            General Schedule are not eligible for retained pay. Pay for these
            individuals will be set at the rate that would have been in effect had the
            employee remained in the GS position, including any within-grade
            increases to which the employee would have been entitled.

d.   Pay Flexibilities

     Agency and Staff Office Heads may use any of the following flexibilities when
     recruiting for SES vacancies and when setting pay for SES appointees.

     (1) Payment of Travel and Transportation Expenses for New Appointees. Pre-
         employment interview expenses and travel/moving costs for new appointees
         may be paid under 5 U.S.C. 5706b and 5 CFR Part 572.


                                      10
           (2) Advance Pay for New Appointees. Advance payment up to two pay periods
               may be paid under 5 U.S.C. 5524(a) and 5 CFR Part 550, Subpart B.

           (3) Recruitment and Relocation Incentives. Recruitment and relocation bonuses
               up to 25% of basic pay may be given for hard to fill positions; executives
               must agree to serve in the Federal Government for one-year or be subject to
               repayment of all or part of the bonus received. A relocation incentive may be
               paid only when the senior executive’s annual summary under an official
               performance appraisal system is at least “Fully Successful.” (See Exhibits 5
               and 6, Request for SES Pay Recommendation – Recruitment and Relocation
               Incentives).

           (4) Retention Incentives. Retention allowances up to 25% of basic pay may be
               paid, if the agency determines that unusually high or unique qualifications of
               the executive, or a special need of the agency for the executive’s services
               makes it essential to retain the executive, and that the executive would likely
               leave the Federal service in the absence of an incentive. A retention incentive
               may be paid only when the senior executive’s annual summary under an
               official performance appraisal system is at least “Fully Successful.” (See
               Exhibit 7, Request for SES Pay Recommendation – Retention Incentives).

      e.   Pay for Military and Civilian Retirees

           Determinations in setting pay for military and civilian retirees’ impact their
           Federal pay, retirement pay or annuity. When a military retiree becomes a
           Federal employee there is no reduction in his or her Federal pay or retirement pay
           or annuity. However, paid work may reduce Social Security retirement, and
           survivor or disability benefits if earnings exceed the established limits. If a
           civilian retiree is “reemployed,” his or her salary is generally reduced or the
           annuity is terminated. When making decisions regarding these individuals,
           human resources specialists must consult with the Retirement/Benefits Officer to
           determine if pay will be reduced or the annuity will be terminated.

      f.   Critical Position Pay

           Critical position pay up to Level I of the Executive Schedule may be authorized
           only in exceptional cases under 5 U.S.C. 5377. Pay above Level I must be
           approved by the President. Critical position pay may be granted only for
           positions that require expertise of an extremely high level in a scientific,
           technical, professional, or administrative field, and are critical to the agency’s
           accomplishment of the agency’s mission, and only to the extent necessary to
           recruit or retain an individual exceptionally well qualified for the position.
           Agencies wishing to use the critical position authority should review 5 CFR 535.
           All requests must be submitted to OPM which, in consultation with OMB, will
           make the determination to approve such a request.


14.   PRIOR APPROVAL PROCEDURES FOR PAY RECOMMENDATIONS

                                           11
      Agency and Staff Office Heads (i.e., recommending officials), in coordination with their
      servicing human resources specialist (ERMD) will prepare the request for pay
      recommendations, including the justification and forward it for consideration in the prior
      approval package. They should follow the guidance outlined in Exhibits 1 – 7 to ensure that
      pay decisions are in compliance with the policy guidelines for authorizing pay. The
      Executive Director, ERMD will serve as the reviewing official for these pay
      recommendations.

      The request for SES pay recommendations are submitted along with Form AD-3075,
      Executive Resources Personnel Action Selection Request (Exhibit 8). This form is used
      to document and obtain the required clearance and approval for all executive personnel
      actions. This form is located at
      http://www.ocio.usda.gov/sites/default/files/docs/2012/AD%203075%20Executive%20R
      esources%20Personnel%20Action%20Request.pdf.

      This form is prepared by the servicing human resources specialist (ERMD) and routed
      for:

      a. Clearance by the:
         (1) Agency Head or Staff Office Director;
         (2) Under or Assistant Secretary;
         (3) Executive Director, ERMD;
         (4) Director, OHRM; and
         (5) ASA.

      b. Approval by or for the Secretary.

      The written request must be approved by the Secretary before the official salary offer or pay
      incentive is made. SES appointees should be advised that the pay recommendation is
      tentative until the request is approved.

15.   PAY FOR PERFORMANCE SALARY SETTING DETERMINATIONS

      All SES members will have their salary adjusted in accordance with USDA’s
      performance management system. The PRB ensures that SES members are compensated
      equitably for their work and that their accomplishments are recognized and rewarded, by
      reviewing and recommending pay adjustments; and providing advice on matters relating
      to executive compensation (e.g., bonuses, performance awards, base position, etc.).

      The position level system is to be used only for pay setting purposes. There is nothing in
      this policy to restrict an executive from exceeding the salary range for the designated SES
      position after initial pay setting through the pay for performance system.




                                                12
16.   PAY AND PERFORMANCE FOR COMPARABLE LEVEL (AD) POSITIONS

      USDA positions that are equivalent to the SES and designated under an administratively
      determined (AD) pay plan are covered under this pay policy. The pay and performance
      standards for these positions will be determined under the USDA SES position level
      structure and in accordance with USDA’s SES performance management system.




                                            13
                              EXHIBIT 1 – SES POSITION LEVELS

                                       POSITION LEVEL 3
SES Positions                      Position Indicators  Position Characteristics
 •   Deputy Under                  Responsibility                     •    Complex and multi-component,
     Secretary/Deputy Assistant     • Degree of latitude                   multi-function, multi-agency
     Secretary                          exercised                     •    Performs activities that are vital to
 •   Administrators                 • Degree of decision-                  the mission accomplishment of
 •   Assistant Administrators           making authority                   multiple organizations
 •   Associate Administrators       • Degree of policy-               •    Most significant levels of latitude
 •   Chief                              making authority                   and responsibility, as indicated by
 •   Associate Chief                • Degree of alignment to               the degree of policy and decision
 •   Deputy General Counsel             enterprise perspective             authority
 •   Deputy Chief Financial                                           •    Reports to a Presidential Appointee
     Officer                                                          •    Typically supervises several senior
 •   Deputy Chief Information                                              executives
     Officer                                                          •    Serves as the most senior level in a
 •   Chief Human Capital Officer                                           substantial functional community
 •   Deputy Director, OHRM         Complexity                         •    Impact is extraordinary, tangible
 •   Director, OBPA                 • Size of budget                       and substantially furthers
 •   Director, OPPM                 • Size of staff                        Department, Mission Area and/or
 •   Director, OO                   • Degree of consensus,                 agency objectives and strategic
                                       collaboration,                      goals
 •   Director, OHSEC
                                       coordination required          •    Represents top leadership to
 •   Director, OAO
                                    • Interplay of policies                external entities, to include
Administratively Determined         • Degree of precedence                 Congress, Executive Office of the
Position                            • Single vs. multi-function            President, OMB and White House
                                                                           Staff
  • Director, NAD
                                                                      •    Approves or effects Department or
                                                                           Agency-wide policy and programs
                                                                      •    Represents the Department at key
                                                                           interagency meetings
                                   Scope of Influence                 •    Characterized by substantial
                                     • Number of                           executive-level leadership and
                                         organization affected             managerial skills and
                                     • Level of organizations              competencies; positions at this
                                         affected                          level are more likely to be
                                     • Impact inside vs.                   encumbered by more seasoned
                                         outside USDA or                   executives from within the Federal
                                         Component/agency                  government or from private
                                     • Number of SES                       industry
                                         supervised                   •    Formulates Agency-wide strategic
                                                                           plans, programmatic objectives,
                                                                           policies and standards
                                   Impact of Mission                None
                                     • Impact on objectives
                                          and strategic goals
                                          (Outside USDA,
                                          Across USDA,
                                          Component,
                                          Organization)
                                     • Impact on development
                                          of goals and objectives
                                          vs. reaction to them


                                                   14
Exhibit 1 – SES Position Levels (continued)

                                        POSITION LEVEL 2
SES Positions                       Position Indicators  Position Characteristics
 •   Deputy Administrators          Responsibility                   •       Interactions are typically less
 •   Deputy Assistant                • Degree of latitude                    complex than Position Level 3 and
     Administrators                      exercised                           generally involve multi-Component
 •   Associate Deputies              • Degree of decision-                   or intra-Component/agency
 •   Assistant Deputies                  making authority                    participants
 •   Deputy Chiefs                   • Degree of policy-making       •       Activities that are vital to the mission
 •   Associate Deputy Chiefs             authority                           accomplishment of the assigned
 •   Executive Directors             • Degree of alignment to                organization(s)
 •   Chief Financial Officers            enterprise perspective      •       Leader/Deputy of an organization
 •   Chief Information Officers                                              below the Administrator level and/or
 •   Chief, Human Resource                                                   serves as senior functional authority
                                                                             with accountability for major
     Officers
                                                                             programs
 •   Chief, Acquisitions Officers
                                    Complexity                       •       Has latitude and responsibility, as
 •   Chief of Staff
                                     • Size of budget                        indicated by degree of policy and
 •   Chief Operating Officers
                                     • Size of staff                         decision-making authority, typically
 •   Regional Administrators
                                     • Degree of consensus,                  includes Agency-level only
 •   Area/Station Managers                                           •       Impact is tangible and furthers
                                        collaboration,
 •   Budget Officers                    coordination required                Agency objectives and strategic goals
 •   Associate General Counsel       • Interplay of policies         •       Manages large numbers of programs,
 •   Regional Attorneys              • Degree of precedence                  personnel or organizations
 •   Provost                         • Single vs. multi-function     •       Formulates, oversees and enforces
                                                                             Agency policy
                                                                     •       Has approval authority on major
                                                                             command or equivalent policies and
                                                                             programs
                                                                     •       Represents functional area at Agency
                                                                             or organization/service at interagency
                                                                             meetings
                                    Scope of Influence               •       Serves on boards, committees and
                                      • Number of organization               other groups pertaining to assigned
                                           affected                          functional areas
                                      • Level of organizations
                                           affected
                                      • Impact inside vs. outside
                                           USDA or
                                           Component/agency
                                      • Number of SES
                                           supervised

                                    Impact of Mission                    •    Typically reports to Position Level
                                      • Impact on objectives                  3 Senior Executive
                                           and strategic goals           •    May supervise at least one Position
                                           (Outside USDA, Across              Level 1 Senior Executive or
                                           USDA, Component,                   equivalent
                                           Organization)
                                      • Impact on development
                                           of goals and objectives
                                           vs. reaction to them




                                                     15
Exhibit 1 – SES Position Levels (continued)

                                      POSITION LEVEL 1
SES Positions                     Position Indicators  Position Characteristics
 •   Executive Associates         Responsibility                     •   Interactions are typically less
 •   Directors                     • Degree of latitude                  complex than Position Level 2 and
 •   Coordinators                      exercised                         generally involve intra-Agency
 •   Associate Area Directors      • Degree of policy-making             participants
 •   Center Directors                  authority                     •   Activities that are vital to the mission
 •   Institutional Directors       • Degree of decision-                 accomplishment of the assigned
 •   Managers                          making authority                  organization(s)
 •   Special Assistants            • Degree of alignment to          •   Has latitude and responsibility, as
 •   Economists                        enterprise perspective            indicated by degree of policy and
 •   Engineers                                                           decision making authority, typically
                                                                         include Agency level only
 •   Soil Scientists
                                                                     •   Oversees planning and effective
 •   State Conservationists
                                                                         execution of the fully spectrum of
 •   Assistant General Counsels
                                                                         programs
 •   U.S. Manager
                                                                     •   Develops systems and standards for
                                                                         the administration and management
                                                                         of approved plans and programs
                                  Complexity                         •   Impact is tangible and furthers
                                   • Size of budget                      Agency objectives and strategic goals
                                   • Size of staff                   •   Characterized by significant
                                   • Degree of consensus,                functional and/or technical expertise;
                                      collaboration,                     positions at this level are more likely
                                      coordination required              to be encumbered by newly-
                                   • Interplay of policies               appointed executives
                                   • Degree of precedence            •   Develops policies and programs
                                   • Single vs. multi-function       •   Manages medium-to-small programs
                                                                         that have Agency-wide impact
                                                                     •   Participates in a primary role in
                                                                         planning, programming and
                                                                         budgeting activities
                                                                     •   Initiates programs and actions to
                                                                         ensure adherence to Agency-wide
                                                                         policies and objectives
                                  Scope of Influence                 •   Technical/expertise-based positions
                                    • Number of organization             is a leader/authority in a focused
                                         affected                        organization, usually below an
                                    • Level of organizations             Agency Deputy level in such areas as
                                         affected                        technical, engineering, contracts, and
                                    • Impact inside vs. outside          industrial management
                                         USDA or
                                         Component/agency
                                  Impact of Mission                N/A
                                    • Impact on objectives
                                         and strategic goals
                                         (Outside USDA, Across
                                         USDA, Component,
                                         Organization)
                                    • Impact on development
                                         of goals and objectives
                                         vs. reaction to them




                                                  16
                                                  EXHIBIT 2

              SAMPLE REQUEST FOR INITIAL PAY SETTING RECOMMENDATION

Subject: Salary decision for (name), tentative selectee for Senior Executive Service (SES) position of
(position title), (series), (organization)

Background: (Selectee name) was recently selected for the subject position. Upon conversion to the SES,
he/she is eligible for a pay increase as recommended by the agency/staff office head. (Selectee name) current
salary is (amount) per year. Consistent with the pay setting policy the position is most closely in Position level
_____.

General Guidelines for Initial Appointment to the SES
   • Agency determines the appropriate rate of pay based on the nature and the quality of the individual’s
       experience, qualifications, and accomplishments as they relate to the requirements of the SES
       position, and the employee’s current responsibilities. NOTE: Rates of basic pay above the rate for
       EX III but less than or equal to the rate for EX II are generally reserved for those newly appointed
       executives who possess superior leadership or other competencies.
   • USDA uses a position level structure system to set pay. Each level consists of a salary range which
       has a minimum rate of basic pay up to a maximum rate of basic pay based on current SES rates of pay.
   • The employee’s pay cannot be less than their current salary.
   • Upon conversion from GS to SES, employees should have their salary set at a dollar amount that is at
       least the minimum salary range and provide sufficient monetary consideration and elevation for those
       entering Position Level 1.
   • With few exceptions, the pay for SES members may be adjusted not more than once every 12 months.
       Consequently, after (Selectee name) is converted to the SES, he/she is not eligible for another pay
       increase until the one-year anniversary date of his/her conversion. Outside of a rare exception to the
       12 month rule, the only adjustment to pay would be a pay adjustment based on his/her FY
       performance accomplishments.

JUSTIFICATION: (provide rationale of agency’s determination of the appropriate rate of pay based on the
nature and the quality of the individual’s experience, qualifications, and accomplishments as they relate to the
requirements of the SES position, and the employee’s current responsibilities as outlined in the SES pay
policy.)

Decision: Based on (Selectee’s name) experience, qualifications, and accomplishments as they relate to the
requirements of the SES position, I am recommending a total salary of _____________________.

RECOMMENDATION:


Recommended by: _______________________________________                        _________________
                    Agency/Staff Office Head                                          Date

Reviewed by: ___________________________________________                               _________________
                      Executive Director, ERMD                                         Date


NOTE: Further clearance and approval for the request will be obtained via Form AD-3073, Executive
Resources Personnel Action Selection Request.




                                                       17
                                                   EXHIBIT 3

        SAMPLE REQUEST FOR REASSIGNMENT/TRANSFER PAY RECOMMENDATION


Subject: Salary decision for (name), tentative selectee for Senior Executive Service (SES) position of
(position title), (series), (organization)

Background: (Selectee name) was recently selected for the subject position. Upon reassignment/transfer,
he/she is eligible for a pay increase as recommended by the agency head/selecting official. (Selectee name)
current salary is (salary) per year. Consistent with the pay setting policy the position is most closely in
Position Level _____.

General Guidelines
In setting a senior executive’s rate of basic pay, an agency should analyze the similarities to and differences
from the subject position in terms of factors such as:

   •   Comparable pay for like SES positions;
   •   Organizational characteristics, including the level in the agency where the position is located, and the
       size and complexity of the organization (including subordinate organizational units);
   •   Functional and program responsibilities, including geographic scope (e.g., local, regional, national, or
       international), budget size, and impact on accomplishment of the agency’s and organization’s mission;
   •   Degree and scope of executive, managerial, and/or supervisory authorities and responsibilities;
   •   Level and purpose of contacts (contacts should be essential for successful performance of the work, be
       a recurring requirement of the position, and have a demonstrable impact on the difficulty and
       responsibility of the position.);
   •   Nature of the staff, e.g., staff size (including staff in subordinate organizational units) and grade levels
       of individuals reporting directly to the position;
   •   Most recent SES pay adjustment;
   •   Current or most recent performance rating; or
   •   The projected date the employee might be considered for their next salary increase under the SES
       performance management system.

JUSTIFICATION: (Agency name) requests an increase in (employee name) salary from (current salary) to
(proposed salary). The Agency has determined that this pay increase, an exception to the 12- month rule, is
necessary to (insert reason, i.e. reassign (employee name) to this position of substantially greater scope and
responsibility.) (Provide specific details of determination.) Consistent with the pay setting policy the position
is in Position Level __.

A pay increase made as a result of this determination to approve an exception to the 12-month rule is
considered a pay adjustment and begins a new 12-month period effective ___date________.

RECOMMENDATION:

Recommended by: _______________________________________                         _________________
                    Agency/Staff Office Head                                           Date

Reviewed by: ___________________________________________                        _________________
                      Executive Director, ERMD                                         Date

NOTE: Further clearance and approval for the request will be obtained via Form AD-3073, Executive
Resources Personnel Action Selection Request.




                                                        18
                                                        EXHIBIT 4

        SAMPLE REQUEST FOR REAPPOINTMENT/REINSTATEMENT PAY RECOMMENDATION

Subject: Salary decision for (name), tentative selectee for Senior Executive Service (SES) position of (position title),
(series), (organization)

Background: (Selectee name) was recently selected for the subject position. Upon reappointment/reinstatement, he/she
is eligible for a pay increase as recommended by the agency head/selecting official. (Selectee name) current
salary/previous SES salary is (salary) per year. Consistent with the pay setting policy the position is most closely in
Position Level _____.

General Guidelines
The determination to set the senior executive’s rate of basic pay should be based on factors such as:

   •    Agency determines the appropriate rate of pay based on the nature and the quality of the individual’s experience,
        qualifications, and accomplishments as they relate to the requirements of the SES position.
   •    Previous SES rate of pay;
   •    Break in SES service of more than 30 days (the employee’s pay cannot be less than their highest previous rate of
        pay);
   •    Break in SES service of less than 30 days (the pay cannot be higher than the senior executive’s former SES rate of
        basic pay, unless warranted);
   •    At least 12 months have elapsed since the employee’s last SES pay adjustment (i.e. presidential appointment)
   •    Fewer than 12 months have elapsed since the employee’s last SES pay adjustment (i.e. presidential appointment);
        an additional pay increase, if warranted);
   •    Comparable pay for like SES positions;
   •    Degree and scope of executive, managerial, and/or supervisory authorities and responsibilities;
   •    Level and purpose of contacts (contacts should be essential for successful performance of the work, be a recurring
        requirement of the position, and have a demonstrable impact on the difficulty and responsibility of the position.);
   •    Nature of the staff, e.g., staff size (including staff in subordinate organizational units) and grade levels of
        individuals reporting directly to the position;
   •    Most recent performance rating (if applicable); or
   •    Other items as outlined in the SES pay setting policy.

JUSTIFICATION: (provide rationale of agency’s determination of the appropriate rate of pay based on the nature and
the quality of the individual’s experience, qualifications, and accomplishments as they relate to the requirements of the
SES position, as outlined in this policy).

Decision: Based on (Selectee’s name) experience, qualifications, and accomplishments as they relate to the requirements
of the SES position, I am recommending a total salary of ____________. The Agency has determined that this pay
increase, an exception to the 12- month rule, is necessary to (insert reason, i.e. unique or unusual qualifications/reacquire
their service) (Provide specific details of determination.) Consistent with the pay setting policy the position is in Position
Level __.

A pay increase made as a result of this determination to approve an exception to the 12-month rule is considered a pay
adjustment and begins a new 12-month period effective ___date________.

RECOMMENDATION:

Recommended by: _______________________________________                                 _________________
                      Agency/Staff Office Head                                                  Date

Reviewed by: ___________________________________________                                _________________
                        Executive Director, ERMD                                                Date

NOTE: Further clearance and approval for the request will be obtained via Form AD-3073, Executive Resources
Personnel Action Selection Request.




                                                              19
                                                    EXHIBIT 5

                         SAMPLE REQUEST FOR RECRUITMENT INCENTIVE

A recruitment incentive is paid to a newly appointed employee if it has been determined that the position is
critical to the mission of the organization, and in the absence of the incentive, it would be difficult to fill the
position with a highly-qualified employee from either the Federal or private sector. An employee for this
purpose means an individual who is newly appointed in the organization. For additional guidance, see DM-
4040-575-001, Pay Administration – Recruitment, Relocation and Retention Incentives,
http://www.ocio.usda.gov/sites/default/files/docs/2012/DM4050-575-001.pdf.

Subject: Request payment of a (dollar amount/incentive percentage rate) for a recruitment incentive to
(selectee name) tentative selectee for Senior Executive Service (SES) position of (position title), (series),
(organization)

Justification Statement must include: The determination to pay a recruitment incentive must be based on
factors including, but not limited to:

    •    The success (or lack thereof) of recent efforts to recruit candidates for similar positions, using
         indicators such as job offer acceptances rates, the proportion of positions filled, the length of time
         required to fill similar positions, and the probable cost of renewed recruitment efforts;
    •    Recent turnover in similar positions. For purposes of recruitment incentives approval, positions are
         considered similar if they have the same duties and responsibilities and have the same level of
         responsibility;
    •    The current non-Federal salary and fringe benefits package the candidate receives;
    •    Employment trends and competition in the labor market that make it difficult to recruit candidates for
         similar positions;
    •    Special qualifications or competences (i.e., knowledge, skills, abilities, education, etc.) required for
         the position (or group of positions). These competencies must be applicable to a vast majority of the
         duties and responsibilities of the job;
    •    Efforts to use non-pay authorities and other methods, such as special training, work scheduling
         flexibilities, delegation of special projects to resolve difficulties alone or in combination with a
         recruitment incentive;
    •    The desirability of the duties, work and organizational environment or geographic location of the
         position; and
    •    Other supporting factors.

RECOMMENDATION:

Recommended by: _______________________________________                           _________________
                    Agency/Staff Office Head                                             Date

Reviewed by: ___________________________________________                          _________________
                      Executive Director, ERMD                                           Date

NOTE: Further clearance and approval for the request will be obtained via Form AD-3073, Executive
Resources Personnel Action Selection Request.




                                                         20
                                                   EXHIBIT 6

                         SAMPLE REQUEST FOR RELOCATION INCENTIVE

A relocation incentive may be authorized and paid when, in the absence of the incentive, it would be difficult
to fill a position with a highly-qualified employee.

A relocation incentive is paid to a current employee who must relocate (permanently or temporarily and with
no break in service) to accept a position in a different geographic area if it is determined that the position is
likely to be difficult to fill in the absence of the incentive. For additional guidance, see DM-4040-575-001,
Pay Administration – Recruitment, Relocation and Retention Incentives,
http://www.ocio.usda.gov/sites/default/files/docs/2012/DM4050-575-001.pdf.

Subject: Request payment of a (dollar amount/incentive percentage rate) for a relocation incentive to
(selectee name) tentative selectee for Senior Executive Service (SES) position of (position title), (series),
(organization)

Justification Statement must include: The amount of the incentive must be justified in writing by the
appropriate approving authority and the determination to pay the incentive must be made prior to the
prospective employee entering on duty in the position for which relocated. The determination to pay a
relocation incentive must be based on but not limited to:

    •   The availability and quality of candidates possessing the competencies required for the positions,
        including the success of recent recruitment efforts to recruit candidates for the position or similar
        positions, using indicators such as offer acceptance rates, proportion of positions filled, and the length
        of time required to fill similar positions;
    •   The salaries typically paid outside the Federal Government for similar positions;
    •   Recent turnover rates in similar positions;
    •   Special or unique competencies required for the position;
    •   Operating unit efforts to use non-pay authorities, such as special training and work scheduling
        flexibilities, to resolve difficulties alone or in combination with a relocation incentive;
    •   Personal or professional disruption that will occur as a result of relocation and/or the undesirability of
        the geographic area of the proposed new duty station;
    •   The desirability of the duties, work or organizational environment, geographic locations of the
        positions;
    •   When the executive’s rating of record under an official performance appraisal or evaluation system is
        at least “Fully Successful” or equivalent; and
    •   Other supporting factors.

RECOMMENDATION:


Recommended by: _______________________________________                         _________________
                    Agency/Staff Office Head                                           Date

Reviewed by: ___________________________________________                        _________________
                      Executive Director, ERMD                                         Date

NOTE: Further clearance and approval for the request will be obtained via Form AD-3073, Executive
Resources Personnel Action Selection Request.




                                                        21
                                                      EXHIBIT 7

                             SAMPLE REQUEST FOR RETENTION INCENTIVE

A retention incentive may be to a current career executive if (1) the agency determines that the unusually high or
unique qualifications of the executive or a special need of the agency for the executive’s services makes it essential
to retain the executive, and that the executive would be likely to leave the Federal service in the absence of a
retention incentive, or (2) the agency has a special need for the employee’s services that makes it essential to retain
the employee in his or her current position during a period of time before the closure or relocation of the employee’s
office, facility, activity, or organization and the employee would be likely to leave for a different position in the
Federal service in the absence of a retention incentive. For additional guidance, see DM-4040-575-001, Pay
Administration – Recruitment, Relocation and Retention Incentives,
http://www.ocio.usda.gov/sites/default/files/docs/2012/DM4050-575-001.pdf.

Subject: Request payment of a (dollar amount/incentive percentage rate) for a retention incentive to (selectee
name) tentative selectee for Senior Executive Service (SES) position of (position title), (series), (organization)

Justification Statement must include: A retention incentive and the amount of the incentive must be justified in
writing by the appropriate approving authority before the incentive may be paid. The determination to pay a
retention incentive must be based on but not limited to:

    •    Employment trends and labor market factors. The availability of quality candidates in the labor market that
         have the required competencies and who could perform all the duties and responsibilities of the employee’s
         position at the level performed by the employee, with minimal training, cost, or disruption of the service to
         the public;
    •    The success of recent efforts to recruit candidates and retain employees with qualifications similar to those
         possessed by the employee for positions similar to the position held by the employee. For purposes of
         retention incentive approval, positions are considered similar when they possess the same duties and
         responsibilities and the same level of responsibility;
    •    Any special or unique competencies, skills, or training required for the position should be thoroughly
         described in relation to the operating unit’s work;
    •    Efforts to use non-pay human resources (HR) flexibilities (e.g., work scheduling options, telework, special
         training, improved working conditions, etc.) to help retain the employee;
    •    Salary and benefits packages usually paid for comparable positions with similar duties and responsibilities
         in the private, non-profit and government (non-Federal) sectors;
    •    The desirability of the duties, work or organizational environment, geographic locations of the positions;
    •    The extent to which the employee’s departure would impair the ability to carry out an activity, perform a
         function, and/or complete a project deemed essential to the operating unit’s mission. If a retention incentive
         is based on the likelihood that an employee is likely to retire if the incentive is not paid, include recruitment
         and/or succession planning efforts for the position;
    •    When the executive’s rating of record under an official performance appraisal or evaluation system is at
         least “Fully Successful” or equivalent; and
    •    Other supporting factors.

RECOMMENDATION:

Recommended by: _______________________________________                             _________________
                     Agency/Staff Office Head                                               Date

Reviewed by: ___________________________________________                            _________________
                       Executive Director, ERMD                                            Date

NOTE: Further clearance and approval for the request will be obtained via Form AD-3073, Executive Resources
Personnel Action Selection Request.




                                                           22
                                                                  EXHIBIT 8

                 SAMPLE EXECUTIVE RESOURCES PERSONNEL ACTION SELECTION REQUEST FORM

                                                   U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                        Executive Resources Personnel Action Selection Request
1. Name (Last, First, Middle)

2. First Action                                                            3. Second Action

4. From (Position Title)                                                   5. To (Position Title)

6. Pay Plan       7. Grade/Step      8. Series       9. Salary             10. Pay Plan      11. Grade/Step       12. Series     13. Salary

14. Agency, Organization Title, Duty Station                               15. Agency, Organization Title, Duty Station

16. Other Compensation and Pay Setting (Attach supporting documentation explaining in detail the proposed request)
☐Recruitment Incentive
                                                                           ☐Superior Qualifications Authority
☐Relocation Incentive
                                                                           ☐Special Needs Authority
☐Retention Incentive
17. Reason for Action (If vacancy, indicate name of former incumbent):

Certification: The position is necessary to carry out the mission of the Agency/Staff Office. The candidate proposed is qualified for the
position, is suitable for employment, and has no financial interests or otherwise that would pose any real or apparent conflict-of-interest if
appointed to this position. Funds are available to finance this action.
18. Cleared By

Signature _____________________________________________________________                             Date _____________
          Agency Head or Staff Office Director

Signature _____________________________________________________________                             Date _____________
          Under or Assistant Secretary

Signature _____________________________________________________________                             Date _____________
          Director, Executive Resources Management Division

Signature _____________________________________________________________                             Date _____________
          Director, Office of Human Resources Management

Signature _____________________________________________________________                             Date _____________
         Assistant Secretary for Administration


19. Approval

Signature _____________________________________________________________                             Date ____________
         By or For the Secretary of Agriculture


                                 For OSEC Use Only: ☐ Approved                         ☐ Disapproved
          Disclaimer Statement: This form is intended for use by the Office of Human Resources Management, Executive
          Resources Management Division only. It is to be used to obtain approval to manage USDA executive resources.




                                                                       23
                                       APPENDIX A

                           AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES

This directive must be used with:

U.S.C. 5381-5385, Pay for the Senior Executive Service (SES)

5 CFR Part 534, Subpart D, Pay and Performance Awards Under the Senior Executive Service

5 CFR Part 530, Subpart B, Aggregate Limitation on Pay

5 U.S.C. 5307, Limitations on Certain Payments

5 U.S.C. 5753 and 5 CFR Part 575, Subpart A, Recruitment Incentive

5 U.S.C. 5753 and 5 CFR Part 575, Subpart B, Relocation Incentive

5 U.S.C. 5754 and 5 CFR Part 575, Subpart C, Retention Incentive

Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Senior Executive Service (SES) Desk Guide (most
recent working draft)

USDA DM-4050-575-001, Pay Administration – Recruitment, Relocation and Retention
Incentives

5 CFR Part 531, Subpart B, Using a Highest Previous Rate Under the Maximum Payable Rate
Rule




                                            A-1
                                   APPENDIX B

                                   DEFINITIONS


Agencies                                 Refers to mission areas, agencies or staff
                                         offices (such as the Office of General
                                         Counsel).
Agency Head                              The head of a Department of Agriculture
                                         (USDA) agency or an official who has been
                                         delegated the authority to act for the head of
                                         the agency in the matter concerned. The
                                         Agency Head for USDA is the Secretary of
                                         Agriculture.
Basic Pay                                Basic pay is defined as the rate fixed by
                                         applicable law or regulation. Basic pay does
                                         not include other types of pay such as:
                                         bonuses, allowances, overtime, holiday, and
                                         military pay or supplemental payments from
                                         the Office of Workers’ Compensation
                                         Programs (OWCP).
Executive Resources Board (ERB)          A group comprised of USDA career and non-
                                         career senior executives who review and
                                         provide recommendations to the Secretary or
                                         designee on various SES policies and
                                         programs. Pertinent to this policy are pay,
                                         compensation and performance management.
GS Maximum Payable Rate                  The lowest rate on the current pay scale of the
                                         employee’s grade that is equal to or exceeds
                                         his or her highest previous rate.
Highest Previous Rate (HPR)              The highest rate of basic pay previously
                                         received by an individual while employed in a
                                         civilian position in any part of the Federal
                                         Government without regard to whether that
                                         position was under the GS pay system; or the
                                         highest rate of basic pay in effect when a GS
                                         employee held his or her highest GS grade and
                                         highest step within that grade.
Performance-Based Pay Adjustment         A salary increase or decrease resulting from a
                                         senior executive’s annual summary rating
                                         approved by the appointing authority. Pay may
                                         be adjusted once in any 12-month period.




                                       B-1
Performance Review Board (PRB)     A group of career and non-career senior
                                   executives appointed by the Secretary
                                   responsible for the oversight of the
                                   performance management and compensation
                                   processes for senior executives.
Previous Salary                    Basic pay plus locality pay (or if coming from
                                   outside government, best equivalent)
                                   immediately prior to the SES appointment.
Service Period                     A specified period of employment with the
                                   agency.
Staff Office                       A USDA administrative office whose head
                                   reports to the Secretary.
Staff Office Head                  The Head of a Staff Office or an official who
                                   has been delegated the authority to act for the
                                   Head of the Staff Office in the matter
                                   concerned.
Twelve (12) Month Period           Fifty-two (52) week period from the last pay
                                   adjustment that is known as the 12-month rule.
USDA SES Position Structure        A three-level system that groups positions with
                                   common characteristics. Position levels
                                   delineate the importance of different positions
                                   by placing emphasis on the characteristics of
                                   positions such as impact on mission, level of
                                   complexity, span of control, inherent authority,
                                   scope and breath of responsibility and
                                   influence in national security matters.




                                 B-2
