                        U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                              WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                        NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                DR 4040-430
                                                        DATE:
 SUBJECT: Employee Performance and Awards               June 24, 2020
                                                        EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of Human Resources Management
                                                        June 24, 2025



Section                                                                    Page

1.  Purpose                                                                  2
2.  Special Instructions/Cancellations                                       2
3.  Scope                                                                    2
4.  Policy                                                                   3
5.  Performance Management                                                   3
    a. Additional Exceptions to Scope                                        3
    b. Guiding Principles for Performance Management                         4
    c. General Performance Management Provisions                             5
    d. Performance Plan Components                                           6
    e. Planning Performance                                                  9
    f. Monitoring Performance                                               12
    g. Developing Performance                                               15
    h. Evaluating Performance                                               16
    i. Addressing Performance Problems                                      25
    j. Performance Management Training Requirements                         30
    k. Linking Performance to Other Personnel Systems                       31
6. Awards and Recognition                                                   35
    a. Guiding Principles for Awards and Recognition                        35
    b. General Award Provisions                                             36
    c. Monetary and Time Off Awards                                         38
    d. Quality Step Increases                                               49
    e. Non-monetary Awards                                                  52
    f. Ceremonies and Refreshments                                          61
    g. Special Situations                                                   62
    h. Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Awards                        63
    i. External Awards                                                      63
7. Forms and Records                                                        64
8. Roles and Responsibilities                                               66
9. Compliance                                                               70
10. Policy Exceptions                                                       70
11. Inquiries                                                               70
Appendix A - Abbreviations and Acronyms                                                   A-1
Appendix B - Definitions                                                                  B-1
Appendix C - Authorities and References                                                   C-1
Appendix D - Monetary Award and TOA Authorization Requirements                            D-1
Appendix E - Measurable and Non-Measurable Benefits Scales                                E-1
Appendix F - President’s Volunteer Service Award Eligibility Criteria                     F-1



1. PURPOSE

   a.   Performance Management. This DR sets forth the United States Department of
        Agriculture’s (USDA) policy for the Non-Executive Performance Management Program
        within the Appraisal System approved by the Office of Personnel Management (OPM)
        on January 10, 2020, with an effective date of October 1, 2020.

   b.   Awards and Recognition. This DR also sets forth USDA’s policies for the Employee
        Awards and Recognition Program.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

   a.   This DR supersedes DR 4040-430, Performance Management, dated February 6, 2019.

   b.   This directive also cancels:

        (1) DR 4040-451-1, USDA Employee Awards and Recognition Program, dated January
            20, 2011; and

        (2) DR 4040-451-04, Referral Bonus Awards, dated November 18, 2005.

   c.   This directive is effective October 1, 2020 and remains in effect until it is superseded or
        it expires.


3. SCOPE

   This directive applies to all USDA employees except:

   a. Members of the Senior Executive Service (SES);

   b. Senior Level (SL) and Scientific and Professional (ST) positions;

   c. Members of the Senior Science and Technology Service;

   d. Foreign Service employees; and

   e. Presidential appointees.


                                                 2
4. POLICY

  a.   In accordance with 5 United States Code (U.S.C.) 4302, Establishment of Performance
       Appraisal Systems, 5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 430, Performance
       Management, and OPM’s approval of the Performance Appraisal System (System),
       USDA’s Non-Executive Performance Management Program (Program) provides for:

       (1) Establishing employee performance plans, including elements and performance
           standards;

       (2) Communicating performance plans to employees at the beginning of an appraisal
           period;

       (3) Evaluating each employee during the appraisal period on the employee's elements
           and standards;

       (4) Recognizing and rewarding employees whose performance so warrants;

       (5) Assisting employees in improving unacceptable performance; and

       (6) Reassigning, reducing in grade, or removing employees who continue to have
           unacceptable performance, but only after an opportunity to demonstrate acceptable
           performance.

  b.   USDA’s Employee Awards and Recognition Program provides for the recognition of
       individual and group achievements, especially those that contribute to the core mission
       and goals of the Department or demonstrate exemplary performance, in accordance with
       5 U.S.C. 45, Incentive Awards, and 5 CFR Part 451, Awards.

  c.   The programs must be administered in accordance with the principles set forth in 5
       U.S.C. 2301, Merit System Principles.

  d.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may supplement this DR with prior review
       and approval of the USDA Chief Human Capital Officer (CHCO). Supplemental
       regulations may not conflict with the contents of this directive.


5. PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT

  a.   Additional Exceptions to Scope.

       (1) In addition to the exceptions listed in Section 3, the following are excluded from the
           provisions of Section 5:

            (a) Employees appointed to excepted service positions who are not reasonably
                expected to be employed longer than the 90-day minimum appraisal period in a
                consecutive 12-month period;



                                               3
         (b) Employees serving in temporary appointments for less than 1 year, who agree
             to serve without a performance evaluation, and who will not be considered for
             reappointments or pay increases based, in whole or in part, on performance;

         (c) Positions filled under 5 CFR § 213.3102(k), Entire Executive Civil Service,
             when occupied by employees to whom no compensation is paid;

         (d) Positions filled under 5 CFR § 213.3102(l) when occupied by scientific,
             professional, or technical experts for consultation purposes;

         (e) Positions filled under 5 CFR § 213.3102(o) when occupied by faculty
             members; and

         (f) Other employees excluded from coverage by statute or by OPM regulation,
             including those excluded by 5 U.S.C. § 4301(2), Definitions.

     (2) Schedule C employees appointed under 5 CFR § 213.3301, Positions of a
         Confidential or Policy-determining Nature, are subject to the provisions of this DR
         except for coverage of the rights in 5 U.S.C. § 4303, Actions Based on
         Unacceptable Performance.

b.   Guiding Principles for Performance Management. The following principles are the
     foundation for USDA’s Program and provide the policy parameters for situations not
     specifically described in this DR:

     (1) Performance is not a program or an initiative, but the qualitative and quantitative
         delivery, by organizations and individuals, of the USDA mission to the public and
         other stakeholders.

     (2) The success of the USDA Program lies with the employees and Rating and
         Reviewing Officials who work within the Program, rather than with the policies or
         structure of the Program.

     (3) Setting clear expectations is the foundation for effective performance management.

     (4) Ongoing and meaningful feedback around progress toward goals is more important
         than the mechanics of the rating process.

     (5) The hallmarks of a successful performance management program include:

         (a) Alignment with USDA strategic performance goals and results, cascaded from
             the most senior levels down to individual employees;

         (b) Clearly defined, outcome-based performance standards and measures in plans;

         (c) Accountability at all levels;




                                             4
         (d) Timely and ongoing feedback and learning;

         (e) Differentiating between acceptable and unacceptable performance; and

         (f) A culture of engagement and recognition for work done well.

c.   General Performance Management Provisions.

     (1) Performance Cycle. Ensuring the efficient and effective use of the workforce is not
         just a quarterly event. Performance management is a continuous cycle that
         involves:

         (a) Planning work in advance so that expectations and goals can be set;

         (b) Monitoring progress and performance continually, and providing ongoing
             feedback;

         (c) Developing the employee's ability to perform through training and work
             assignments;

         (d) Evaluating and rating to summarize performance; and

         (e) Recognizing and rewarding employees’ contributions.

     (2) Plans and Ratings. USDA requires a timely and credible performance plan and
         rating of record for each eligible employee.

     (3) System Design.

         (a) The System provides for ratings of record that differentiate performance as
             either Fully Successful or Unacceptable.

         (b) Appraisal Period. USDA’s official appraisal period is October 1 through
             September 30 of each calendar year (also known as the performance year.)
             The appraisal period may be adjusted as early as 75 days before October 1 and
             as late as October 30 to accommodate special situations, as described in
             Sections 5e and h.

         (c) Minimum Appraisal Period. The minimum performance appraisal period for a
             rating of record is 90 calendar days in active status under an approved
             performance plan.

              1   The 90 days do not need to be consecutive.

              2   Annual measures must be prorated if the appraisal period is less than 1
                  year.




                                            5
     (4) Separation of Roles. One individual may not serve as both the Rating and
         Reviewing Official for a performance plan or rating. The Reviewing Official must
         be in the Rating Official’s chain of command.

     (5) Performance Management and Virtual/Telework.

          (a) Defining Production and Quality Expectations. Employees who are approved
              for telework or who work virtually will not be held to a higher or lower
              production or quality standard than those who are not utilizing the flexibility.

          (b) Defining Responsiveness Expectations. Rating Officials may include
              performance measures specific to responding to email, phone calls, and/or
              instant messaging, commensurate with the responsiveness expectations for
              employees who are physically in the office.

          (c) General Telework Provisions. See DR 4080-811-002, Telework Program.

d.   Performance Plan Components.

     (1) Performance Elements.

         (a) Performance elements must reflect the responsibilities and duties actually
             assigned to and expected to be performed by the employee, consistent with an
             accurate and current position description.

         (b) All elements are designated as critical.

         (c) A performance element contains:

              1    The element title which identifies a significant program, duty, and/or
                   responsibility for which the employee is accountable; and

              2    The associated standards and measures which will permit the accurate
                   evaluation of job performance based on specific, clearly-defined criteria.

          (d) Elements may only reflect performance expectations for work that is within the
              control of the individual employee.

          (e) Elements may not reflect team expectations for non-supervisory employees.

     (2) Performance Standards and Measures.

         (a) Standards describe results, outcomes, goals, and expected accomplishments,
             rather than lists of duties and responsibilities. They are the performance
             thresholds, requirements, and expectations an employee must meet for an
             element to be appraised at the Fully Successful level of performance.




                                             6
(b) Performance measures are the defined indicators within the standards used to
    determine how well the employee produced or provided products or services.
    They are criteria that are observable and/or demonstrable, and may gauge
    quality, quantity, timeliness, cost effectiveness, and/or manner of performance.

(c) Measures must be balanced and credible.

(d) Each element’s standards must be defined at the Fully Successful level.
    Standards and measures must specify all of the following for each element,
    commensurate with the series and grade of the position:

    1    A tangible and substantive outcome that reflects the essential purpose of
         the position;

    2    A level of performance throughout the appraisal period that demonstrates
         quality work in support of the Department and Mission Area, agency, or
         staff office mission that meets deadlines or schedules for completion of
         work; and

    3    A level of performance that necessitates the effective application of
         judgment, technical skills, and organizational knowledge to successfully
         complete work products.

(e) Elements must not include standards at the Does Not Meet Fully Successful
    level. The expectations defined at the Fully Successful level are the
    demarcation for the element, and performance that falls below that level will be
    automatically designated Does Not Meet Fully Successful.

(f) Absolute standards are prohibited unless a single failure could result in loss of
    life, injury, breach of national security, or great monetary loss.

(g) Backwards standards are prohibited.

(h) Standards and measures may be defined using milestones throughout the
    performance year to ensure continual progress is being made.

(i) Performance measures must be prorated when the appraisal period is less than
    1 year.

(j) Assigning generic standards to all employees is prohibited if the generic
    standards do not truly represent their work.

    1    Generic standards covering similar positions with similar responsibilities
         must ensure expectations reflect the respective employee’s actual duties
         and responsibilities, and are clearly and specifically communicated.




                                    7
        2    Generic standards may be clarified via such things as supplemental
             standards, measures within the standards, memoranda, standard operating
             procedures, and checklists for office processes.

        3    Generic standards must be commensurate with the grade of the positions
             to which they are assigned.

(3) Content Requirements.

    (a) Except as described in Section 5e(4)(f), the performance plan for each position
        must:

        1    Communicate in writing the elements for the position, and each element’s
             performance standards and measures;

        2    Contain all elements that will be used in deriving and assigning a
             summary rating;

        3    Include:

             a   A minimum of three and not more than seven performance elements;

             b   At least one mission results-oriented element that is aligned with the
                 organization’s strategic goals and objectives, and reflects the primary
                 purpose of the position;

                 i.     The element should not be so broad as to include every
                        programmatic outcome expected of the position; expectations for
                        multiple or secondary functions should be defined under separate
                        elements.

                 ii.    This element must also reflect the civil rights-related
                        expectations related to the employee’s program responsibilities.

             c   Specific performance standards for each element;

             d   Credible measures within each performance standard; and

             e   Standards and measures that relate to customer perspectives in at least
                 one element.

        4    Be commensurate with the position’s series and grade level;

        5    Not be made more or less rigorous based on a particular employee’s
             perceived strengths or weaknesses, or based on past performance;

        6    Encompass the most significant duties and responsibilities assigned to and
             expected to be performed by the employee (if the current performance


                                        8
                   expectations do not match the employee’s position description, the
                   position description should be revised); and

              7    Be updated as necessary throughout the performance year.

          (b) Supervisory Plans.

              1    In addition to the requirements of Section 5d(3)(a), performance plans for
                   supervisors and managers must contain an element for general supervision
                   and leadership that includes:

                   a   Expectations related to performance management;

                   b   Expectations related to supervisory civil rights and Equal
                       Employment Opportunity (EEO) responsibilities; and

                   c   Expectations related to employee engagement.

              2    Any mandatory language for this subsection will be announced via
                   memoranda.

          (c) New Roles.

              1    Standards for employees new to their position and/or recently promoted
                   should reflect, at the Fully Successful level, expectations specific to the
                   employee learning the new responsibilities.

              2    Standards for new or recently promoted employees should be defined on a
                   case-by-case basis, depending on the employee’s experience with similar
                   responsibilities and the complexity of the new position or grade level.

              3    The standards should reflect the timeframe by which the employee should
                   complete training, gain familiarity with the role, and/or begin to perform
                   the full range of duties of the position.

e.   Planning Performance.

     (1) Rating Official Responsibilities.

          (a) Communicate the strategic goals of the organization, and how the employee’s
              responsibilities align with those goals;

          (b) Establish individual performance plans that clearly communicate the
              expectations for fully successful performance and comply with the
              requirements of Section 5d;

          (c) Engage employees during the process of establishing and documenting
              performance plans and ensuring employees understand what is expected; and


                                             9
    (d) Ensure duties covered by performance elements are included in the respective
        employee’s position description.

(2) Employee Responsibilities.

    (a) Provide input to their Rating Official concerning the development of the
        performance plan, including performance elements, standards, and measures;
        and

    (b) Ensure they have a clear understanding of their performance expectations and
        how their performance relates to the mission of the organization.

(3) Timeframes.

    (a) An approved performance plan must be issued to eligible employees no later
        than:

         1   30 days from the beginning of the new performance year;

         2   15 days from when an employee starts a new position, a detail, or
             temporary promotion of 90 or more days; or

         3   15 days from a new assignment or change in assignment that impacts the
             expectations of the position during the appraisal period.

    (b) Performance plans do not roll over from one performance year to the next, but
        the elements and standards in an approved plan will remain in effect during a
        grace period while the new plan is being finalized for the new performance
        year.

    (c) A performance plan put in place fewer than 75 days before the end of a
        performance year may carry through the next performance year, provided the
        effective dates on the plan reflect the entire period.

    (d) When a Rating Official is assigned to a new supervisory position, performance
        plans for subordinate employees must be reviewed with the employees within
        30 days, and revised as necessary, consistent with Sections 5f(5) and (6).

(4) Basic Provisions.

    (a) Rating Officials must formally communicate expectations before holding
        employees accountable for them.

    (b) The final authority for establishing performance plans rests with management,
        typically the Rating Official, and optionally with the Reviewing Official’s
        review and concurrence.




                                     10
(c) Employee Participation in the Performance Plan.

    1   Rating Officials must involve employees in the development of their
        performance plans prior to the start of a new performance year, as much as
        practicable, which means seeking and considering employees’ ideas and
        opinions in the development of performance plans.

    2   Employees should indicate in the appropriate block of their performance
        plan whether they participated in developing their plan.

(d) Consistency. Performance plans are not required to be uniform, but they must
    be fair and equitable throughout a Reviewing Official’s respective
    organizations.

(e) Finalizing the Performance Plan.

    1   A performance plan is final when the Rating Official and, optionally, the
        Reviewing Official, sign the performance plan and issue it to the
        employee.

    2   If a manager is signing subordinates’ performance plans in their capacity
        as Reviewing Official, they should not approve any performance plan until
        they are satisfied that the plan has met the requirements of Section 5d and
        are otherwise consistent with the provisions of this DR.

    3   Employees are requested to sign and date Form Agriculture Department
        (AD)-435E, Performance Plan and Appraisal for Non-Supervisors, or
        Form AD-435S, Performance Plan and Appraisal for Supervisors to
        certify receipt of their performance plan.

        a    An employee’s signature does not mean that the employee agrees or
             disagrees with the contents of the plan.

        b    An employee’s failure or refusal to sign does not void the contents of
             the plan or the performance expectations documented within it.

        c    If an employee declines to sign the Form AD-435E or Form AD-
             435S, the Rating Official should document the refusal and the reasons
             presented by the employee on the form.

(f) Performance Plans for Temporary Assignments.

    1   Temporary assignments lasting longer than 180 days require a full
        performance plan.

    2   Temporary assignments lasting between 90 and 180 days require an
        abbreviated performance plan containing:


                                 11
                   a    A mission results-oriented element; and, as applicable;

                   b    The general supervision and leadership element for a temporary
                        assignment as a supervisor.

              3    Temporary assignments of fewer than 90 days require a documented
                   summary of expectations, but not a full or abbreviated plan.

f.   Monitoring Performance.

     (1) Rating Official Responsibilities.

          (a) Provide regular, recurring, and timely performance feedback to employees,
              including monitoring progress toward quarterly and annual goals;

          (b) Maintain documentation and records relevant to each employee’s performance,
              including feedback from customers and other stakeholders;

          (c) Review progress toward goals with each employee no less than once each
              quarter, as described in Section 5f(4);

          (d) Review performance standards and measures to determine if they are still
              current and applicable, and revise as necessary.

          (e) Identify and document potential issues with any employee meeting their
              performance expectations, and address concerns with the employee before their
              performance falls below the Fully Successful level for any element as defined
              on their performance plans; and

          (f) Take appropriate action to address performance not meeting expectations,
              consistent with Section 5i.

     (2) Reviewing Official Responsibilities.

          (a) Immediately communicate changes in organizational priorities to both Rating
              Officials and employees;

          (b) Ensure subordinate Rating Officials are effectively managing their respective
              employees’ performance, including complying with the requirements of this
              Section; and

          (c) Carry out the Rating Official responsibilities in this Section for all direct
              reports.

     (3) Employee Responsibilities.

          (a) Carry out the performance expectations defined in their performance plans,
              including meeting applicable milestones;


                                              12
    (b) Seek clarification on the standards and measures, as needed;

    (c) Identify work problems or other obstacles which may hinder the
        accomplishment of performance expectations, and work with Rating Officials
        to resolve them;

    (d) Seek performance feedback from their Rating Official and, as appropriate,
        from internal and external customers; and

    (e) Participate in the quarterly conversations with their Rating Official.

(4) Quarterly Conversations.

    (a) Rating Officials must have a specific conversation with each employee to
        discuss performance no less than once each quarter.

    (b) The purpose of the conversations is to facilitate regular and ongoing
        communication between the Rating Official and the employee that:

        1    Supports the attainment of organizational and individual goals; and

        2    Promptly identifies and addresses any performance concerns.

    (c) Quarterly conversations will be scheduled within each quarter of the
        performance year (e.g., for the second quarter, between January 1 and March
        31).

    (d) Topics to be covered will include:

        1    Assessing progress toward the standards and measures in the performance
             plans;

        2    Clarifying existing expectations, as necessary;

        3    Discussing potential concerns about meeting expectations or any obstacles
             hindering the employee’s capacity to meet the expectations, and how
             they’ll be handled;

        4    Documenting new assignments, potentially reprioritizing or eliminating
             other assignments, and revising the performance plan as necessary;

        5    Identifying the need for training and/or development, if necessary; and

        6    Providing feedback on the quality of performance in that quarter.

    (e) There is no minimum period of time for the employee to perform under
        standards or for the Rating Official to be in that role, before a quarterly
        performance conversation takes place.


                                       13
    (f) The combination of conveying of an annual rating of record and the
        communication of a new performance plan may be considered one quarterly
        conversation (normally the first quarter of the performance year).

    (g) The requirement in Section 5e(3)(d) is considered a quarterly conversation.

    (h) Except as noted in Section 5f(4)(f), quarterly performance conversations do not
        include a rating of record, and no rating of record may be expressly promised
        or implied to an employee. However, discussions may indicate the need to
        significantly revise the performance plan, necessitating an interim rating to
        cover the period of performance under the original plan.

    (i) Rating Officials must initial and date, and ask their employees to initial and
        date, the Form AD-435E, Form AD-435S, or approved electronic alternative to
        document the reviews have taken place.

(5) Updating Performance Plans.

    (a) Employee plans must be updated during the performance year when minor
        changes need to be documented, for example:

        1    Clarification of standards and measures;

        2    New organizational goals or priorities that do not significantly impact the
             original standards; or

        3    Elimination of existing work assignments due to factors beyond an
             employee’s control that make the original expectations unachievable.

    (b) Pen and ink changes or other form of documentation for minor modifications
        may be made at any time, provided the employee is informed before the
        changes are made effective.

        1    The employee should initial such changes to indicate receipt;

        2    Rating Officials must document and keep records of all such modifications
             and related conversations to demonstrate the employee was informed; and

        3    If these changes are made in an electronic system, they may be noted in a
             comments section.

(6) Revising Performance Plans.

    (a) Employee plans must be revised during the performance year when significant
        changes need to be documented, for example:

        1    Adding a substantial new expectation; or



                                      14
              2    Adding a significant new standard or measure.

         (b) Such changes made 90 or more days before the end of the performance year
             require an interim rating, provided the employee worked at least 90 days under
             the existing performance plan.

         (c) Such changes made fewer than 90 days before the end of the performance year
             require a rating of record. The new performance plan will cover the remaining
             time in the current performance year, as well as the following performance
             year.

g.   Developing Performance.

     (1) Rating Official Responsibilities.

         (a) Work with employees to identify opportunities for development to improve or
             enhance performance;

         (b) Encourage employees to seek professional and technical development
             opportunities to enhance their contribution to the Department and Mission
             Area, agency, and staff office goals; and

         (c) Prioritize the funding available for an employee’s development to ensure
             performance-related training is given first consideration.

     (2) Employee Responsibilities.

         (a) Be accountable for developing and improving their own performance;

         (b) Complete developmental assignments; and

         (c) Apply learning from training and other developmental opportunities to
             materially improve their performance.

     (3) Developing performance pertains to increasing an employee’s capacity to perform
         the current expectations of the position, rather than providing training opportunities
         to prepare the employee for a substantially different role or higher grade.

     (4) Performance-related developmental opportunities include, but are not limited to:

         (a) Classroom or online training;

         (b) On-the-job-training;

         (c) Rotational assignments;

         (d) Mentoring;



                                             15
          (e) Special assignments;

          (f) Details and reassignments;

          (g) Process improvement teams; and

          (h) Self-development activities.

h.   Evaluating Performance.

     (1) Ratings of Record.

          (a) Rating Official Responsibilities.

              1    Accurately assess the performance of employees throughout the entire
                   appraisal period according to the elements, standards, and measures in the
                   performance plan;

              2    Ensure employees’ performance upon which the ratings are based is well-
                   documented;

              3    Submit the proposed ratings to the Reviewing Official before issuing them
                   to the employee;

              4    Issue the final ratings of record to employees after the Reviewing Official
                   has signed them; and

              5    Complete ratings within prescribed deadlines.

          (b) Reviewing Official Responsibilities.

              1    Evaluate their subordinate Rating Officials to ensure accountability for
                   effective performance management in accordance with the standards and
                   measures in the performance management element;

              2    Review the ratings proposed by their subordinate Rating Officials for
                   accuracy, objectivity, completeness, and consistency with the plan’s
                   standards;

              3    Direct revisions as necessary; and

              4    Sign the final ratings of record before they are issued to employees.

          (c) Employee Responsibilities.

              1    If required by the Rating or Reviewing Official, or on own initiative,
                   submit an accomplishment report to their respective Rating Official, which
                   details:


                                             16
         a   Personal performance, contributions, and accomplishments that align
             with the standards and measures for each element in their
             performance plan; and

         b   Any additional performance, contributions, and accomplishments that
             are not specific to the expectations documented in the performance
             plan.

     2   Submit work products and other documentation to support the
         accomplishment report, as necessary.

(d) Timeframes. Rating and Reviewing Officials must complete ratings of record
    as soon as practicable after the end of the appraisal period, and issue them to
    employees no later than October 30th.

(e) General Provisions.

    1    A rating of record must be produced:

         a   Following the end of the performance year, provided the employee
             has performed under an established plan for a minimum of 90 days,
             which need not be consecutive;

         b   When a within-grade increase (WGI) decision is not consistent with
             the employee's most recent rating of record and a more current rating
             of record is required; and

         c   When, within 90 days prior to the end of the performance year:

             i. An employee’s performance plan is significantly revised;

             ii. An employee resigns or transfers to a position outside USDA;

             iii. An employee is reassigned or promoted;

             iv. An employee’s Rating Official leaves their position; or

             v. There is any combination of the above.

    2    If an employee did not work under a performance plan for at least 90 days
         prior to the ratings deadline, a rating of record for that performance year
         cannot be produced.

    3    Ratings must be based on actual employee performance during the
         performance year.

         a   Presumptive ratings are prohibited.



                                  17
        b   Ratings of record must not be carried forward from a previous
            appraisal period.

        c   Previous ratings of record have no impact on determining the current
            rating of record.

    4   The appraisal period will not be extended for the purpose of permitting the
        employee to demonstrate performance at the Fully Successful level in any
        element to the extent that the rating of record is not completed by the
        deadline.

    5   Forced Distribution. Placing limitations on the use of particular summary
        rating levels (e.g., mandating a certain percentage of ratings at the
        Unacceptable level), is prohibited.

(f) Methodology for Determining the Rating of Record.

    1   Determining the Proposed Element Ratings.

        a   Each performance element must be evaluated separately, based on
            actual performance, accomplishments, contributions, and results.

        b   There is no default element rating. The expectations articulated at the
            Fully Successful level of an element’s standards and measures must
            be entirely met before assigning that element rating.

        c   An element rating may not be lowered:

            i.    Because of work that was not completed while an employee was
                  on pre-approved leave;

            ii.   Because of work that could not be completed due to an
                  abbreviated performance year; and/or

            iii. For not meeting a specific standard due solely to factors outside
                 the employee’s control.

        d   The Rating and Reviewing Officials retain discretion in determining
            whether extenuating circumstances provide a reasonable explanation
            as to why a performance expectation was not achieved. This
            determination must be specifically documented in a narrative
            assessment for the element.

        e   The Rating Official must prepare a narrative assessment supporting
            the proposed evaluation of any element below the Fully Successful
            level. The narrative must:



                                 18
             i. Specify the factual details regarding any expectations not met
                relative to each element that is evaluated at the Does Not Meet
                Fully Successful level; and

             ii. Be based on documentary or other evidence that objectively and
                 clearly describes the employee’s performance during the appraisal
                 period.

         f   The Rating Official may not discuss preliminary ratings with anyone
             except the Reviewing Official, the Reviewing Official’s manager, and
             human resources or civil rights staff in an official capacity. This does
             not preclude discussions between the Rating Official and the
             employee prior to the determination of the proposed rating (e.g.,
             seeking clarification of an item the employee included in an
             accomplishment report).

    2    Calculating the Summary Rating. If all elements are rated Fully
         Successful, the summary rating is Fully Successful. If any element is not
         rated Fully Successful, the summary rating is Unacceptable.

    3    Determining the Final Ratings.

         a   The Rating Official must provide the proposed ratings and any
             required narrative assessment to the Reviewing Official for
             consideration.

         b   If the Reviewing Official reaches a different conclusion on one or
             more proposed ratings, the Rating and Reviewing Officials must
             attempt to resolve the disparity.

         c   If they are unable to resolve their differences, the Reviewing Official
             will determine the final rating(s). Under no circumstances may the
             Rating Official communicate, directly or indirectly, the differences to
             the employee.

         d   The Reviewing Official may be overruled by their respective
             manager.

(g) Finalizing the Rating of Record.

    1    A summary rating is valid and becomes the rating of record when the
         Rating Official and Reviewing Official sign the Form AD-435E or Form
         AD-435S.

    2    If the Rating Official disagrees with the Reviewing Official’s final
         element rating(s), they may decline to sign the rating.



                                  19
    a   In this case, the Reviewing Official must sign as the Rating Official,
        and the Reviewing Official’s manager must sign as the Reviewing
        Official.

    b   The original Rating Official may not discuss the differences of
        opinion with anyone except their 1st and 2nd line supervisor.

    c   The respective narrative assessment must be written or updated to
        reflect the final element rating.

3   The rating of record must be issued to the employee.

    a   The Rating Official, whether the employee’s supervisor of record or
        the official who signed the rating, must review the rating of record
        with the employee.

    b   The employee's signature on Form AD-435E or Form AD-435S will
        serve as certification that such a discussion took place. The
        employee’s signature:

        i. Does not necessarily signify that the employee agrees with the
           rating; and

        ii. Does not preclude the employee from following the provisions of
            Section 5h(1)(i)2.

    c   If this discussion cannot take place, the Rating Official must
        document the reason for not having the employee’s signature on the
        form.

    d   If the employee refuses to sign Form AD-435E or Form AD-435S:

        i. The Rating Official must document the reason for not having the
           employee’s signature on the form.

        ii. The rating is the permanent rating of record unless the employee
            exercises the provisions of Section 5h(1)(i)2 and the rating is
            subsequently changed.

4   The Rating Official must also:

    a   Provide a copy of the completed rating and any supporting
        documentation to the servicing Human Resources Office (HRO) for
        processing and maintenance; and

    b   Retain a copy of the completed rating and any supporting
        documentation for the Rating Official’s supervisory file.


                            20
(h) Special Situations.

    1    Absence of a Plan Throughout the Performance Year. If an employee was
         not on a performance plan at any point during the performance year, a
         rating of record cannot be produced for that year.

    2    Absence of a Plan at the End of the Performance Year.

         a   If an employee is not on a performance plan at the end of the
             performance year, but served under a plan that defined work similar
             to that of the position of record for at least 90 days at some point
             during the year:

             i. An interim rating of Fully Successful for that time period will
                serve as the rating of record.

             ii. If the interim rating is Unacceptable, but the employee
                 demonstrates performance at the Fully Successful level before
                 October 30, the rating of record will be Fully Successful.

             iii. If the interim rating is Unacceptable, and the employee does not
                  demonstrate performance at the Fully Successful level before
                  October 30th, the rating of record will be Unacceptable.

         b   The 90 days do not need to be consecutive.

         c   If an interim rating was not done, a rating of record cannot be
             produced for that year.

    3    Employee Leave.

         a   If an employee is on active duty or other leave at the end of the
             performance year, and the employee performed at least 90 days on a
             performance plan, the rating of record must be prepared and held until
             the employee’s return. The 90 days do not need to be consecutive.

         b   If an employee who has performed at least 90 days on a performance
             plan is preparing to go on active duty or other leave and does not plan
             to return to duty before October 30, the rating of record must be
             prepared and issued to the employee before the leave begins.

         c   If the employee was on active duty or other leave for an extended
             period, and did not perform at least 90 days on a performance plan, a
             rating of record cannot be produced for that performance year.

    4    Vacant Supervisory Position. If a supervisory position is vacant at the end
         of the performance year, the second-level supervisor will serve as the


                                  21
    Rating Official, and the third-level supervisor will serve as the Reviewing
    Official.

5   New Supervisors.

    a   New supervisors may serve as Rating Officials provided the
        following:

        i.    The subordinate employees have been under established
              performance plans for the minimum appraisal period of 90 days;

        ii.   The supervisor has completed formal training in assessing and
              rating performance; and

        iii. If the supervisor has been in the supervisory role for fewer than
             90 days, there is at least one interim rating to consider in the
             rating of record.

    b   If all of those provisions are not in place, the second-level supervisor
        will serve as the Rating Official, and the third-level supervisor will
        serve as the Reviewing Official.

6   Acting Supervisors.

    a   Individuals in acting supervisory roles at the end of the performance
        year or at the end of an extended appraisal period may serve as Rating
        or Reviewing Officials, provided the following:

        i. The employees have been under established performance plans
           for the minimum appraisal period of 90 days;

        ii. The acting supervisor is officially designated as acting for a
            period of at least 60 days, either by detail or temporary
            promotion;

        iii. The acting supervisor has completed formal training in assessing
             and rating performance; and

        iv. If the acting supervisor has been in the acting supervisory role for
            fewer than 90 days, there is at least one interim rating to consider
            in the rating of record.

    b   If those provisions are not met, the second-level supervisor will serve
        as the Rating Official, and the third-level supervisor will serve as the
        Reviewing Official.

7   Employees Detailed Outside of USDA.


                             22
        a    When an employee is detailed outside of the Department, the
             supervisor of record must make a reasonable effort to obtain appraisal
             information from the outside organization.

        b    If such information is unattainable and the employee worked under a
             performance plan within USDA for fewer than 90 days in the
             performance year, a rating of record cannot be produced for that
             performance year.

        c    A rating of record recommended by the external organization must be
             approved by the respective employee’s Rating and Reviewing
             Officials of record. The final rating of record must be documented on
             the Form AD-435E or Form AD-435S and filed in the employee’s
             performance file (EPF).

    8   Disabled Veterans. The performance appraisal and resulting rating of
        record for a disabled veteran may not be lowered because the veteran has
        been absent from work to seek medical treatment as stated in Executive
        Order 5396, Special Leaves of Absence to be Given Disabled Veterans in
        Need of Medical Treatment, dated July 17, 1930.

(i) Producing or Changing a Rating of Record After the Deadline.

    1   The USDA CHCO may issue a blanket or targeted extension to the rating
        deadline for circumstances including:

        a    A lengthy furlough due to lapse in appropriations; or

        b    A weather event, other natural disaster, or pandemic which
             significantly impacted a region.

    2   Absent such extension, after December 1, a rating of record that covers the
        previous performance year may only be changed or produced under the
        following circumstances:

        a    Within 60 days of issuance based upon an informal request by the
             employee to the Rating and/or Reviewing Official.

        b    As a result of a complaint or other formal proceeding permitted by
             law or regulation that results in a final determination by the
             appropriate authority that the rating of record must be changed or
             produced or as part of a bona fide settlement of a formal proceeding;
             or

        c    Where the Mission Area’s CHCO Council Member determines that a
             rating of record was incorrectly recorded or calculated.



                                 23
(2) Interim Ratings.

    (a) General Provisions.

         1   If an employee has performed under an established plan for a minimum of
             90 consecutive or non-consecutive days, an interim rating must be
             produced when:

             a   A performance plan is revised 90 or more days before the end of the
                 performance year;

             b   The employee is reassigned or promoted 90 or more days before the
                 end of the performance year;

             c   The employee’s detail or temporary promotion of less than the full
                 performance year is ending;

             d   The employee’s detail or temporary promotion of less than the full
                 performance year continues beyond the end of the performance year;

             e   The employee transfers outside of USDA 90 or more days before the
                 end of the performance year;

             f   The employee resigns from Federal service 90 or more days before
                 the end of the performance year with at least 3 weeks’ notice;

             g   The Rating Official leaves that position 90 or more days before the
                 end of the performance year; and

             h   An acting Rating Official’s detail or temporary promotion is ending
                 after 90 or more days.

         2   Interim ratings must specify the date range of the performance.

         3   Interim ratings must be completed within 15 days of the conclusion of the
             abbreviated appraisal period, including issuing the rating to the employee
             and providing a copy to the Rating Official who will be assessing the
             employee’s performance at the end of the performance year.

         4   The Rating Official preparing the rating of record at the end of the
             performance year, in consultation with the Reviewing Official, must
             consider the nature of assignments and the length of time covered by the
             interim rating(s) when determining the impact of the interim rating(s) on
             the employee’s element and summary ratings that comprise the rating of
             record.

    (b) The interim rating process is comparatively streamlined:


                                      24
              (1) The employee will not be required to submit an accomplishment report.

              (2) The Rating Official must evaluate the employee’s performance against
                   each element in the performance plan, and, because in some situations an
                   interim rating may become the rating of record, propose a summary
                   interim rating to the Reviewing Official.

                   a    If the Reviewing Official agrees with the proposed interim rating, the
                        Rating and Reviewing Officials will sign the interim rating.

                   b    If the Reviewing Official disagrees with the proposed interim rating,
                        they may adjust the interim rating before signing it. The Rating
                        Official’s signature may be omitted if they disagree with the final
                        interim rating.

     (3) Advisory Assessments.

          (a) When an employee has performed for at least 60 but fewer than 90 days either
              in a temporary role or on a performance plan that is being revised, an advisory
              assessment must be produced within 15 days of the end of the temporary
              assignment or of the effective date of the revised plan.

          (b) The supervisor of the abbreviated performance period must document:

              1    The primary expectations during the abbreviated performance period (if
                   not already described in a performance plan);

              2    Whether the employee met the expectations; and

              3    The date range of the performance.

          (c) The supervisor must provide a copy of the documentation to the employee and
              to the employee’s supervisor of record (if applicable) for consideration in
              determining the performance year’s rating of record.

i.   Addressing Performance Problems.

     (1) Prerequisites to Addressing Issues. The following must be in place before
         performance problems can be officially addressed:

          (a) A current, accurate position description; and

          (b) A current, accurate performance plan, including standards and measures that
              clearly articulate the expectations at the Fully Successful level.

     (2) Distinction and Overlap Between Performance and Conduct.




                                            25
    (a) Conduct and performance management problems may coincide, but they are
        distinct issues.

         1    Misconduct is generally a failure to follow a regulation, policy, or
              workplace rule, whether written or unwritten. Examples include:

              a   Tardiness;

              b   Absenteeism;

              c   Insubordination;

              d   Falsification;

              e   Misuse of Government computer systems;

              f   Prohibited personnel practices;

              g   Retaliation;

              h   Failure to follow safety regulations; and

              i   Failure to protect personally identifiable information (PII).

         2    Poor performance is an employee’s failure to do the job at the Fully
              Successful level, as defined in the performance plan.

    (b) A pending conduct consideration will have no bearing on conducting
        performance conversations and/or issuing a timely rating of record.

    (c) Accountability for poor performance, by means of a Demonstration
        Opportunity (DO) and/or a rating of record, does not preclude consequences
        for misconduct.

    (d) Consequences for misconduct do not preclude accountability for poor
        performance.

(3) Immediacy. As described in Section 5f, Rating Officials should identify and
    document potential issues with any employee meeting their performance
    expectations, and address the issues with the employee, before performance falls
    below the standards defined at the Fully Successful level for any element as it is
    defined in the employee’s performance plan.

(4) Reassignments. An employee may be reassigned at any time for performance that
    fails to meet the Fully Successful level as it is defined in the employee’s
    performance plan.




                                       26
(5) Adverse Actions. A Mission Area, agency or staff office may take action for
    performance and/or related misconduct to promote the efficiency of the service,
    subject to the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 75, Adverse Actions, and 5 CFR Part 752,
    Adverse Actions.

(6) Performance-Based Actions. A Mission Area, agency or staff office may remove
    an employee or reduce their grade for failing to perform at the Fully Successful
    level in any performance element, subject to the provisions of 5 U.S.C. § 4303, and
    5 CFR Part 432, Performance Based Reduction in Grade and Removal Actions.

    (a) If the employee’s performance falls below the standards for Fully Successful
        on any element, the Rating Official must do the following prior to taking a
        performance-based action:

         1   Notify the employee in writing of the element(s) for which performance is
             below the Fully Successful level;

         2   Inform the employee that unless they demonstrate performance in the
             element(s) identified in the notice at the Fully Successful level, they may
             be reduced in grade or removed; and

         3   Afford the employee a reasonable opportunity to demonstrate Fully
             Successful performance on the element(s) by placing the employee on a
             DO.

    (b) An interim rating or a rating of record is not required before taking a
        performance-based action.

    (c) The requirement to establish a DO excludes employees listed in 5 CFR §
        432.102(f), including employees in the competitive service serving a
        probationary or trial period under an initial appointment.

(7) Demonstration Opportunity.

    (a) The DO is not a developmental opportunity or an opportunity to merely
        improve performance. It is an opportunity to demonstrate performance at the
        Fully Successful level in the respective element(s).

    (b) A DO requires a DO plan.

         1   The DO plan must define expectations that:

             a    Clearly identify the performance the employee is required to
                  demonstrate for the element(s) that are not currently being performed
                  at the Fully Successful level.




                                       27
         b    Do not describe the performance in a manner that defines what would
              have to be done to fail to demonstrate acceptable performance.

         c    Are achievable within the duration of the DO;

         d    Are commensurate with the duties and responsibilities of the
              employee’s position and grade level, as reflected in the employee’s
              position description and performance plan;

         e    Allow for a margin of error during the DO. An absolute standard is
              not permitted unless a single failure could result in loss of life, injury,
              breach of national security, or great monetary loss; and

         f    Describe how the performance will be measured and assessed.

    2    The DO plan must describe any assistance the Mission Area, agency, or
         staff office will provide the employee to bring the performance up to the
         Fully Successful level.

    3    The DO plan must specify the length of the period to demonstrate
         performance at the Fully Successful level. There is no minimum
         opportunity period for a DO.

         a    A DO of 30 calendar days is normally sufficient.

         b    A DO of more than 30 calendar days must be approved by the USDA
              CHCO.

         c    The length of the DO should be determined by:

              i. The complexity of the work;

              ii. The duration of the segment of work which would provide
                  adequate evidence that performance at the Fully Successful level
                  is or is not demonstrated; and

              iii. Whether the employee has previously demonstrated acceptable
                   performance, as defined at the Fully Successful level of the
                   current performance plan.

(c) The Rating Official, or alternate as identified in the DO plan, must closely
    monitor the employee’s performance during the DO. The employee must be
    informed at least once a week during the DO that they are or are not meeting
    expectations.

(d) If, during the DO, the Rating Official concludes that additional time is required
    to assess whether the employee is demonstrating performance at the Fully


                                   28
        Successful level, the DO may be extended for no more than 30 days with the
        prior approval of the USDA CHCO. If the DO is extended, the Rating Official
        must notify the employee in writing about the extension.

    (e) At the conclusion of the DO, the Rating Official must immediately determine
        whether the employee has demonstrated acceptable performance as defined in
        the DO plan. The employee must be notified in writing within 7 days about the
        determination.

    (f) If the employee has failed to demonstrate acceptable performance, the Rating
        Official must initiate steps to take an adverse or performance-based action no
        later than 7 calendar days from the end of the DO.

    (g) If the employee fails the DO before the DO is completed (e.g., commits more
        errors within the first week than are permitted within the 30 days) the DO will
        be concluded immediately, and a decision made on the appropriate adverse or
        performance-based action within 7 days.

(8) Subsequent Performance.

    (a) If an employee has consistently demonstrated performance at the Fully
        Successful level for 1 year from the beginning of a DO and the employee’s
        performance again falls below the Fully Successful level in any element, the
        Rating Official must afford the employee an additional DO before determining
        whether to propose a performance-based action.

    (b) A performance-based action may be proposed based upon instances of
        performance below the Fully Successful level which occur within a 1-year
        period from the beginning of the DO, ending on the date of the notice of
        proposed action.

(9) Rating of Record During a Demonstration Opportunity.

    (a) It should be rare for a DO to extend beyond the end of the performance year
        because performance that falls below the Fully Successful level must be
        identified and addressed immediately.

    (b) If an employee is on a DO with a scheduled duration beyond the end of the
        performance year, a rating of record must be given to the employee no later
        than 30 days after the end of the performance year, consistent with Section
        5h(1).

    (c) The appraisal period will not be extended for the purpose of permitting an
        employee to demonstrate acceptable performance such that the rating of record
        is not completed by the deadline.

    (d) If an employee’s performance is not at the Fully Successful level for every


                                      29
              element before the rating of record deadline, the rating of record for that
              performance year is Unacceptable.

         (e) A rating of record is not permitted to be changed if the employee demonstrates
             acceptable performance after the rating of record deadline.

     (10) Savings Provision. Administrative actions initiated against employees whose
          performance is Unacceptable under 5 U.S.C., Section 4303, and the USDA
          Performance Management Program, or another program in existence prior to the
          effective date of this Program, will continue to be processed consistent with that
          pre-established set of procedures and requirements.

j.   Performance Management Training Requirements.

     (1) Supervisory Positions.

         (a) Supervisors and managers are required to take formal performance
             management training. When assuming a supervisory role for the first time
             within USDA, supervisors and managers must complete training in assessing
             and rating performance by the earlier of the following:

              1    Within the first 3 months of assuming the supervisory role; or

              2    Before preparing or reviewing ratings of record for subordinate
                   employees.

         (b) Ongoing training in other aspects of performance management must be
             completed not less than every 2 performance years for the remainder of their
             supervisory tenure.

     (2) Non-supervisory Positions. Non-supervisory employees must take performance
         management training within the first 3 months of employment, and thereafter in ad
         hoc intervals as OHRM, the Mission Area, agency, or staff office determines to be
         necessary (e.g., if there are significant changes to the System and/or Program).

     (3) All training must be recorded in the Department’s training system of record.

     (4) To meet the mandatory requirements, performance management training must
         include one or more of the following components:

         (a) The concepts and practical use of performance management;

         (b) Setting expectations;

         (c) Managing performance for results;

         (d) Assessing and rating performance;



                                            30
          (e) Linking individual performance expectations to organizational goals;

          (f) Setting effective goals for individual performance;

          (g) Establishing and applying objective measures of performance;

          (h) The performance appraisal process;

          (i) Writing accomplishment reports, if requested;

          (j) Communicating organizational performance to employees;

          (k) Giving and receiving feedback;

          (l) Using reward and recognition to achieve and sustain higher levels of
              performance;

          (m) Developing competencies;

          (n) Addressing performance deficiencies; and

          (o) Distinguishing between performance and conduct.

k.   Linking Performance to Other Personnel Systems.

     (1) Probationary Employees.

          (a) The Rating Official must continually evaluate a probationary employee to
              determine whether the employee has demonstrated the ability to perform the
              functions of the position at the Fully Successful level, including an informal
              assessment no later than at each of the 3, 6, and 9 month marks.

          (b) A probationary employee must be terminated during the probationary period if
              performance fails to demonstrate the capacity or qualifications necessary for
              continued employment.

              1    An employee’s probationary period ends upon completion of the
                   scheduled tour of duty on the day before the anniversary date of
                   employee’s appointment.

              2    If a probationary employee is to be terminated for performance reasons,
                   the Rating Official must notify the employee in writing of the reason for
                   termination, the effective date, and the official’s conclusions as to the
                   inadequacies of the employee’s performance.

     (2) Probationary Supervisors and Managers.




                                            31
    (a) The Rating Official must continually evaluate a probationary supervisor or
        manager to determine whether they have demonstrated the ability to perform
        the functions of the position at the Fully Successful level, including an informal
        assessment no later than at each of the 3, 6, and 9 month marks.

    (b) A probationary supervisor or manager, who for reasons of supervisory or
        managerial performance does not satisfactorily complete the probationary
        period, is entitled to be assigned to a position of no lower grade and pay than
        the one the employee vacated to accept the supervisory or managerial position,
        except:

        1    A new supervisor or manager who does not satisfactorily complete the
             supervisory probationary period and who is also serving the probationary
             period for an initial appointment may be removed at any time as described
             under the provisions of Section 5k(1).

        2    If the new supervisor or manager who is also serving probationary period
             for an initial appointment is not removed, they are not automatically
             entitled to be assigned to a position at a specific grade and pay. Such
             determinations are made on a case-by-case basis in consultation with the
             servicing HRO.

    (c) A non-supervisory or non-managerial employee who is demoted into a
        supervisory or managerial position for which a probationary period is required,
        and who does not satisfactorily complete the probationary period for reasons of
        supervisory or managerial performance, is entitled to be assigned to a position
        at the same grade and pay as the position in which they were serving a
        supervisory probationary period.

        1    The Rating Official must notify the employee in writing of the decision to
             assign the employee to a different position.

        2    The employee is eligible for repromotion in accordance with the
             respective Mission Area, agency, and staff office’s merit promotion
             policy.

(3) Within-Grade Increase (WGI).

    (a) WGIs are based on performance and longevity.

    (b) An eligible employee may be granted a WGI only when:

        1    The current rating of record was assigned no earlier than the most recently
             completed appraisal period; and

        2    The employee is currently performing at or above the Fully Successful
             level on all elements in the performance plan.


                                       32
(c) A WGI must not be granted automatically.

    1    The Rating Official must indicate on Form AD-658, Within-Grade
         Increase Record, or OHRM-approved electronic alternative, whether:

         a   Performance is currently at the Fully Successful level for every
             element in the performance plan and the WGI is approved;

         b   Performance is currently below the Fully Successful level for one or
             more elements in the performance plan and the WGI is denied; or

         c   The WGI determination is delayed.

    2    If a WGI is erroneously processed without the Rating Official’s
         verification of acceptable performance, and the WGI should have been
         denied or delayed, the WGI must be rescinded.

(d) An employee with a current rating of record that is below Fully Successful may
    receive a WGI only if:

    1    Their current performance is at or above the Fully Successful level for
         every element in the performance plan; and

    2    An out-of-cycle rating of record is prepared to certify performance at or
         above the Fully Successful level.

(e) If an employee was rated Fully Successful on the most recent rating of record
    and performance in any element falls below Fully Successful before the WGI is
    due, the employee must be notified immediately and put on a DO according to
    the provisions of Section 5i.

    1    The employee may request reconsideration of the determination of
         unacceptable performance that resulted in the denied WGI.

    2    If the employee succeeds in demonstrating performance at the Fully
         Successful level before the WGI’s effective date, the WGI may be
         approved.

    3    The WGI must be denied if it is due while the employee is on an active
         DO. An out-of-cycle rating of record must be prepared to document a
         rating of Unacceptable.

    4    If the employee succeeds in demonstrating performance at the Fully
         Successful level at the end of the DO, the WGI may be reconsidered at
         any time thereafter, but the Mission Area, agency, or staff office must
         consider the employee's performance at least every 52 weeks after the
         denial.


                                  33
         5    If, after an out-of-cycle rating of Unacceptable, the WGI is subsequently
              approved based on performance at the Fully Successful level in every
              element on the performance plan, a new rating of record must be prepared
              before the WGI may be processed. When granted, the WGI will not be
              retroactive.

    (f) A WGI determination may be delayed only under these circumstances:

         1    When an employee has not had the minimum 90-day appraisal period to
              demonstrate acceptable performance on their standards; and/or

         2    When an employee is reduced in grade because of unacceptable
              performance to a position in which they are eligible for a WGI or will
              become eligible within the minimum appraisal period.

(4) Promotion. An employee’s rating of record must be considered when evaluating
    that employee either for reassignment to a position with equal promotion potential,
    or for a promotion of any kind. An employee is not eligible to receive a promotion
    unless the employee’s current rating of record is Fully Successful or above.

(5) Training and Development.

    (a) Supervisors should utilize the performance management provisions as a tool to
        identify opportunities for improving and enhancing knowledge, skills, and
        abilities of the employee to meet mission needs.

    (b) Employees:

         1    Share the responsibility for identifying training opportunities that will
              improve their knowledge, skills, abilities, and performance; and

         2    Are responsible for self-development.

(6) Performance-Based Recognition. Under the two-level summary rating pattern,
    recognition for performance excellence and other contributions will be primarily
    non-rating-based awards. Employees who receive a rating of record of Fully
    Successful, and meet the additional criteria articulated in Section 6d(2), are eligible
    for, but not entitled to, a Quality Step Increase (QSI).

(7) Reduction in Force (RIF).

    (a) Ratings of record are used to establish service credit for RIF purposes.

    (b) A Rating Official may not assign an employee a new rating of record for the
        sole purpose of affecting the retention standing.

    (c) Ratings of record that were due before the date of specific RIF notices but were


                                        34
               not officially approved and placed on record until on or after the date of the
               specific notices will not be used to determine additional service credit.


6. AWARDS AND RECOGNITION

 a.   Guiding Principles for Awards and Recognition. The following principles are the
      foundation for USDA’s awards and recognition program, and provide the policy
      parameters for questions and situations not specifically described in this DR:

      (1) Effective and strategic recognition for work done well is essential to employee
          engagement, and a driver of positive business outcomes.

      (2) Recognition is most effective and serves to cultivate a high-performing workforce
          when it:

           (a) Rewards exemplary performance and accomplishments in support of the
               organization’s mission and goals;

           (b) Is clearly based on merit;

           (c) Differentiates among levels of performance and/or contribution to an
               organizational achievement;

           (d) Recognizes creativity and innovation;

           (e) Is timely;

           (f) Is commensurate with the performance and/or contribution; and

           (g) Represents a tangible and/or symbolic value to the recipient.

      (3) USDA advocates a culture of appreciation where recognition for good work is
          owned by the entire workforce, and encompasses a very broad spectrum of
          acknowledgement, not limited to the monetary, time off, and non-monetary awards
          delineated in this directive. Intangible recognition provides meaningful
          appreciation for successes and achievements, and facilitates engagement and
          positive business outcomes.

           Examples include, but are not limited to:

           (a) Public credit for work done well;

           (b) Opportunities to participate in visible projects;

           (c) Being selected to lead initiatives;

           (d) Thank you notes; and


                                              35
          (e) White boards for employees to leave short notes of appreciation for their peers.

     (4) Where there is discretion within established policy, Mission Areas, agencies, and
         staff offices should normally implement the course of action that will best uphold
         the principles of effective employee recognition, to the extent practicable.

b.   General Award Provisions.

     (1) The granting of awards is discretionary, not an employee entitlement.

     (2) Incentives and recognition may cover individual employees or groups, provided
         everyone in the group contributed to the accomplishment.

     (3) Awards may be granted for:

          (a) Exceptional performance;

          (b) An exemplary accomplishment;

          (c) Work that advances the quality, efficiency, economy, or other improvement of
                Government operations;

          (d) Excellence in customer service;

          (e) A suggestion or invention that advances USDA’s mission and services;

          (f)   Achieving a significant reduction in paperwork; and

          (g) A special act or service in the public interest in connection with, or related to,
                the employee’s official employment.

          One key to determining if an achievement or contribution may be recognized with
          an award is whether it is directly connected to noteworthy performance or to an
          accomplishment specific to USDA’s mission and goals.

     (4) Awards may not be granted for such things as:

          (a) An employee leaving the Mission Area, agency, or staff office when it would
              appear to be a departure or retirement “bonus”;

          (b) Attending special programs or observances;

          (c) Participating in fitness programs;

          (d) Canceling leave;

          (e) The non-use of sick leave;



                                             36
    (f) Responding to the Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey;

    (g) Participating in special activities such as gleaning;

    (h) Planning social activities, either during or outside of official time, e.g., picnics
        and holiday parties; or

    (i) Personally contributing to specific initiatives, e.g., the Combined Federal
        Campaign (financially) and Feds Feed Families (food). Mission Areas,
        agencies, and staff offices may recognize the efforts of employees who serve in
        collateral roles to lead such initiatives with informal non-monetary awards, but
        monetary or time off awards (TOA) are not permitted for those efforts.

(5) Prizes. Federal awards regulations do not provide for the awarding of prizes or any
    other type of “award” that involves the element of chance (e.g., drawings or raffles).

(6) Contractor Employees and Volunteers.

    (a) Monetary recognition may not be granted to non-Federal or non-USDA
        employees, including volunteers and collaborators, under the authorities in this
        DR. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may recognize their
        contributions solely with certificates of appreciation.

    (b) USDA awards programs do not cover contractor employees. They are
        employed by the contracting organization, not the Federal government, and
        cannot receive direct payments from USDA.

         1    Under very limited circumstances, contractor employees may receive non-
              monetary awards, such as certificates, when they are part of a group of
              USDA employees being recognized for a contribution to the Department’s
              mission and goals.

         2    Such recognition always requires the prior written concurrence of the
              Contracting Officer, and documentation of the concurrence must be
              maintained by the Contracting Officer’s Representative.

(7) Confidentiality and Privacy.

    (a) Documentation related to recommendations for recognition is confidential
         information and is available only to those involved in the award decision
         process and other officials on a need-to know basis. Recommendations are not
         to be discussed with nominees or with anyone not involved in the decision
         process until the award has been authorized within the appropriate chain of
         command and approved by the HRO.

    (b) Limited award information is obtainable under the Freedom of Information Act
         (FOIA), and requests should be handled through that process. Mission Areas,


                                        37
              agencies, and staff offices may not disclose award amounts if doing so could
              reveal the recipient’s rating of record, which is protected information under the
              Privacy Act.

c.   Monetary and Time Off Awards.

     (1) Eligibility. All employees whose current rating is Fully Successful are eligible for
         monetary and time off awards, except that employees who were on leave restriction
         within the 52 weeks prior to the award effective date are not eligible for a TOA.

     (2) Authorization and Approval. The provisions in this Section apply to all monetary
         awards and TOAs processed within USDA, including those for employees who are
         on reimbursable details outside the Department, and irrespective of the funding
         source.

         (a) Monetary awards and TOAs always require an AD-287-2, Recommendation
             and Authorization of Monetary and Time Off Awards, or OHRM-approved
             electronic alternative, and the justification required for the category of award.

         (b) Any employee may nominate another employee or management official for an
             award, but may not nominate:

              1    Themselves; or

              2    Anyone in their supervisory chain, except in the context of a formal
                   Mission Area, agency or staff office program, such as a Supervisor of the
                   Year award.

          (c) The nominating individual is an optional role on the AD-287-2.

         (d) The Recommending Official is either the employee’s first or second level
             supervisor of the employee’s position of record, and is responsible for ensuring
             an award is not duplicative, as described in Section 6c(4).

         (e) The Certifying Official is an optional role for Mission Area, agency, or staff
             office use (e.g., a Budget Analyst or Administrative Officer).

         (f) The Authorizing Official is determined by the award amount, as described in
             Appendix D.

         (g) Award packages for authorization at the subcabinet and Secretary levels must
             include:

              1    A decision memorandum from the agency or staff office;

              2    The AD-287-2(s); and either:




                                            38
             a    A thorough justification that documents how the requested amount for
                  a discrete award is commensurate with the contribution, consistent
                  with Appendix E; or

             b    A thorough justification that documents how the cumulative amount
                  for multiple awards in a consecutive 52 week period is commensurate
                  with the contributions, consistent with Appendix E, and addresses any
                  overlap among the multiple awards.

    (h) Award authorization packages for the Secretary must also be routed from the
        subcabinet official through the USDA CHCO and the Assistant Secretary for
        Administration (ASA).

    (i) An award is considered approved when the Human Resources Official signs off
        on the AD-287-2 that the award complies with statutory and regulatory
        requirements.

(3) Prohibited Bases. Monetary awards and TOAs may not be granted as additional
    compensation or reimbursement of any kind, including scenarios such as:

    (a) Forfeited annual leave;

    (b) An actual or perceived inequity in salaries and/or the classification of positions;

    (c) A substitute for salary dollars as a means of circumventing the annual
        aggregate limitation on pay;

    (d) Performing the normal duties of the position as an excepted, essential, or
        emergency employee during a furlough, weather-related closure, or similar
        scenario;

    (e) Working outside normal hours when the time should be recorded as
        compensatory time or overtime; or

    (f) Denial of a recruitment, relocation, or retention bonus.

(4) Multiple awards for the same contribution.

    (a) Supervisors and managers must ensure employees are not inadvertently
        receiving duplicative awards for the same contribution. For example:

         An employee was given an award by their supervisor for a customer service
         contribution, and the office that benefitted from the customer service
         nominated the employee for a separate award. In this situation, the employee’s
         supervisor should flag the award as duplicative and suggest another form of
         recognition (e.g., certificate of appreciation.)



                                       39
    (b) There are limited circumstances where multiple awards may be appropriate.

         1   TOAs and monetary awards may be combined for a single award action
             where the sum of the combined award is commensurate with the
             contribution(s), and together are consistent with Appendix E. (See Section
             6c(10).)

         2   If an award is granted, and the benefit of the contribution being recognized
             is later determined to be greater than originally ascertained, the employee
             may be granted the difference between the original award and what is
             subsequently concluded to be the more appropriate amount. The
             justification for the second award must reference the original award, and
             must describe the basis for determining the combined award amount.

         3   Contributions to a large or multi-year project may be recognized at
             specific milestones, provided:

             a    The combined amounts for all the associated awards are
                  commensurate with the employee’s contributions, consistent with the
                  applicable benefits scale in Appendix E; and

             b    The award justifications specify the work being recognized at the
                  respective milestones.

(5) Timeliness and Effective Dates.

    (a) Recognition is most effective when it is given as close to the achievement or
        contribution as possible. However, when timely awards are precluded (e.g.,
        because of budgetary or process issues, or temporary spending freezes), the
        awards may be processed as soon as practicable once those barriers are
        resolved.

    (b) Effective dates may be no earlier than the date an award is approved by the
        HRO on the AD-287-2 or OHRM-approved electronic alternative.

    (c) Where there is discretion in setting effective dates, Mission Areas, agencies,
        and staff offices should generally select the course of action that is most
        beneficial to the employee(s) to the extent feasible, consistent with the
        principles of timely recognition as a driver of employee engagement. For
        example:

         1   Rather than processing authorized awards on a specific schedule, HROs
             would process them as soon as they are received; and

         2   If an employee is approaching the annual aggregate limitation on pay, an
             award may be deferred to the next calendar year.



                                      40
         This provision will in no way be interpreted as permitting the “back-dating” of
         actions.

(6) Forced distribution is not permitted in determining performance ratings, but may be
    considered in the context of awards. The term has no precise definition in policy or
    practice, but "forced distribution" generally is associated with the idea of limiting
    awards to a certain number or percentage of employees.

    (a) Relative comparisons among individuals or groups, such as rank ordering or
         categorizing employees, may be used for making decisions about distributing
         awards. For example, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may limit
         awards to the top three producers or teams, or limit awards to those individuals
         or groups that exceeded certain goals.

    (b) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may also establish criteria for
         categories of awards that are given only to a selected number of recipients who
         best fit the criteria, although the basic criteria might have been met by more
         individuals or teams.

         For example, an agency’s Supervisor of the Year award will have basic criteria
         that set the threshold for award consideration, and a significant number of
         supervisors may meet that threshold; but the individual selected as the
         Supervisor of the Year would generally be the one who best fits the criteria.

(7) Awards Across Agency Lines.

    (a) When a Mission Area, agency, or staff office wishes to recognize an employee
         of another organization or Federal agency with a monetary or time off award
         (TOA), the benefiting organization will nominate the employee for the award.

    (b) The clearance provisions of Section 6c(2) apply to the recommendation and
         authorization of the award.

    (c) If it is a monetary award, the benefiting agency will arrange to reimburse the
         employee’s Mission Area, agency, or staff office.

         1    This provision may be waived when the agencies agree the administrative
              costs involved would outweigh the award amount.

         2    When the servicing HRO of the benefiting Mission Area, agency, or staff
              office has the capacity to process an award for a contributing employee
              from another Mission Area, agency, or staff office, they may do so after it
              is authorized to eliminate the need for reimbursement.

(8) Monetary Awards.

    (a) Amounts.


                                       41
       1    The minimum monetary award is $100.

       2    Award amounts must be commensurate with the contribution(s),
            consistent with the applicable benefits identified in Appendix E.

       3    Monetary awards granted by USDA may never exceed 20% of the
            employee’s rate of basic pay.

   (b) Tax Implications. Cash awards are reported as compensation and taxes
       withheld accordingly.

   (c) Pay Implications. A monetary award is a lump sum payment, and is not basic
       pay for any purpose.

(9) TOAs.

   (a) Amounts.

       1    TOAs are granted in increments of no less than one hour.

       2    The amount of the TOA must be commensurate the value of the
            contribution(s) being recognized, consistent with Appendix E.

       3    Full-time employees may be awarded up to 80 hours of time off during a
            leave year, but not more than 40 hours in one award.

       4    Part-time employees may be granted TOAs up to the average number of
            work hours in the employee’s biweekly scheduled tour of duty during a
            leave year. The limit for a single TOA for part-time employees or
            employees with an uncommon tour of duty is one-half the maximum that
            may be granted during the leave year.

            For example, if an employee has a biweekly scheduled tour of duty of 64
            hours, the employee may be granted up to 64 hours of time off during the
            leave year, and no more than 32 hours at one time.

   (b) Using TOAs.

       1    A TOA may only be taken after it has been approved and entered in the
            USDA payroll/personnel system, and is reflected in the time and
            attendance system.

       2    Employees must obtain their respective supervisor’s approval before using
            a TOA, consistent with the approval requirements for using annual leave.




                                     42
    3    If an employee is incapacitated while using their TOA, that period may be
         recorded as sick leave, and the time off rescheduled for another time,
         within the constraints of Section 6c(9)(c).

    4    If an employee is issued a leave restriction letter after the TOA is
         approved, the TOA may not be used for the duration of the restriction.

(c) Constraints. Unlike other forms of pay for time not worked (e.g., annual
    leave), employees are not entitled to a TOA.

    1    A TOA may not be converted to a monetary payment or other form of
         compensation under any circumstances.

    2    Employees may carry over up to 80 hours of TOA at the end of each leave
         year. Any hours in excess of 80 are forfeited.

    3    Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may not permit the use of TOAs
         for an entire office to allow all employees the same day off work.

    4    The granting of time-off does not increase an employee's "use or lose"
         annual leave amount, and time-off should be scheduled so as not to
         conflict with the use of existing "use or lose" annual leave. Time-off
         absence is not justification for the restoration of forfeited annual leave.

    5    Because a TOA is not annual leave, it cannot be transferred to another
         Federal employee under the Voluntary Leave Transfer Program.

(d) Employee Reassignments and Transfers.

    1    If an employee moves within USDA from one Mission Area, agency, or
         staff office to another, the gaining Mission Area, agency, or staff office
         will honor an unused TOA granted by the employee’s losing agency.

    2    If an employee transfers into USDA from another Department or
         independent Federal agency, the gaining Mission Area, agency, or staff
         office is permitted, but is not required, to honor up to 40 hours of an
         unused TOA granted by the employee’s prior agency. Mission Areas,
         agencies, and staff offices must:

         a   Set an internal policy governing this provision;

         b   Communicate the policy to hiring managers and HROs; and

         c   Apply it consistently.




                                   43
        3   Unused TOAs are not transferrable outside USDA, unless the employee
            makes a special arrangement with the gaining agency to honor the TOA
            granted by the employee’s USDA Mission Area, agency, or staff office.

    (e) Tax Implications. TOAs do not have explicit monetary value, and do not
        change the employee’s income. As a result, TOAs are not subject to special
        tax withholdings. Tax withholdings are deducted from the salary paid for the
        hours the TOA is used, just as tax withholdings are deducted when employees
        use annual or sick leave, or other forms of authorized paid absence.

(10) Combination of Monetary Awards and TOAs.

    (a) A TOA may be granted along with a monetary award, provided the combined
        value of the award given is commensurate with the value of the contribution
        being recognized, consistent with the applicable benefits scale in Appendix E.

        For example, an employee served as the team lead on a short-term project that
        impacted an entire small State. According to the non-measurable benefits scale
        in Appendix E, this would be considered a Moderate type of contribution with
        a Level 1 scope, which would support an award of either $750 or 10 hours of
        time off. A combination of $500 and four hours of time off could be granted.

    (b) The AD-287-2 must document in the award justification how the value of the
        combined amount was determined and how it is commensurate with the
        contribution being recognized.

(11) Categories of Monetary Awards and TOAs.

    (a) Rating-Based Awards.

        1   These awards are based solely on an employee’s performance rating of
            record assigned at the end of the appraisal period, and are intended to
            recognize sustained levels of successful performance over the course of
            the rating period.

            A rating-based award may not be granted to an employee without a rating
            of record.

        2   Because a two-tier summary rating pattern does not differentiate among
            levels of successful performance, monetary awards and TOAs are not
            authorized on the basis of ratings of record in that summary rating pattern.
            Instead, non-rating-based achievement awards will be utilized to recognize
            specific accomplishments that supported excellence in performance.

    (b) Achievement Awards.




                                     44
1   Achievement awards are non-rating-based awards that recognize specific
    accomplishments that are in the public interest and have exceeded normal
    job requirements.

2   Examples of such accomplishments include, but are not limited to:

    a    Making a high-quality contribution involving a difficult or important
         project assignment;

    b    Creating a knowledge management product to document the materials
         and processes for carrying out a significant job function;

    c    Displaying initiative and skill in successfully completing an
         assignment or project before the deadline, to the benefit of the
         program, staff or customer;

    d    Using initiative and creativity in making improvements in projects,
         activities, programs, or services; and

    e    Ensuring the mission of the work unit is accomplished during a
         challenging period by successfully completing additional work or a
         special project assignment while maintaining the employee’s own
         workload.

3   Eligibility.

    a    All employees with a current rating of record of Fully Successful are
         eligible for achievement awards.

    b    These awards can be for individual or group contributions.

    c    Employees may receive more than one achievement award within one
         performance year.

4   Justifications. The justification on the AD-287-2 must clearly state:

    a    What the employee or group accomplished;

    b    The time period covered by the accomplishment;

    c    How the accomplishment exceeded normal expectations of the
         respective employee’s role;

    d    The result or outcome of the accomplishment; and

    e    The calculation of benefits, using the appropriate benefits scale in
         Appendix E, that describes how the award amount was determined.



                             45
    5   Group Awards. Achievement awards may be granted to groups of
        employees.

        a   Each employee must have contributed to the accomplishment being
            recognized.

        b   The total award amount must be commensurate with the
            accomplishment’s overall value to the organization, consistent with
            the appropriate benefits scale in Appendix E.

        c   The amount awarded to each employee in the group must be
            commensurate with their contribution to the accomplishment. For
            example, the award amount for the core team members of a particular
            initiative would normally be greater than the amount for someone
            who served in a peripheral advisory or support role.

        d   If the award amounts are different within the group, the
            documentation must specify the type of contribution which supports
            the respective amounts, consistent with the benefits scale in Appendix
            E.

        e   The award may be processed with a single AD-287-2, but the
            documentation must be redacted before being filed in each
            employee’s OPF.

(c) Suggestion and Invention Awards.

    1   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are authorized to recognize
        suggestions and inventions from employees or groups of employees that:

        a   Further the mission of the Mission Area, agency, staff office or other
            Federal government operations or interests;

        b   Save the Mission Area, agency, staff office, or sub-organization
            money;

        c   Promote internal communication or employee engagement;

        d   Achieve a significant reduction in paperwork;

        e   Improve customer service; or

        f   Improve efficiency.

    2   Acceptance of an award under this authority constitutes an agreement that
        the use by the Government of an idea, method, or device for which the




                                  46
        award is made does not form the basis of a further claim of any nature
        against the Government by the employee, their heirs, or assigns.

    3   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are authorized to give an
        informal non-monetary award for suggestions that demonstrate ingenuity
        on a relatively small scale, or that have not yet been implemented.

    4   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may give a monetary and/or
        TOA for suggestions that have been implemented and have demonstrated
        results, consistent with the benefits scale in Appendix E.

    5   Justifications. The justification on the AD-287-2 must clearly state:

        a    What challenge or opportunity the suggestion addresses;

        b    The scope of the implementation of the suggestion;

        c    The result or outcome of the implementation of the suggestion; and

        d    The calculation of benefits, using Appendix E, that describes how the
             award amount was determined.

(d) Referral Bonuses.

    1   Referral bonuses are granted at the discretion of the Mission Area, agency,
        or staff office, and are not an entitlement.

    2   Eligibility. All USDA employees who meet the definition of “employee”
        in 5 U.S.C. 2105, Employee, are eligible for referral bonus awards with the
        exception of:

        a    Employees whose regular, recurring jobs include the recruitment of
             employees;

        b    Employees who are otherwise excluded from receiving monetary or
             TOAs;

        c    Selecting officials or other persons associated with the selection of
             the candidate; and

        d    Any of the following relatives of the employee recruited:

             i.    Spouse, and parents thereof;

             ii.   Children, including stepchildren and adopted children, and
                   spouses thereof;

             iii. Parents, including stepparents;


                                  47
         iv. Siblings, including stepsiblings, and spouses thereof; or

         v.     Any individual related by blood or affinity whose close
                association with the employee is the equivalent of a family
                relationship.

3   Criteria.

    a    Referral bonus awards will only be granted when the Mission Area,
         agency, or staff office has made the determination they have
         encountered difficulty in recruiting high quality candidates. The
         following factors must be evaluated by the recruitment staff in
         reaching this determination:

         i.     The success of recent efforts to recruit candidates and retain
                employees in like positions;

         ii.    The availability in the labor market of candidates for
                employment;

         iii. Recent turnover in similar position;

         iv. Special qualifications needed for the position; and

         v.     Other unique factors that demonstrate difficulty in filling the
                position.

    b    Vacancy announcements must indicate the position being advertised
         is one for which a referral bonus may be paid.

    c    The HRO which staffed the position must certify on the AD-287-2
         that the eligibility requirements and criteria for granting a referral
         bonus have been met.

4   Amounts. Referral bonuses do not follow the criteria in Appendix E.
    They are limited as follows:

    a    Monetary (up to $1,000, paid in one lump sum);

    b    TOA (up to 20 hours); or

    c    Combined monetary award and TOA, not to exceed the value of
         either of the above (e.g., $500 and 10 hours).

5   Referral bonuses are paid out after:

    a    The newly appointed employee (i.e., an employee on their first
         appointment with a USDA Mission Area, agency, or staff office, or


                                48
                         an appointment to a USDA Mission Area, agency, or staff office after
                         a break in service of 90 or more calendar days) has served 1 year with
                         the Mission Area, agency, or staff office; and

                    b    The new employee received a rating of record of Fully Successful.

d.   Quality Step Increase.

     (1) Constraints.

          (a) QSIs are reserved for the most exceptional levels of performance. No single
                accomplishment merits a QSI; it may be granted only to those employees who
                have demonstrated sustained exceptional performance, commensurate with the
                classification of the employee’s position, over at least an 18 month period in
                the same grade and type of position.

          (b) Because a QSI permanently increases the employee’s salary, it essentially
                continues to reward the employee’s performance for the remainder of their
                career, and increases the Mission Area, agency, or staff office’s retirement
                costs and Thrift Savings Plan contributions. Judgment must therefore be
                exercised to ensure only the top performers are recommended for this award.

          (c) Mission Area, agency, and staff office management reserve the discretion to
                grant a QSI. It is not required or automatically granted to employees who meet
                the basic eligibility criteria.

          (d) No more than 2% of a Mission Area, agency, or staff office’s permanent, non-
                executive employees may be granted a QSI each fiscal year, as identified by
                the effective date of the action.

     (2) Eligibility. An employee must:

          (a) Occupy a position which is eligible for WGIs (i.e., GS employees occupying
                permanent positions);

          (b) Be at the full performance level of their position;

          (c) Be below step 10 of their grade level;

          (d) Have performed in the same grade and type of position for at least 18 months
                before the end of the appraisal cycle;

          (e) Have received a rating of record of at least Fully Successful for at least the
                three most recent performance years (or the two most recent performance years
                if the employee is new to the Federal government);

          (f)   Have demonstrated sustained performance of the highest quality, significantly


                                              49
          and demonstrably above the expectations defined at the Fully Successful level
          of their performance plan;

    (g) Have achieved accomplishments that contributed substantially to the
          organization’s goals, commensurate with the classification of their position;

    (h) Be expected to continue the same high level of performance; and

    (i)   Not have received a QSI within the previous 104 weeks.

          There are many factors that influence the timing of QSIs that should not have a
          negative impact on employees. A QSI recommendation cannot be effected
          until the 104 week mandatory waiting period is completed, but as long as at
          least two performance years since the prior QSI, a subsequent QSI can simply
          be held until such time the 104 week requirement is met.

(3) QSI Recommendations and Review Panels.

    (a) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will establish one or more review
          panels to evaluate QSI recommendations.

    (b) A recommendation package for a QSI will be prepared by either the first- or
          second-level supervisor, and must include:

          1   Form AD-3115, Recommendation and Authorization of Quality Step
              Increase; and

          2   The three most recent consecutive ratings of record, or two ratings of
              record if the employee is new to the Federal government.

    (c) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will establish policies and practices
          for their review panels.

          1   The policies and practices do not have to be approved by OHRM, but must
              include:

              a    The organizational scope of their panels;

              b    The size and composition of their panels; and

              c    Any requirements for the QSI nominations, beyond what is described
                   in this Section.

          2   Review panels may consult with their HRO on technical questions, but
              will not usually have HRO staff as part of the panel.

    (d) Review panels will provide their recommendations to the respective
          authorizing SES official.


                                        50
(4) Authorization.

    (a) QSIs will be authorized no lower than the SES level, who will take into
        consideration, but will not be bound by, the recommendation of the review
        panel.

    (b) QSI authorization documentation always requires an AD-3115 or OHRM-
        approved electronic alternative, and the approved nomination package.

(5) QSI Approval and Effective Date.

    (a) When the servicing HRO’s approving official, as identified by the Mission
        Area, agency, or staff office CHCO Council Member, signs the AD-3115:

        1    The final Mission Area, agency, or staff office discretion on the QSI will
             have been exercised; and

        2    The QSI will be designated approved.

    (b) A QSI becomes effective on the first day of the first pay period on or after it is
        approved by the HRO. QSIs may not be retroactive except to correct an
        administrative error that occurred after the final Mission Area, agency, or staff
        office discretion has been exercised (i.e., the date the award is approved by the
        HRO.)

(6) QSI and WGI Timing.

    (a) A QSI does not change the effective date of an employee’s normal WGI,
        except when the QSI places the employee in the fourth or seventh step. At
        either step, the employee would enter a longer waiting period for the next WGI.

    (b) When a WGI and QSI are effective on the same day, the WGI will be
        processed before the QSI.

    (c) HROs may hold a QSI for what they determine to be an administratively
        reasonable timeframe to benefit a high-performing employee, so that it is
        processed after a pending WGI. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices
        must ensure such decisions are made consistently and fairly.

(7) QSI and Promotion Timing.

    This subsection pertains only to non-career ladder promotions; an employee below
    the full performance level of their position is not eligible for a QSI.

    (a) A QSI must be applied to the rate of pay for the position on which the rating of
        record was based.




                                       51
         (b) If an employee is granted a QSI based on performance at one grade and is
             competitively promoted before the QSI is made effective, the QSI cannot be
             applied to the higher grade. Backdating the QSI to an effective date prior to
             the promotion is prohibited.

         (c) A QSI must be processed before any promotion action with the same effective
             date.

         (d) If the rating of record was based on the employee’s performance in a temporary
             promotion, the QSI must be based on the rate of pay for the temporary position.
             When the temporary promotion terminates, the employee will lose the benefit
             of the QSI because pay is set in the lower grade as if the employee had not
             been temporarily promoted, unless the Mission Area, agency, or staff office
             sets pay at a higher rate under 5 CFR 531.221, Maximum Payable Rate.

         (e) If the rating of record was based on the employee’s performance in a
             permanent position, the QSI cannot be applied to the rate of pay received
             during a temporary promotion. The employee would receive the QSI after
             termination of the temporary promotion when the employee returns to the
             lower-graded position.

e.   Non-Monetary Awards.

     (1) General Provisions.

         (a) 5 CFR 451.104(a), Awards, specifically authorizes honorary and informal
             recognition awards.

         (b) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are authorized to provide these non-
             monetary awards to employees instead of or in addition to monetary awards
             and TOAs, within the parameters for the appropriate expenditure of public
             funds.

         (c) Non-monetary awards are authorized only when items are presented on the
             basis of achievement.

             1       Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must ensure non-monetary
                     items are not given in the context of gifts, keepsakes, or mementos.

             2       Non-monetary awards based on career milestones or retirement are
                     prohibited, except as specified in Sections 6e(5)(d) and (e).

         (d) Cash surrogates, such as gift certificates, gift cards, and pre-paid credit and
             debit cards, are not authorized under this DR.

         (e) Programs that allow employees to choose from among a number of non-
             monetary awards are not permitted, because:


                                             52
         1   When an employee is given considerable choice in selecting the item
             received as a non-monetary award, the award rarely meets the conditions
             for de minimis, regardless of its fair market value; and

         2   For tax purposes, programs that give employees a wide degree of choice
             within specified limits, such as categories where all the items are of about
             the same value, are equivalent to giving a gift certificate. The value of the
             category from which the employee was eligible to choose must be
             reported to the IRS as a taxable fringe benefit, and the Mission Area,
             agency, or staff office would have to withhold taxes on that amount.

(2) Approvals.

    (a) Non-monetary awards do not require an AD-287-2.

    (b) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may establish internal guidance for
         the use of non-monetary awards, including general criteria and approvals.
         Such internal guidance must be consistent with the policies in this DR, but does
         not require OHRM approval.

(3) Distinction between non-monetary awards and swag. Executive Order 13589,
    Promoting Accountability and Streamlining Removal Procedures Consistent with
    Merit System Principles, calls upon all agencies to reduce spending on extraneous
    promotional items, also known as “swag.”

    (a) OPM describes swag as “merchandise such as mugs, shirts, key chains, pens,
         hats, thermoses, and bags that typically display an agency’s name or seal. Swag
         items are commonly distributed to all employees or participants at a particular
         event for the sole purpose of promoting or advertising the agency or
         organization.”

    (b) Non-monetary awards are given on the basis of employee contribution, as
         required by 5 U.S.C. § 4503, Agency Awards.

(4) Types of non-monetary awards:

    (a) Honorary Awards. These are a form of formal recognition, the highest level of
        non-monetary awards in a Mission Area, agency, or staff office, or a significant
        organizational component of a Mission Area, agency, or staff office.

         1   Spending Limits. The spending limit for honorary awards is $250 on any
             one item, with that amount reserved for exceptionally high-level honorary
             awards. Awards in that range would typically be presented by the
             Secretary, recognizing the most significant and/or career-spanning
             accomplishments. Most honorary award expenditures will be well below
             this amount.



                                      53
    a   At the level of an agency Administrator’s or Chief’s Award, items
        will typically not exceed a purchase and engraving price of $175 for
        an individual or team leader, or $75 for group members.

    b   At the level of a major organization within a Mission Area, agency, or
        staff office, awards will typically not exceed a purchase and
        engraving price of $150 for an individual or team leader, or $50 for
        group members.

2   Item Selection Criteria. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must
    exercise good judgment in selecting honorary recognition items, and are
    responsible for ensuring items meet all of the following criteria:

    a   The item must be something the recipient could reasonably be
        expected to value in a symbolic context, but not something that
        conveys a sense of monetary value;

    b   The item must have lasting trophy value (i.e., it is something the
        employee may wish to show to coworkers, friends, or family
        members). An item that does not have a lasting form is not
        appropriate as an honorary award because it loses its enduring
        symbolic value; and

    c   The item must clearly symbolize the employer-employee relationship
        in some fashion. Affixing, imprinting, or engraving the USDA logo
        on an honorary award item is a discernable way to meet this criterion,
        but putting a logo on an item that otherwise has no connection to the
        employee's work (e.g., a tennis racket) would not meet this criterion.

3   Examples.

    a   Items that would meet the criteria in this subsection include:

        i.    An engraved crystal award;

        ii.   A flag in an engraved case presented to the family of an
              employee lost in the line of duty (Section 6e(5)(c));

        iii. An engraved plaque; or

        iv. A jacket embroidered with the USDA logo for employees who
            spend a significant amount of time working outdoors or meeting
            with customers outside the office.

    b   Items that would not meet the criteria in this subsection include:

        i.    A crystal carafe;


                              54
              ii.   An expensive frame that is not engraved as an award;

              iii. A gift basket; or

              iv. A jacket embroidered with the USDA logo for every employee in
                  an office, irrespective of whether everyone substantially
                  contributed to the achievement.

    4    Context. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must ensure honorary
         awards of this type are not provided in the context of “gifts,” but rather as
         significant recognition for a substantial accomplishment.

    5    Tax Implications. OPM has determined that traditional non-monetary
         awards, such as plaques, are usually not taxable.

(b) Informal Awards. These are non-monetary awards of nominal cost, and are
    more casual than honorary awards.

    1    Usage. These awards:

         a    Are typically used to provide frequent and timely recognition of
              individual and group contributions that, taken alone, do not merit a
              monetary award, a TOA, or an honorary award;

         b    May be presented along with a monetary award or TOA if the
              Mission Area, agency, or staff office determines it will enhance the
              more significant award; and

         c    Normally have more informal approval procedures and presentation
              settings than honorary awards.

   2    Item Selection Criteria. Items presented as informal recognition awards
        must:

         a    Be of nominal value, or de minimis; in USDA, this is generally $35 or
              less; and

         b    Take an appropriate form to be used in the public sector and to be
              purchased with public funds. Some items may be inexpensive, but
              still not be appropriate.

    3    Examples:

         a    Items that would meet the criteria in this subsection include:




                                   55
                  i.    T-shirts, ballcaps, or mugs with a team slogan given to every
                        contributing member of a project team for successful completion
                        of that project, or a significant milestone of the project;

                  ii.   Engraved paperweights;

                  iii. Challenge coins;

                  iv. Nylon laptop shoulder bags; or

                  v.    Luggage tags and passport holders for employees who travel.

             b    Items that would not meet the criteria in this subsection include:

                  i.    Movie tickets;

                  ii.   A music CD;

                  iii. A flask; or

                  iv. Grilling utensils.

    (c) Certificates.

        1    A Certificate of Merit may accompany achievement awards and QSIs, and
             must be signed by a supervisor or manager.

        2    Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are authorized to determine their
             parameters for the use of Certificates of Appreciation.

        3    Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may utilize certificate
             presentation folders that display the USDA logo (also referred to as the
             USDA symbol).

        4    Folders that display the USDA seal are reserved for the Secretary’s use.

(5) Specialized Categories of Non-monetary Awards.

    (a) Secretary’s Honor Awards. These awards are the highest award granted by the
        Secretary of Agriculture to an individual or group for a contribution or
        achievement in support of the Department’s mission.

        1    The designation “Honor Award” is reserved solely for these awards, and
             may not be used to describe any other awards within USDA.

        2    The program parameters, including frequency, timing, criteria, procedures,
             and approvals, are at the Secretary’s discretion, and are subject to change
             at any time.


                                         56
    3    The program parameters are announced at the direction of the Office of
         the Secretary, and remain in effect until superseded.

(b) Hall of Heroes.

    1    The purpose of the program is to recognize contributions with a direct and
         lasting impact on national and international agriculture and related
         programs.

    2    The program is announced solely at the direction of the Secretary.

    3    The program parameters, including frequency, timing, criteria, procedures,
         and approvals, are at the Secretary’s discretion, and are subject to change
         at any time.

    4    The program parameters will be announced in a nomination call
         memorandum at the direction of OSEC.

(c) Flag Recognition. As a posthumous honorary award, Under and Assistant
    Secretaries may present a flag in an engraved flag case to the next of kin of an
    employee lost in the line of duty, or an individual in a contractor, collaborator,
    or volunteer capacity, lost while providing mission support service to USDA.

    1    Criteria.

         a    This recognition is authorized when an individual meets both of the
              following:

              i.     The individual is lost in the line of duty (i.e., carrying out an
                     official function on behalf of USDA); and

              ii.    The individual would not have been lost had they not been
                     carrying out a USDA function (i.e., not of natural causes, even if
                     during work hours).

         b    Examples of situations which would qualify an individual for this
              posthumous recognition:

              i.     Aircraft accident while conducting USDA business or on official
                     travel;

              ii.    Vehicular accident while on USDA business;

              iii. Plant or farm accident while on USDA business; and




                                     57
        iv. Vehicular accident while on temporary duty (TDY) and on
            official travel time (e.g., driving between the TDY site and
            home/office).

    c   Examples of situations which would not qualify the individual for
        flag recognition:

        i.    Vehicular accident while on TDY and off duty (e.g., going to
              dinner);

        ii.   Vehicular accident while on the way to work; and

        iii. Natural causes while conducting normal USDA business.

    d   Flags may not be provided when the death is the result of:

        i.    Unlawful or negligent action of the individual;

        ii.   Willful misconduct of the individual; or

        iii. Activities unrelated to the individual’s status as a Federal
              employee, contractor, collaborator, or volunteer.

2   Next of kin will be determined according to the following order of
    precedence:

    a   Widow(er);

    b   If none, to the eldest child;

        i.    This includes an adopted child

        ii.   This does not include step-children, unless the otherwise eligible
              next of kin specifically directs otherwise

    c   If none, parents;

    d   If none, to the next of kin according to the laws of the State in which
        the individual legally resided.

3   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must notify OHRM of flag
    recognition for any USDA employee to ensure the employee is included
    on OPM’s data calls for the online Wall of Honor. The report must
    include:

    a   The employee’s name;

    b   The employee’s title;


                              58
        c    The employee’s duty location;

        d    A description of the circumstances; and

        e    Links to relevant news stories, Mission Area, agency, or staff office
             announcements or press releases.

(d) Length of Service Recognition.

    1   Eligibility.

        a    All employees are eligible for length of service recognition.

        b    It is based solely on length of service; achievements and ratings of
             record are not considered.

    2   Criteria.

        a    Certificates may be presented starting with 5 years of service, at 5-
             year intervals.

        b    In computing eligibility, employees will receive credit for total
             Federal service, including civilian and all honorable military service
             credited to their service computation date for leave purposes, as
             described in Chapter 6 of OPM’s Guide to Processing Personnel
             Actions.

        c    Military service for retired service members is eligible to be credited
             for length of service recognition at the request of the employee.

    3   Modes.

        a    Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are authorized to present a
             Length of Service Certificate, and either a:

             i.     Lapel pin or charm (or equivalent), or

             ii.    Commemorative challenge coin, provided the item cost is
                    comparable to the pins and charms, or approximately $2-3 each.

        b    Non-monetary awards are authorized only on the basis of employee
             performance or contribution, and are therefore not authorized based
             on career milestones.

        c    Subcabinet officials may sign length of service certificates or re-
             delegate this authority to a lower level official in the organization.
             Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may also obtain certificates



                                   59
               pre-printed with the Secretary’s signature from the Office of
               Operations Materiel Management Service Center.

(e) Retirement Recognition.

      1   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may provide some form of
          honorary recognition, provided it is for the employee's career-long
          contributions in support of USDA's mission (or other agency if the career
          includes Federal employment outside USDA). The recognition may not
          be merely for the number of years of service.

      2   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may also present a retirement
          certificate. Subcabinet officials may sign retirement certificates or re-
          delegate this authority to a lower level official in the organization.

(f)   President’s Volunteer Service Awards (PVSA). The PVSA program is an
      optional program, administered at the Mission Area, agency, and staff office
      level.

      1   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are authorized to recognize
          employees for volunteer service performed outside of work hours by
          becoming a certifying organization in accordance with the guidance at the
          Corporation for National and Community Service website.

      2   This DR authorizes recognition of employees. Mission Areas, agencies,
          and staff offices wishing to recognize non-employees, such as volunteers,
          with a PVSA, must do so under Mission Area, agency, or staff office
          regulations and funding which permit such recognition.

      3   Award levels are described at the Corporation for National and
          Community Service website.

      4   USDA criteria for PVSAs are in Appendix F, President’s Volunteer
          Service Award Eligibility Criteria.

      5   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are authorized to determine the
          frequency and timing of PVSA recognition.

      6   Employees who volunteer together for a single organization may be
          recognized as a group.

          a    Each group member must contribute at least 25 hours; and

          b    Hours credited under a group award may not also be used for an
               individual award, with the exception of a Lifetime Achievement
               Award.



                                   60
               7   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices providing PVSA recognition
                   will develop an application process, ensuring the following is documented
                   and maintained for 3 years for reporting purposes:

                   a    Employee name(s);

                   b    Duty Station(s);

                   c    Qualifying organization(s) for which the volunteer service was
                        performed;

                   d    Date ranges of the volunteer service, per organization;

                   e    Total number of hours of the volunteer service, per organization; and

                   f    Employee certification that the information on the application is
                        correct.

               8   All applicants are required to have a verifying official (i.e., someone in a
                   leadership capacity at each respective volunteer organization) certify the
                   applicant has, in fact, served the number of hours for which they are
                   claiming credit.

               9   Volunteer hours already recognized in a previous PVSA are not eligible to
                   be counted toward another award, with the exception of a Lifetime
                   Achievement Award.

               10 An employee may only receive one Lifetime Achievement Award through
                  USDA’s program.

f.   Ceremonies and Refreshments.

     Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may hold ceremonies and serve refreshments
     under the authorization to incur necessary expense for the honorary recognition of
     employees, and must ensure such spending represents proper and defensible use of
     taxpayer dollars. This spending is subject to the review and approval of contracting and
     budget offices, and must be tracked and reportable by event.

     (1) Ceremonies.

          (a) Agencies and staff offices may plan formal ceremonies for high level awards,
               such as Administrator’s or Chief’s Awards. External venues, special staging,
               or other effects are generally not appropriate at this level, and spending for
               such must be approved by the Administrator, Chief, or Staff Office Head.

               If an agency is planning a ceremony on behalf of its Under Secretary, such
               spending must be approved by the Under Secretary’s office.


                                             61
          (b) Organizations within the agency or staff office may hold less formal
               ceremonies.

     (2) Refreshments.

          (a) Cake and punch refreshments, or similar items within that cost range, are
               generally acceptable as necessary expenses, provided the primary purpose of
               the gathering is the presentation of awards.

               If the primary purpose of the gathering is to conduct other business, presenting
               a few awards at the end is not sufficient justification to provide refreshments
               under this authorization.

          (b) Refreshments in conjunction with formal ceremonies, such as those at the
               Administrator or Chief level, may include simple finger foods as well.

          (c) Ceremonies at the subcabinet and Secretary level may be accompanied by
               catered receptions, but the refreshments typically may not take the form of a
               meal. Exceptions must be approved in advance by the ASA.

          (d) If a local office employee is receiving an award at a State or Regional Office,
               or in Washington, D.C., and the ceremony is being livestreamed, the local
               office may provide cake and punch-type refreshments as a means of celebrating
               the local employee’s recognition.

g.   Special Situations.

     (1) Post-Employment and Posthumous Awards. Monetary awards may be granted to
         former employees or to their legal heirs or estate if the contribution recognized by
         the award was made during their employment with USDA.

     (2) Awards to Employees Moving Between Pay Scales and/or to Another Mission
         Area, Agency or Office in USDA.

          (a) An award may be paid to an SES, SL or ST employee after appointment to
               such pay plan for contribution(s) as a GS employee. Approval provisions for
               SES, SL and ST awards apply.

          (b) An award may be paid to an employee after a reassignment to another USDA
               Mission Area, agency, or staff office is effective. The provisions of Section
               6c(7) apply.

     (3) Awards to Employees on Behalf of Other Federal Agencies. When another Federal
         agency or department wishes to provide a monetary or TOA to a USDA employee,
         the provisions of Section 6 will govern the action.




                                             62
     (4) Awards to Employees of Other Federal Agencies. When Mission Areas, agencies,
         or staff offices wish to provide a monetary award or TOA to an employee of
         another Federal agency doing work on behalf of USDA, that agency’s award
         policies and procedures will govern the action.

     (5) Honorary Awards to Private Citizens. Under the provisions of 7 CFR
         §2.91(a)(9)(ii), Director, Office of Human Resources Management, only the
         Secretary may provide honorary awards to a private citizen, except as noted in
         Section 6e(5)(c). Authority to grant honorary awards to private citizens may not be
         further delegated.

h.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Awards.

     (1) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may establish customized award
         programs that convey significant recognition reflecting their respective mission and
         culture. Examples include, but are not limited to awards like Supervisor of the
         Year, Program Technician of the Year, and Scientist of the Year.

     (2) Such awards do not require OHRM review or approval, but must be consistent with
         the policies contained in this DR.

i.   External Awards.

     (1) The Samuel J. Heyman Service to America Medals, awarded annually by the
         Partnership for Public Service, are a highly respected honor with a formal selection
         process. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must clear their nominations
         through their respective Under Secretary’s office before submitting the nominations
         to the Partnership, and must provide a copy of the cleared nomination to OHRM.

     (2) OMB and OPM may establish awards programs, such as the Gears of Government
         Awards, where the overarching criteria and processes are defined by OMB or OPM.
         OHRM will publish any necessary supplementary guidance specific to USDA’s
         implementation of the programs.

     (3) There are numerous other external awards for Federal employees that OHRM does
         not monitor or manage. Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must exercise
         discretion as to whether they will encourage or manage such nominations.

          (a) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may not nominate an employee for
              an award or permit their acceptance of an award if it is sponsored by any entity
              having interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or non-
              performance of the employee's official duties.

          (b) All external awards of cash or investment interests (in any amount) and gifts
              with an aggregate market value greater than $200 (including the aggregate
              value of physical items, complimentary attendance at awards ceremonies, or
              free transportation to ceremonies) offered as part of an external award, may


                                            63
                only be accepted after timely notification to the USDA Office of Ethics, and a
                written ethics determination issued by the Office of Ethics allowing acceptance
                of such offered gifts.

       (4) Employees may not receive an award or recognition from an individual charity or
           other organization for Combined Federal Campaign performance or participation.
           This does not preclude an employee from receiving recognition for humanitarian
           activities performed outside the workplace that might include volunteer work at a
           CFC charity.


7. FORMS AND RECORDS

  a.   Forms

       (1) Appraisal Forms. The Rating Official must use the following forms, or OHRM-
           approved electronic alternative, to prepare and document performance plans:

           (a) Form AD-435E, Performance Plan and Appraisal for Non-Supervisors; and

           (b) Form AD-435S, Performance Plan and Appraisal for Supervisors.

       (2) WGI Form. The Rating Official must use Form AD-658, Within Grade Increase
           Record, or OHRM-approved electronic alternative, to approve, delay, or deny
           WGIs.

       (3) Award Forms. The following forms, or OHRM-approved electronic alternative,
           must be used for awards.

           (a) Form AD-287-2, Recommendation and Authorization of Monetary and Time
                off Awards; and

           (b) Form AD-3115, Recommendation and Authorization of Quality Step Increase.

       (4) Digital Signatures. Digital signatures are authorized for these forms, and must:

           (a) Comply with DR 3640-001, Identity, Credential, and Access Management;

           (b) Be created using the Department’s digital signature standard, via the USDA-
               approved Personal Identity Verification (PIV) (LincPass), PIV-Derived, or
               other USDA-approved credentials that offer cryptographic non-reputable
               assurance in the signer’s identity; and

           (c) Be producible on a paper copy.

  b.   Certificates. The following certificates are designated for Departmentwide application.

       (1) Form AD-141A, Certificate of Appreciation;


                                              64
    (2) Form AD-69, Certificate of Merit;

    (3) Length of Service Certificates (AD-68 form series); and

    (4) Retirement Certificates (Government Printing Office/OPM certificates).

c. Records.

    (1) Performance and award-related records must be maintained in accordance with the
        procedures set forth in 5 CFR Part 293, Personnel Records; 5 CFR Part 297,
        Privacy Act Procedures for Personnel Records; and any Departmental Directives
        associated with Personally Identifiable Information; the Privacy Act of 1974; and
        the Freedom of Information Act of 1996 (FOIA), 5 U.S.C. Section 552. These
        records must be filed according to OPM’s The Guide to Personnel Recordkeeping.

    (2) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must not agree to erase, remove, alter, or
        withhold from another USDA or other Federal agency any information about an
        employee’s performance or conduct in that employee’s official personnel records,
        including an employee’s Official Personnel Folder (OPF) and EPF, as part of, or as
        a condition to, resolving a formal or informal complaint by the employee or settling
        an administrative challenge to an adverse personnel action.

    (3) Ratings of record, the supporting performance plans, and other relevant
        documentation must be maintained for 4 years, or longer periods as required.

    (4) Records related to monetary awards, TOAs, and QSIs must be maintained for 3
        years, or longer periods as required.

    (5) Rating Officials will regard performance records as confidential in their
        maintenance and distribution.

    (6) Performance Rating Transfers.

        (a) If an employee moves to a new organization within USDA or to another
              Federal agency, the ratings of record contained in the OPF and the EPF must be
              transferred to the new organization or Federal agency.

        (b) The "losing" servicing HRO will purge all ratings of record, performance
              plans, and any supporting performance-related documents that are more than 4
              years old from the OPF or EPF.

    (7) Purchase records for non-monetary awards and necessary expenses must be
        maintained for 6 years. These records must be filed according to Office of
        Contracting and Procurement (OCP) guidance.

    (8) Reports, including analyses of the effectiveness of spending practices, may be
        required as OHRM or OCP deem necessary.


                                            65
8. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Director, OHRM, serving as the USDA CHCO, will:

       (1) Design, attain OPM approval of, and implement USDA’s Appraisal System in
           accordance with 5 CFR Part 430;

       (2) Establish USDA’s Performance Management Program policies and parameters
           within the approved System;

       (3) Ensure the Program complies with applicable laws, regulations, and OPM guidance,
           including the merit system principles and prohibited personnel practices;

       (4) Establish awards program policies in accordance with Federal regulations;

       (5) Review, direct, and approve Mission Area, agency, and staff offices’ internal
           policies; and

       (6) Provide policy compliance oversight, technical assistance, and direction on issues
           that arise.

  b.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Heads will:

       (1) Promote and model the policies and behaviors necessary for effective performance
           management and employee recognition;

       (2) Delegate appropriate authority to managers, supervisors, and other management
           officials, as required, to effectively implement and operate under the Performance
           Management Program in a manner consistent with effective operations and sound
           management practices;

       (3) Develop and communicate Mission Area, agency, or staff office organizational
           goals, initiatives, and priorities;

       (4) Assess organizational performance, communicate results to employees, and provide
           formal guidance to Rating and Reviewing Officials on how organizational
           performance is considered when deciding ratings and awards;

       (5) Ensure supervisors are accountable for the successful accomplishment of their
           performance management responsibilities, and employees are accountable for their
           individual performance;

       (6) Ensure appropriate performance management and recognition training is provided
           for managers, supervisors, and employees within their organizations;

       (7) Incorporate funding for their awards program in the Mission Area, agency, or staff
           office budget;



                                             66
     (8) Ensure high-performing employees are recognized and rewarded;

     (9) Develop, review, and update, as needed, an annual awards spending plan for their
         Mission Area, agency, or staff office that establishes and maintains a current,
         comprehensive strategy to develop and foster a culture of recognition, including
         formal and informal recognition;

     (10) Ensure the authority to incur necessary expense for honorary non-monetary awards
          is used in a manner that shows good judgment and preserves the credibility and
          integrity of USDA’s awards program;

     (11) Establish QSI panels;

     (12) Establish Mission Area, agency, or staff office policy on whether to transfer up to
          40 hours of a previously-earned TOA for employees transferring from outside
          USDA;

     (13) Set clear expectations and communicate support for their awards program, ensuring
          employees working for different managers within the organization experience
          minimal disparities in the program’s execution;

     (14) Continually assess their use of incentives and awards to determine whether their
          awards program is genuinely motivating employees’ high performance;

     (15) Inform employees of recognition policies and procedures;

     (16) Ensure spending data on all awards, including monetary, non-monetary, and time
          off, are tracked and evaluated for appropriateness and desired results; and

     (17) Ensure internal reviews are conducted of the effectiveness of the awards program
          implementation, including consistent application across the organization, and
          making adjustments where necessary.

c.   USDA CHCO Council Members will:

     (1) Administer their employee performance management and recognition programs in
         accordance with Departmental and Federal regulations;

     (2) Ensure formal and informal performance planning and evaluation are used
         appropriately in the context of managing, training, recognizing, promoting,
         retaining, reassigning, and, as necessary, reducing in grade or removing employees
         for unacceptable performance;

     (3) Provide training and information on performance management and recognition for
         managers, supervisors, and employees;

     (4) Provide guidance for linking performance to organizational goals, and establishing


                                            67
           performance plans with results-focused performance elements and balanced,
           credible performance measures within the performance standards;

      (5) Provide assistance and guidance to supervisors and managers in the execution of
          their performance management and recognition responsibilities;

      (6) Conduct annual internal evaluations and participate in Departmentwide Program
          evaluations to assess compliance with established principles, policies, and
          procedures; and determine the need for improvement, training, or guidance;

      (7) Provide required reports and documentation of Program activities to support USDA
          and OPM accountability Program reviews or audits;

      (8) Ensure internal processes do not diminish the principles or impact of employee
          recognition;

      (9) Provide required reports and documentation of Program activities to OHRM upon
          request; and

      (10) Submit all draft internal directives and policies that reference the employee
           performance management and awards programs to the CHCO for review and
           approval prior to implementation. (This requirement does not necessitate approval
           of procedural guidance such as annual reminders of program requirements,
           processes, and deadlines.)

 d.   Managers and Supervisors will:

       (1) Model the principles of effective employee recognition;

      (2) Ensure recognition is merited, suitably justified, linked to, and commensurate with
          the performance, contribution(s) or accomplishment(s) being recognized;

       (3) Submit nominations for timely recognition of employee or group achievements;

       (4) Consider input from appropriate sources when making recognition decisions,
           including obtaining concurrence from the supervisor of record if recognizing an
           employee from another organization;

       (5) Use non-monetary awards as an alternative when monetary awards or TOAs are not
           appropriate or otherwise not authorized; and

       (6) Promote the awards and recognition program by encouraging employee
           participation, arranging for appropriate presentations, and publicizing recognition
           activities.

e.    Reviewing Officials will:




                                              68
     (1) Establish a performance culture that fosters a high performing organization through
         effective management of individual and organizational performance;

     (2) Implement the principles, policies, procedures, and requirements of the performance
         management program for the organizations within their span of control;

     (3) Hold their subordinate Rating Officials accountable for carrying out their
         performance management responsibilities within established deadlines;

     (4) Actively support Rating Officials in dealing with unacceptable performance; and

     (5) Complete required ongoing performance management training.

f.   Rating Officials will:

     (1) Create a performance culture and environment that fosters a highly performing
         work unit;

     (2) Implement the principles, policies, procedures, and requirements of the Program
         within their span of control;

     (3) Establish meaningful and achievable performance expectations in a performance
         plan for each subordinate employee;

     (4) Work with employees to identify opportunities to develop their performance;

     (5) Provide ongoing feedback and performance coaching, including quarterly reviews;

     (6) Maintain documentation on each employee’s performance;

     (7) Recognize and effectively address employees’ performance issues early;

     (8) Provide the most effective assistance to employees as is practical; and

     (9) Complete required ongoing performance management training.

g.   Employees will:

     (1) Provide input to their Rating Official concerning the development of their
         performance plan;

     (2) Carry out the performance expectations defined in their plan;

     (3) Request clarification of the performance standards and measures, as needed;

     (4) Identify obstacles to completing performance expectations and address them with
         their respective Rating Official;



                                            69
       (5) Complete developmental assignments;

       (6) Participate with their Rating Official in their quarterly conversations; and

       (7) Submit an accomplishment report at the end of the performance year, if the Rating
           Official so requires.


9. COMPLIANCE

  a.   USDA CHCO Council Members are responsible for ensuring their non-executive
       performance management programs comply with the Program policies specified in this
       DR.

  b.   On an as-needed basis, the Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM) will:

       (1) Establish mandatory compliance reporting; and

       (2) Audit Mission Area, agency, and staff office programs.


10. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  a.   Policy exceptions to this directive must be requested, in advance, via a decisional
       memorandum to the USDA CHCO. The memorandum must be routed through the
       respective subcabinet official.

  b.   Policy exceptions specific to the Secretary’s authorization of awards, as noted in
       Appendix D, must be requested, in advance, via a decision memorandum. It must be
       routed through the:

       (1) Respective subcabinet official;

       (2) USDA CHCO; and

       (3) ASA.


11. INQUIRIES

   Inquiries regarding this DR may be directed to the Office of Human Resources
   Management, 202-720-3585.

                                             -END-




                                               70
                               APPENDIX A

                  ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AD       Agriculture Department (for Departmental forms use only)
CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
CHCO     Chief Human Capital Officer
DO       Demonstration Opportunity
DR       Departmental Regulation
EEO      Equal Employment Opportunity
EPF      Employee Performance File
FOIA     Freedom of Information Act
GS       General Schedule
HRO      Human Resources Office
OCP      Office of Contracting and Procurement
OHRM     Office of Human Resources Management
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
OPF      Official Personnel Folder
OPM      Office of Personnel Management
OSEC     Office of the Secretary
PII      Personally Identifiable Information
PIV      Personal Identity Verification
PVSA     President’s Volunteer Service Award
QSI      Quality Step Increase
RIF      Reduction in Force
SES      Senior Executive Service
SL       Senior Level
ST       Scientific and Professional
TDY      Temporary Duty
TOA      Time Off Award
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture
WGI      Within-Grade Increase




                                      A-1
                                         APPENDIX B

                                         DEFINITIONS


Absolute Standards. Performance standards which allow for no errors.

Acceptable Performance. An employee’s performance that meets the performance standard(s)
and measures at the Fully Successful level for the respective element(s).

Advisory Assessment. An informal, written record of an employee's performance for a period of
60- 89 days.

Agency. Organizational units of the Department, other than staff offices, whose heads report to
officials within the Office of the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Under Secretaries, and Assistant
Secretaries. (DR 0100-001)

Agency Head. The head of a USDA agency or an official who has been delegated the authority
to act for the head of the agency.

Alignment. The line of sight within a performance plan from organizational goals to the
individual’s performance expectations.

Appraisal. The formal process under which performance is reviewed and evaluated against
performance elements and standards.

Appraisal Period. The period of time covered by a specific performance plan, during which
performance will be evaluated against elements and standards, and for which a rating of record
will be prepared.

Appraisal Program. The specific policies and requirements established within the framework of
the OPM-approved performance appraisal System.

Appraisal System. The broad framework of policies and parameters established by the
Department as defined at 5 U.S.C. 4301(1) for the administration of performance appraisal
programs under 5 U.S.C., Chapter 43, Subchapter I , and 5 CFR 430 Subpart B; documented on
OPM Form 1631 and approved by OPM.

Award. Something bestowed, or an action taken, to recognize and reward individual or team
achievement that contributes to meeting organizational goals or improving the efficiency,
effectiveness, and economy of the Government or is otherwise in the public interest. (5 CFR §
451.102)

Backwards Standards. Standards which describe unacceptable performance rather than tell the
employee what level of performance is expected.




                                                B-1
Balanced Measures. An approach to performance management that balances organizational
results with the perspectives of stakeholders, including customers and employees.

Basic Pay. The total amount of pay received at a rate fixed by law or administrative action for
the position held by an employee, including any special rate under 5 CFR part 530, subpart C, or
any locality-based comparability payment under 5 CFR part 531, subpart F, or other similar
payment under other legal authority, before any deductions. Basic pay includes night and
environmental differentials for prevailing rate employees under 5 U.S.C. 5343(f) and 5 CFR
532.511. Basic pay excludes additional pay of any other kind.

Challenge Coin. Originally a military tradition, a small coin or medallion bearing the
organization’s logo or emblem and carried by the organization’s members. In USDA’s practice,
they are normally presented in recognition of a special achievement or contribution by a member
of the organizational unit, or someone performing such on behalf of the unit. They are also
authorized for Length of Service recognition.

CHCO Council Member. The most senior Human Resources Officer in a Mission Area or staff
office.

Credible Measures. Performance measures that are observable, measurable, and/or
demonstrable.

Critical Element. An element of a performance plan which covers an aspect of a job for which
an employee can be held individually accountable, and that must be done successfully in order
for the organization to complete its mission. It is of such importance that failing to attain the
Fully Successful level of the element would result in a determination that an employee’s
summary rating would be Unacceptable. Such elements must only be used to measure
performance at the individual level, such that the critical element describes performance that is
reasonably measured and controlled at the individual employee's level. In the two-level
summary rating pattern, all elements are critical.

Days. Calendar days, unless otherwise specified.

de Minimis. The Internal Revenue Code defines a de minimis item as one which, taking into
account the frequency with which it is given, has a value so small that accounting for it is
unreasonable or too administratively impracticable (26 CFR §1.132-6(a)). USDA generally
envisions de minimis as less than $35.

Demonstration Opportunity (DO). The period of time provided for an employee to demonstrate
acceptable performance in an element(s) previously determined to not attain the Fully Successful
level, generally requiring a formal Demonstration Opportunity Plan.

Demonstration Opportunity Plan. A written plan that describes the level of performance required
to demonstrate acceptable performance (i.e., Fully Successful) in one or more elements.

Disabled Veteran. A veteran who is entitled to compensation (or who but for the receipt of
military retired pay would be entitled to compensation) under laws administered by the Secretary


                                                 B-2
of the Department of Veterans Affairs, or a person who was discharged or released from active
duty because of a service-connected disability.

Element. A work assignment or responsibility that is used to plan, monitor, and appraise
employee performance.

Element Rating. The level of performance assigned to a specific performance element, as
measured by a comparison of accomplishments to the performance standards established for that
element. The two possible element ratings are Fully Successful and Does Not Meet Fully
Successful.

Employee Performance File (EPF). A folder containing an employee’s ratings of record and the
associated performance plans for the most recent four years.

Full Performance Level. The highest level of classified duties certified by the supervisor to
successfully carry out the objectives of the position and the mission of the organization.

Generic Element or Standard. A performance element or standard which is written to cover a
wide number or variety of positions. Supplemental standards may be necessary to ensure
expectations and performance measures are sufficiently documented to effectively communicate
expectations and manage an employee’s performance.

Hall of Heroes Award. A USDA award that recognizes individuals (living or deceased) and
symbolic figures that had a direct and lasting impact on national/international agriculture and
related programs.

Honor Award. The highest honorary award in USDA, granted by the Secretary of Agriculture to
an individual or group for a contribution or achievement in support of the Department's mission
and goals.

Incentives. Awards which are based on predetermined criteria such as productivity standards,
performance goals, measurement systems, award formulas, or payout schedules. (5 CFR §
451.102)

Informal Recognition. Non-monetary awards of nominal value, presented for an
accomplishment or contribution that does not merit a monetary award, TOA or honorary award.

Interim Rating. A written appraisal of an employee’s performance conducted before the end of
the appraisal period. Interim ratings are required for situations such as changes in supervisors,
promotions, significant changes in responsibilities, and details and temporary promotions of 90
or more days.

Leave Year. A leave year begins on the first day of the first full biweekly pay period in a
calendar year, and ends on the day immediately before the first day of the first full biweekly pay
period in the following calendar year.




                                                 B-3
Manager. An individual who directs the work of an organization through one or more
subordinate supervisors.

Measures. Objective criteria for assessing employees’ work results, which delineate the results
and outcomes for which the employee is responsible. General measures of performance include
quality, quantity, timeliness, cost effectiveness and manner of performance. Activities or duties
are not measures.

Minimum Appraisal Period. The minimum 90-day period of performance that must be
completed on a performance plan before a rating of record may be prepared.

Mission Area. A group of agencies with related functions that report to the same Under or
Assistant Secretary. Research, Education, and Economics (REE) is an example of a Mission
Area.

Nominal. See de minimis.

Non-Critical Element. An element of a performance plan which is related to a work assignment
or responsibility that is important to the successful achievement of a position’s performance
expectations, but not of such importance that failing to attain the Fully Successful performance
level of the element would result in a determination that an employee’s summary rating would be
Unacceptable. A non-critical element may reflect group or team expectations. In the two-level
summary rating pattern, no elements are non-critical.

Non-Rating-Based Award. A lump sum monetary or time off award that recognizes specific
accomplishments that are in the public interest and have exceeded normal job requirements.

Official Personnel File. The file containing records for an individual’s Federal employment
career.

Out-of-cycle rating of record. A rating of record given when a WGI decision is not consistent
with the employee's most recent rating of record and a more current rating of record must be
prepared.

Performance. The accomplishment of work described in the employee’s performance plan.

Performance Goals. Specific goals assigned to an employee by the Rating Official that establish
the results that are to be achieved. These are most often documented by describing the required
outcome, results, and associated performance measures.

Performance Management. The systematic process by which the Department involves its
employees in ensuring organizational effectiveness in the accomplishment of USDA mission and
goals. It integrates the process the Department uses to communicate and clarify organizational
goals to employees; identify individual and, where applicable, team accountability for
accomplishing organizational goals; identify and address developmental needs; assess and
improve individual, team and organizational performance; use appropriate measures of



                                                 B-4
performance as the basis for recognizing and rewarding accomplishments; and use the results of
the performance appraisal process as a basis for appropriate personnel actions.

Performance Plan. The written document, or approved electronic alternative, that communicates
to the employee what is expected of the position. A plan must include all elements, and their
respective performance standards and measures on which the employee will be evaluated.

Performance Standard. The performance thresholds, requirements, and expectations an
employee must meet for an element to be appraised at a specific level of performance.
Performance standards are properly written as outcomes, rather than duties, and must include
credible performance measures.

Performance Year. The full 12-month appraisal period from October 1 – September 30.

Permanent Position. A position filled by an employee whose appointment is not designated as
temporary and does not have a definite time limitation of 1 year or less. This includes a position
to which an employee is promoted on a temporary or term basis for at least 1 year. It does not
include a position filled by an employee whose appointment is limited to 1 year or less and
subsequently extended so that the total time of the appointment exceeds 1 year. (5 CFR 531.403)

Personally Identifiable Information (PII). Any information about an individual maintained by a
Mission Area, agency, or staff office, including (1) any information that can be used to
distinguish or trace an individual‘s identity, such as name, social security number, date and place
of birth, mother‘s maiden name, or biometric records; and (2) any other information that is
linked or linkable to an individual, such as medical, educational, financial, and employment
information.

Position of Record. The position to which an employee is assigned through a formal personnel
action, such as an appointment, promotion, reassignment, or transfer. It does not indicate such
things as details or temporary promotions.

President’s Volunteer Service Award. An initiative of the Corporation for National and
Community Service, administered by the Points of Light organization. Recognizes United States
citizens and lawfully admitted, permanent residents of the United States who have achieved the
required number of hours of volunteer service over a 12-month period or cumulative hours over
the course of a lifetime.

Quality Step Increase (QSI). An optional one-step increase in pay granted to GS employees who
demonstrate the highest quality performance over the course of at least 18 consecutive months,
when it is expected that level of performance will continue to be demonstrated.

Rating-Based Award (also referred to as a Performance Award). An award granted to an
employee based solely on the current rating of record.

Rating Official. A representative of management, generally the employee’s immediate
supervisor, who establishes the employee’s performance plan; provides progress reviews; and



                                                 B-5
prepares an interim rating(s), as applicable. If the Rating Official is the employee’s supervisor of
record, they prepare the final rating of record at the end of the appraisal period.

Rating of Record. The formal evaluation and summary rating of an employee's performance as
compared to the elements and standards for performance over the entire appraisal period.

Recognition. Awards that provide after-the-fact acknowledgement to employees for their
accomplishments when there was no previous promise of reward. Recognition signals the types
of achievements the organization values.

Referral Bonus. An incentive bonus granted to an employee who brings new talent to the
Mission Area, agency, or staff office by referring a person who is subsequently selected for, and
performs successfully in, a hard-to-fill position.

Reviewing Official. A representative of management, generally the employee’s second-level
supervisor, and in all cases at least one organizational level above the Rating Official, who
reviews and approves the performance plan; interim rating(s), as applicable; and rating of record.
The Reviewing Official is also responsible for ensuring both consistency and meaningful
distinctions among similar positions and alignment with organizational goals.

Staff Office. A Departmental administrative office whose head reports to officials within the
Office of the Secretary. (DR 0100-001)

Suggestion. A constructive proposal that results in a savings or an improvement to USDA or the
broader Federal Government. Suggestions pose solutions to problems, identify potential
problems, or provide an opportunity to effect change.

Summary Rating. The overall rating (e.g., Fully Successful) determined by the formula applied
to all of the element ratings.

Supervisor. An individual employed in USDA having authority, in the interest of a Mission
Area, agency, or staff office, to hire, direct, assign, promote, reward, transfer, furlough, layoff,
recall, suspend, discipline and/or remove employees; to adjust their grievances or to effectively
recommend such action, if the exercise of the authority is not merely routine or clerical in nature
but requires the consistent exercise of independent judgment. Except with respect to any unit
which includes firefighters or nurses, the term “supervisor” includes only those individuals who
devote a preponderance of their employment time to exercising such authority.

Supervisor of Record. The supervisor for the position of record. These individuals are
responsible for ensuring the performance management provisions are carried out for employees
who officially report to them (even if the employees are on detail elsewhere), and are responsible
for the final rating of record.

Team Leader. An employee whose primary purpose is, as a regular and recurring part of their
assignment and at least 25% of their duty time, to lead a team of other GS employees in
accomplishing work.



                                                  B-6
Telework. A work flexibility arrangement under which an employee performs the duties and
responsibilities of their position, and other authorized activities, from an approved worksite other
than the location from which the employee would otherwise work. Telework may be authorized
for an entire duty day or a portion of one. Telework does not include the following:

   (1) Work performed while on official travel status;

   (2) Work performed while commuting to/from work; or

   (3) Mobile work.

Time Off Award. Time off from duty, without loss of pay or charge to leave, granted to a
Federal employee as a form of incentive or recognition.

Unacceptable Performance. An employee’s performance that fails to meet established
performance standards in one or more elements of such employee’s position.

Voluntary Leave Transfer Program. A voluntary program under which an employee may donate
annual leave directly to another employee who has a personal or family medical emergency and
who has exhausted their available paid leave.

Within-Grade Increase. A periodic increase in a General Schedule (GS) employee's rate of basic
pay from one step of the grade of their position to the next higher step of that grade.




                                                  B-7
                                            APPENDIX C

                                AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Actions Based on Unacceptable Performance, 5 U.S.C. 4303, (2018)

Adverse Actions, 5 CFR Part 752, (2019)

Adverse Actions, 5 U.S.C. 75 (2018)

Awards, 5 CFR Part 451 (2019)

Delegations to the Director, Office of Human Resources Management, 7 CFR § 2.91 (2019)

Earning Within-Grade Increase, 5 CFR § 531.404 (2019)

Employee, 5 U.S.C. 2105 (2018)

Employee Performance File System Records, 5 CFR § 293.401 through 293.406 (2019)

Employment and Training of Veterans, 38 U.S.C. 4211 (2018)

Entire Executive Civil Service, 5 CFR § 213.3102 (2019)

Freedom of Information Act of 1996 (FOIA), 5 U.S.C. Section 552, as amended (2018)

Incentive Awards, 5 U.S.C. 45 (2018)

Maximum Payable Rate Rule, 5 CFR 531.221 (2019)

Merit System Principles, 5 U.S.C. 2301 (2018)

Official Personnel Folder, 5 CFR § 293.302 (2019)

OMB, M-17-22, Comprehensive Plan for Reforming the Federal Government and Reducing the
Federal Civilian Workforce, April 12, 2017

OPM, Form 1631, Performance Appraisal System Description, (2016)

OPM, The Guide to Personnel Recordkeeping, June 1, 2011

OPM, The Guide to Processing Personnel Actions, Chapter 6

Performance Appraisal, 5 U.S.C. 43 (2018)

Performance Based Reduction in Grade and Removal Actions, 5 CFR Part 432 (2019)

Performance Management, 5 CFR Part 430 (2019)



                                                C-1
Personally Identifiable Information, 2 CFR § 200.79 (2019)

Personnel Records, 5 CFR Part 293 (2019)

Positions of a Confidential or Policy-Determining Nature, 5 CFR § 213.3301 (2019)

Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. Section 552a (2018)

Privacy Act Procedures for Personnel Records, 5 CFR Part 297 (2019)

Probation on Initial Appointment to a Competitive Position, 5 CFR Part 315 Subpart H (2019)

Probation on Initial Appointment to a Supervisory or Managerial Position, 5 CFR Part 315
Subpart I (2019)

Promoting Accountability and Streamlining Removal Procedures Consistent with Merit Systems
Principles, Executive Order 13839, May 25, 2018

Promoting Efficient Spending, Executive Order 13589, November 9, 2011

Quality Step Increases, 5 CFR Part 531, Subpart E (2019)

Reduction in Force, Retention Standing, 5 CFR Part 351 Subpart E (2019)

Special Leaves of Absence to be Given Disabled Veterans in Need of Medical Treatment
Executive Order 5396, July 17, 1930.

The Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act, 38 U.S.C. 4301-4335 (2018)

USDA, DR 3640-001, Identity, Credential, and Access Management, December 9, 2011

USDA, DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007

USDA, DR 4080-811-002, Telework Program, January 4, 2018

USDA, DR 4230-001, Volunteer Programs, October 20, 2016

USDA, Form AD-287-2, Recommendation and Authorization of Monetary and Time Off Awards
(July 2020)

USDA, Form AD-435E, Performance Plan and Appraisal for Non-Supervisors (June 2020)

USDA, Form AD-435S, Performance Plan and Appraisal for Supervisors (June 2020)

USDA, Form AD-658, Within Grade Increase Record (June 2020)

USDA, Form AD-3115, Recommendation and Authorization of Quality Step Increase (July 2020)




                                               C-2
                                        APPENDIX D

          MONETARY AWARD AND TOA AUTHORIZATION REQUIREMENTS


Use the following table to determine the authorization requirements for monetary and time off
awards.

Table 1. Authorization Requirements
 Discrete or cumulative
                                 Organizational authorization levels are no lower
 awards within a consecutive
                                 than:
 52 week period, up to:
        $750      and/or 8 hours The immediate supervisor
      $2,000     and/or 20 hours The 2nd level supervisor
      $4,000     and/or 40 hours The first SES in the employee’s chain of command
      $6,000     and/or 80 hours The agency or staff office head
      $8,000                     The subcabinet official
    $10,000                      The Secretary

a. An award for a highly exceptional and unusually outstanding suggestion, invention, superior
   accomplishment, or other meritorious effort exceeding $10,000 per individual requires the
   Secretary’s approval, as well as authorization from OPM prior to payment. Mission Areas,
   agencies, and staff offices must consult with OHRM before initiating such a request to ensure
   it complies with current OPM guidance.

b. Awards exceeding $25,000 require Presidential authorization.




                                                D-1
                                         APPENDIX E

              MEASURABLE AND NON-MEASURABLE BENEFITS SCALES


Use the Measurable Benefits Scale when a contribution, suggestion or invention results in a
quantifiable benefit, such as a process improvement that saves a program a particular monetary
amount. The benefit is calculated based on the first 52 weeks of the contribution, invention, or
of the implemented improvement or suggestion.

Table 2. Measurable Benefits Scale
         Benefit                                       Award
 Up to $10,000          10% of the benefits
                        $1,000 for the first $10,000 in benefits, plus 3% of benefits over
 $10,001 - $100,000
                        $10,000
                        $3,700 for the first $100,000 in benefits, plus 0.005% of benefits
 $100,001 or more       over $100,000. Award amount may not exceed 20% of recipient’s
                        basic pay.

Use the Non-Measurable Benefits Scales when a contribution, suggestion or invention results in
benefits which cannot be readily quantified, such as contributions described in the examples after
Table 3.

Table 3. Non-Measurable Benefits Scale for Monetary Awards
                                    Type of Contribution
  Scope
               Limited           Moderate          Significant            Substantial
 Level 1      Up to $250         Up to $500       Up to $1,000                N/A
 Level 2      Up to $500         Up to $750       Up to $1,500                N/A
 Level 3         N/A            Up to $1,000      Up to $2,000           Up to $3,500
 Level 4         N/A            Up to $1,250      Up to $3,000           Up to $5,000
 Level 5         N/A            Up to $1,500      Up to $4,000           Up to $7,500
 Level 6         N/A            Up to $2,000      Up to $5,000           Up to $10,000

Table 4. Non-Measurable Benefits Scale for Time Off Awards
                                    Type of Contribution
  Scope
               Limited           Moderate           Significant           Substantial
 Level 1     Up to 4 hours     Up to 8 hours     Up to 16 hours               N/A
 Level 2     Up to 8 hours     Up to 10 hours    Up to 20 hours               N/A
 Level 3         N/A           Up to 12 hours    Up to 24 hours          Up to 40 hours
 Level 4         N/A           Up to 20 hours    Up to 30 hours          Up to 40 hours
 Level 5         N/A           Up to 30 hours    Up to 40 hours          Up to 40 hours
 Level 6         N/A           Up to 40 hours    Up to 40 hours          Up to 40 hours



                                                 E-1
Table 5. Key to Types of Contribution
 Type         Examples
 Limited      a. Assisted a colleague on a project to help meet a deadline;
              b. Provided support for a specific initiative by scheduling meetings,
                  tracking documents through approval, following up on deliverable due
                  dates, etc.;
              c. Served in an “acting” capacity for two pay periods (without a
                  temporary promotion); and
              d. Served as a team member on a short-term project.
 Moderate     a. Developed an administrative process improvement;
              b. Provided technical expertise and guidance to a project team;
              c. Performed an absent colleague’s duties for 60 days, as well as the
                  awardee’s own workload;
              d. Served as the lead on a short-term project; and
              e. Served as a fully contributing team member on a large, long-term
                  project.
 Significant a. Developed a strategic program enhancement which facilitated Mission
                  Area, agency, or staff office decision-making, or improved delivery to
                  external customers;
              b. Delivered an important project with high quality on a very short
                  timeline; and
              c. Served as the lead on a large, long-term project, accountable for the
                  results.
 Substantial a. Led an interagency initiative to develop a new methodology to improve
                  program delivery to USDA’s external stakeholders; and
              b. Led a research team that developed a ground-breaking agricultural
                  industry innovation.




                                               E-2
Table 6. Key to Scope of the Contribution’s Impact
 Scope        Definitions of Levels
 Level 1      a. The operations of the immediate office or Ranger District;
              b. The employees of an entire State or Region up to 300 employees; or
              c. Equivalent.
 Level 2      a. The operations of a division, service center agency’s District or an entire
                  small State or Forest;
              b. The services delivered to the local community;
              c. The employees of an entire State, Region, agency, or staff office up to
                  3,000 employees; or
              d. Equivalent.
 Level 3      a. The operations of an entire medium State or Forest, or a small agency or
                  staff office (up to 3,000 employees);
              b. The services delivered to an entire small State, or delivered by multiple
                  agencies to the local community or service center agency’s entire District;
              c. A significant mission-centric program delivered State or Forest-wide;
              d. A subset of the general public equivalent to an entire small State;
              e. The employees of an entire medium agency (3,001 - 10,000) employees;
                  or
              f. Equivalent.
 Level 4      a. The operations of an entire large State or Forest, multiple States, a
                  Region, an entire medium agency (3,001 –10,000 employees), or all the
                  offices of multiple agencies serving an entire State;
              b. The services delivered by multiple States, or by multiple agencies to the
                  entire State;
              c. A mission program delivered agency-wide;
              d. A subset of the general public equivalent to an entire medium or large
                  State;
              e. The employees of multiple agencies, or an entire large agency (over
                  10,000 employees); or
              f. Equivalent.
 Level 5      a. The operations of an entire large agency (over 10,000 employees),
                  multiple agencies, multiple Regions, or a bureau or independent agency
                  outside USDA;
              b. The services delivered by multiple Regions;
              c. A program delivered Department-wide;
              d. A subset of the general public equivalent to multiple States;
              e. The employees of the entire Department; or
              f. Equivalent.
 Level 6      a. The operations of the entire Department;
              b. A significant mission-centric program delivered Department-wide;
              c. The general public of the entire Nation; or
              d. Equivalent




                                                E-3
                                           APPENDIX F

                       PRESIDENT’S VOLUNTEER SERVICE AWARD
                                ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA


Table 7. Criteria for Eligible Service
                                    Criterion                                    Yes                 No
 Is the volunteer work with an organization that is legally established in the                    Not
                                                                               Eligible
 United States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or one of the territories?                        Eligible
 Does the volunteer work meet national or community needs such as youth
                                                                                                  Not
 achievement, parks and open space, health communities, conservation, animal Eligible
                                                                                                  Eligible
 welfare, public safety or emergency response?
 Is the work paid or otherwise compensated (e.g., stipend)?

 Note: Qualifying for an IRS charitable contribution deduction associated             Not
                                                                                                  Eligible
         with the volunteer work, such as may be appropriate when hosting an          Eligible
         exchange student, for example, is not in and of itself considered a
         stipend.
 Is the work court-ordered or disciplinary-related community service?                 Not
                                                                                                  Eligible
                                                                                      Eligible
 Are the activities associated with influencing legislation or elections to a
                                                                                      Not
 public office, engaging in protests, engaging in union activities, or likely to                  Eligible
                                                                                      Eligible
 include political advocacy?

These criteria are progressive; i.e., the volunteer work must be eligible in each criterion.

Table 8. Examples of Eligible Service
      Category                         Eligible                                    Not Eligible
 AmeriCorps, Peace
                      All on-duty hours are eligible for the
 Corps, Military On-                                                 Not for Bronze, Silver or Gold
                      Call to Service award
 Duty Hours
 AmeriCorps, Peace
                      All volunteer activities are eligible for
 Corps, Military
                      all levels of PVSA
 Off-Duty Hours
                                                                 Activities that take place during the
                        Facilitating a weekday support group for
                                                                 normal worship service such as
 Faith-Based            single parents; painting or cleaning a
                                                                 ushering or participating in the
                        church, mosque or synagogue
                                                                 choir
                        All hours which are part of the official
 Foster Parenting       Senior Corps Foster Grandparents         Non-Senior Corps foster parenting
                        program



                                                   F-1
      Category                         Eligible                               Not Eligible
                       Unpaid volunteering through a legally      If not through a legally established
 Care-giving           established volunteer organization, such   volunteer organization (e.g., within
                       as the Senior Corp Senior Companions       a family or personal relationship)
 Fund-raising          Time spent soliciting funds and actually
                                                                  Rallies, mealtimes, etc.
 Cancer Walk           walking
 Fund-raising
                       Organizing, setting up and cleaning up     Attending the dinner
 Dinner
 Elected position,                                                Time spent campaigning for the
 such as with a        Planning, attending or presiding over      position, and any activity
 homeowners’ or        meetings and events, conducting            undertaken to specifically benefit
 parent-teacher        inspections, etc.                          the individual as a homeowner,
 association                                                      parent, etc.
                                                                  Hours the student is at school,
 Hosting an            Time spent interacting directly with the
                                                                  attending activities without the host
 Exchange Student      student
                                                                  parents, sleeping, etc.
                       Mentoring activities that support such
                       things as the members’ academic
                       advancement, community building, and       Activities that primarily benefit the
 Sorority/Fraternity   leadership skills; participating in the    organization’s social activities or
                       organization’s community support           the immediate house’s concerns
                       activities; working for the respective
                       organization’s charitable foundation.

Each of these examples assumes the General Criteria in Table 1 are met.




                                                F-2
