                 UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                           WASHINGTON, DC. 20250


                                                            Number:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                     4040-412-002

                                                            Date:
SUBJECT:                                                    July 25, 2014
Training and Development for Supervisors                    OPI:
                                                            Office of Human
                                                            Resources Management



1. PURPOSE

  This regulation establishes Departmental policy on training and development for supervisors.


2. BACKGROUND

  This Directive describes how USDA will meet supervisory training requirements. It will:

  a. Ensure that supervisor training is consistent throughout the Department;

  b. Minimize duplication of supervisory training efforts across the Department;

  c. Ensure cost effective delivery of training through blended learning approaches and
     economies of sharing training resources among all USDA agencies and staff offices;

  d. Build a supervisor workforce that supports long-term organizational performance;

  e. Reduce and eliminate problems created by untrained supervisors; and

  f. Build a positive and productive work environment with engaged employees.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS

  This policy supersedes DR4120-002 Training for Team Leaders, Supervisors, Managers, and
  Executives dated (November 4, 1998).
4. AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES

  a. The Government Employees Training Act, Title 5, United States Code, Chapter 41and
     related guidance issued by the Office of Personnel Management;

  b. Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 315, Subpart I, Probation on Initial
     Appointment to a Supervisory or Managerial Position;

  c. Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 410, Training;

  d. Title 5, CFR, Part 412, Executive, Management, and Supervisory Development;

  e. Departmental Regulation 4040-412-001, Leadership Competency Framework; and

  f. Departmental Regulation 4040-430, Performance Management, Section 9.a.(7); and 9.c.


5. POLICY

  a. General Provisions.

     (1) The Merit Systems Protection Board considers supervision to be a profession.
         Supervisors require management and leadership skills as much or more than technical
         skills. Hiring and promoting supervisors should be based on demonstrated leadership
         and management competencies.

     (2) Agencies will ensure supervisors complete required training and will report at least
         annually on training and organizational measures identified by the USDA Office
         of Human Resources Management (OHRM).

     (3) All agencies will use the USDA New Supervisor Training Standard (Appendix A) as
         approved by the Training Officers Consortium (TOC) for all supervisor training and
         development.

  b. Training Standards and Curriculum

     (1) The OHRM will maintain the New Supervisor Training Standard.

     (2) Agencies will provide training to each new supervisor using one of the following
         options:

         (a) Develop and provide a training program for new supervisors, delivered by the
             agency that meets the established training standards and is approved by the TOC
             as part of the implementation plan outlined in Section 5.b.(4) of this Regulation;

         (b) Use the USDA provided training program (See Appendix B); or

                                              2
      (c) Partner with an agency that has an approved training program to provide the
          training.

   (3) Agencies may select different training options for employees based on criteria such as
       geographical regions or job series.

   (4) Agencies that maintain their own training for new supervisors will develop an
       implementation plan for New Supervisor Training.

      (a) The implementation plan must include the following:

          1 List of courses including instructional methods, objectives, and contact hours.

          2 A clear description of how the training program addresses each element of the
            New Supervisor Training Standard.

          3 An evaluation methodology that explains how the agency will assess the
            effectiveness of their training programs using the metrics provided by the
            OHRM and make future improvements based on the evaluation data.

      (b) The plan will be presented to the TOC for approval. Once approved, the training
          program will be creditable for new supervisors to meet their training requirements
          as outlined in Section 5.c. of this document.

c. Requirements to Complete New Supervisor Training.

   (1) A new supervisor, manager, or executive, hired after the implementation of this
       Regulation, who has never held a supervisory appointment in the USDA, or
       documented successful completion of either a USDA agency or Department-level
       approved new supervisor program must complete the USDA-wide approved new
       supervisor training program.

      (a) The training should commence immediately after appointment but no later than
          the first 90 days following the appointment.

      (b) The training must be completed within one year of beginning the appointment.

      (c) A Mission Area Human Resource Director (MAHRD) may waive all or part of the
          training requirement for a supervisor hired from another Federal department under
          the following conditions:

          1   The employee has completed supervisory probation as required by 5 CFR 315
              Subpart I prior to being hired by the USDA.




                                           3
          2   The MAHRD verifies that the employee possesses the skills in the USDA
              New Supervisor Training Standard by completing the New Supervisor
              Training Waiver Form (attached as Appendix C). Where the MAHRD finds
              that there are missing skills, the employee must take the training elements to
              develop those skills and the MAHRD must account for the training to develop
              those skills. The training requirements for “Ethics for Supervisors” may not be
              waived.

          3   Within 90 days of the start date at USDA the employee must complete the
              required new supervisor training assessment in AgLearn with a minimum
              score of 80%.

          4   Within 90 days of the start date at USDA the employee must complete all
              training identified in the Supervisory Training Waiver Form.

          5   The MAHRD must verify that the employee granted a complete or partial
              training waiver and has completed all of the training requirements identified
              in the New Supervisor Training Waiver Form. The completed form must be
              returned to the OHRM with 105 days of the employee’s start date.

   (2) Employees who have previously been a supervisor within USDA and have
       documented completion of a new supervisor training program approved by their
       agency training officer are not required to complete the USDA-wide new supervisor’s
       training program. This documentation must be provided to their agency’s training
       officer.


d. Completion of Training and Assessment as a Condition of Supervisory Probation

   (1) Probationary supervisors must successfully complete all components of the required
       new supervisor training program before the end of their probationary period.

   (2) A MAHRD may grant an extension to new supervisors to complete the training under
       the following conditions:

       (a) Required service of more than 60 continuous days as part of a military
           deployment;

       (b) Leave of more than 60 continuous days under the Family and Medical Leave Act;

       (c) Have partially completed a supervisory probation. In such cases the deadline to
           complete the new supervisory training can only be extended so that the employee
           completes the required training within one year of their current supervisory
           appointment.

       (d) As required or permissible under a superseding authority.

                                            4
   (3) If an extension is granted, new supervisor training is no longer a requirement to
       complete the new supervisor probationary period, but the training must still be
       completed by the employee in the timeframe given by the MAHRD.

   (4) The MAHRD must notify the OHRM for each deferment and document the
       conditions of the extension granted, including the required date for completing the
       training.

   (5) Any new supervisor who does not complete their probation because of failure to
       complete the required training and standard assessment will be reassigned to another
       position in compliance with 5 CFR Part 315, Subpart I.

   (6) Employees must be notified, at a minimum, about the training as a required
       component of probation in the following ways:

       (a) The vacancy announcement,

       (b) The position description,

       (c) The reporting or selection letter,

       (d) In a written document provided during onboarding,

       (e) The training agreement.

   (7) Each notification listed in Section 5.d.(6) must include, at a minimum, the following
       information:

       (a) That ninety days after the appointment that training should already be underway,

       (b) That nine months after the appointment that the training requirements should be
           nearing completion,

       (c) That eleven months after the appointment, if the training requirements are not
           complete, the employee will not come off of probation,

       (d) That fifty weeks after the appointment, Employee Relations will be notified that
           the supervisor is not meeting the training requirement and will not complete
           probation unless the training requirement is complete and recorded in AgLearn.

   (8) All position descriptions for supervisory employees will include information
       explaining that successful completion of the new supervisor training curriculum is a
       requirement to complete probation.

e. Standards for Experienced Supervisor Training.

                                                5
     (1) Each experienced supervisor will have an individual development plan (IDP)
         identifying the competencies for development and specific activities to increase their
         proficiency in those competencies.

     (2) Annually, the OHRM will establish mandatory training and developmental
         requirements for experienced supervisors. These annual training standards will be
         approved by the TOC and then implemented across USDA.

     (3) Completion of the annual experienced supervisor training and development
         requirements will be certified by the supervisor’s manager as part of the annual
         performance review process.

     (4) Agencies will report annually to the OHRM on compliance with supervisor
         training requirements.


6. DEFINITIONS

  a. Experienced Supervisors. Employees who meet the definition of “Supervisor” in
     provision 6.f. with more than one year of experience as a supervisor in Federal
     government.

  b. Managers. Employees who accomplish work by directing the duties of an organizational
     unit with accountability for the success of specific line or staff functions. Managers also
     monitor and evaluate the progress of the organizational unit toward meeting goals and
     making adjustments in objectives, work plans, schedules, and commitment of resources.
     Generally, managers supervise supervisors.

  c. New Supervisors. Employees who meet the definition of “Supervisor” with less than one
     year of experience as a supervisor in the Federal government.

  d. Probationary Supervisors. Employees who meet the definition of “Supervisor” and are in
     probationary status subject to 5 CFR Part 315, Subpart I.

  e. Subordinate Supervisors. Employees who meet the definition of “Supervisor” and who
     are the direct reports of a manager or executive. Subordinate supervisors may be frontline
     supervisors, managers, or executives.

  f. Supervisors: Supervisors are permanent, full-time Federal employees who are responsible
     for delivering at least one employee’s performance review. For the purposes of this
     regulation, only employees who are coded as “2” or “4” in the USDA Enterprise Human
     Resources data system are subject to this policy’s training requirement.

  g. Training Officers Consortium. The USDA decision-making body for nontechnical
     training and employee development.
                                               6
7. RESPONSIBILITIES

  a. Agency Heads shall provide adequate support for implementing agency-specific policies
     and programs to train all new supervisors to meet the requirements outlined in this
     directive.

  b. MAHRDs shall:

     (1) Establish agency policies and procedures as necessary to ensure that all supervisors
         meet training standards and steps are taken to address any new supervisor’s failure to
         complete the new supervisor training program. See Appendix III for guidance on
         agency policy provisions.

     (2) Report annually to the OHRM on compliance with supervisor training requirements.

     (3) Grant and document extensions to the requirement to complete training in compliance
         with provision 5.b.(4)(a).

     (4) Provide a training agreement within 14 days of employment to all newly hired
         supervisors that outlines the mutual obligations of the Agency and trainee.

  c. Executives and Managers shall:

     (1) Ensure and confirm that all new supervisors complete required training before the end
         of the new supervisor probationary period.
     (2) Evaluate the developmental needs of subordinate supervisors and ensure that their
         IDPs reflect those development needs.

     (3) Certify that subordinate supervisors have completed their annual supervisor training
         requirements as part of the performance review process.

  d. USDA Chief Learning Officer (CLO) shall:

     (1) Develop and maintain the Department-wide training curriculum.

     (2) Ensure that supervisor training meets the standards established by Federal regulations,
         the Office of Personnel Management, this Departmental Regulation, and the TOC.

     (3) Provide to MAHRDs a reporting template on compliance with supervisor training
         standards.

     (4) Collect, provide reports, and maintain Departmental records on supervisor training.

  e. Training Officers Consortium shall:

                                              7
(1) Review and approve the curricula for supervisory training programs.

(2) Review and approve mandatory supervisory training requirements that may not be
    part of a curriculum.


                                     -END-




                                        8
       Appendix A - USDA New Supervisor Training Standard

Training Standard Elements
The USDA standard for new supervisor training outlines training topics, performance indicators,
and learning objectives that are mandatory for new supervisor training conducted to meet the
requirements of this regulation. The standard should be seen as the minimum training required of
new supervisors, but agencies may add additional training requirements for their new
supervisors.

       Topic: The title for each discipline to be covered by the training. Generally, the topic
       would relate to the name of a specific course or training module. Because agencies have
       discretion to design their training, in some cases topics may be grouped so that several
       topics may be covered in a single course, or more than one course may be grouped to
       cover a single topic.

       Performance Indicator: The behavior that the supervisor would be expected to
       demonstrate one year following training.

       Objectives: The specific skill or action taught as part of the training program.


Program Overview
The USDA New Supervisor Training Standards comprise six elements: 1) Administrative and
Regulatory functions, 2) Leadership Competencies, 3) Developing Others, 4) Accountability and
Performance Management, 5) Human Capital Management, and 6) Need Dependent Elements.

       Administrative and Regulatory Functions: Mandated responsibilities of supervisors.

       Leadership Competencies: Core leadership competencies selected from the USDA
       Leadership Competency Framework that are not covered in other curriculum elements.

       Developing Others: Skills and topics so that supervisors can ensure that their employees
       have the necessary knowledge and skills to do their jobs properly.

       Accountability and Performance Management: Skills to implement performance
       management according to USDA policies and regulations.

       Human Capital Management: Skills related to hiring and maintaining the workforce.

       Need Dependent Elements: Some new supervisors require specific skills that are not
       universal to all supervisors. These elements would only be required if appropriate for a
       particular supervisor. Topics include labor relations, administering GovTrip, and
       managing budgets.


                                               A-1
The curriculum elements and topics were developed using the supervisor training requirements
in 5 CFR 412, recommendations of the Office of Personnel Management Interagency New
Supervisory Training Working Group, input from USDA agencies on the elements in their
training programs, and a review of organizational metrics in Federal Employee Viewpoint
Survey and the FCAT-M assessment results. The learning topics and skills covered in the New
Supervisor Training Standards are necessary and impactful on the new supervisors’ early
success.

Supervisor Administrative Functions and Regulatory
Requirements
The topics covered in the Supervisor Functions and Regulatory Requirements element should be
completed within 90 days of appointment. The topics in this element outline many of the
mandated responsibilities of the supervisor and the rules that govern the most basic interactions
between a supervisor and the employees.

Table 1. Supervisor Administrative Functions and Regulatory Requirements

Topic                    Performance Indicator                           Objectives
Pay and Leave Policies   Approves and validates leave using the          Make leave decisions in compliance with agency policies.
                         agency’s system.
Time and Attendance      Approves and validates time sheets using the    Grant credit hours and overtime in compliance with
                         agency’s system, e.g., WebTA.                   agency policies.
Managing Telework        All employees who are teleworking pursuant to   Support telework in accordance with USDA and agency
                         current agency policy/guidance have telework    policies.
                         agreements.                                     Ensure employees are engaged and productive while
                                                                         using telework.
Prohibited Personnel     Manages work unit in compliance with            Apply the Merit System Principles.
Practices and Merit      Prohibited Personnel Practices and Merit        Avoid use of the Prohibited Personnel Practices.
Systems Principles       System Principles.
Ethics for Supervisors   Adheres to all policy and federal laws.         Follow USDA Office of Ethics Training guidelines for
                                                                         supervisors, managers, and new employees.
Workplace Violence       Takes appropriate action to prevent and/or      Take appropriate action to prevent and/or address
and Prevention           address workplace violence.                     workplace violence.
Federal EEO Process      Complies with all EEO policies resulting in     Comply with policies on disparate treatment and
                         zero substantiated complaints.                  harassment.
                                                                         Comply with policies on reasonable accommodations
                                                                         Take action to ensure the workplace is free of unlawful
                                                                         discrimination.




                                                          A-2
Leadership Competencies
The leadership competencies support the USDA Leadership Development Framework outlined
in DR 4040-412-001 and recommendations of the OPM Supervisor Training Workgroup
<http://www.chcoc.gov/transmittals/attachments/trans5185.pdf>. The listed topics address single
competencies that are core at the supervisor level in the framework. Two of those leadership
competencies are broken out as their own elements: 1) Developing Others and 2) Human Capital
Management. The competency of Accountability is addressed in the Accountability and
Performance Management Element.


Table 2. Individual Leadership Competencies

Topic                 Performance Indicator                        Objectives
Conflict Management   Fosters creative tension and manages and     Demonstrate active listening.
                      resolves conflicts/disagreements in a        Practice generating alternative solutions.
                      constructive manner.                         Facilitate effective discussions.
                                                                   Demonstrate ability to: keep people in dialogue,
                                                                   separate purpose from strategy, seek mutual purpose by
                                                                   generating alternatives.
Teambuilding          Facilitates cooperation and motivates team   Demonstrate ability to keep people in dialogue as means
                      members to accomplish group goals; Fosters   to build trust and build team unity.
                      team commitment and trust.                   Articulate the drivers of trust
                                                                   Identify strategies to encourage different personality
                                                                   types to work together well.




                                                     A-3
Developing Others
Developing Others is a core competency for supervisors. In the standards, the competency stands
as its own element because there are multiple topics addressed.

Table 3. Developing Others

Topic                   Performance Indicator                          Objectives
Mentor/Coach            Provides long-term career growth guidance.     Describe the value of and differences between coaching
Employees               Uses coaching skills to match employee         and mentoring.
                        performance to stated expectations or goals.   Demonstrate a variety of listening/coaching skills.




Managing AgLearn as a   Appropriately populates employee learning      Manages employee learning plans on AgLearn including
Supervisor              plans on Ag Learn.                             how to approve/disapprove learning options.
Developing and          Ensures development of IDPs that               Outline learning goals based on work unit priorities and
Managing IDPs           incorporate personal and organizational        employee interests.
                        goals for 100% of eligible employees, and      Use AgLearn to manage IDPs for employees (if
                        upon request.                                  employees have AgLearn account or by paper if AgLearn
                                                                       is not employee accessible).




                                                        A-4
Accountability and Performance Management
Accountability is a supervisor level core competency that supervisors demonstrate through the
use of performance management systems and applying general principles common throughout
the Federal government.

Table 4. Accountability and Performance Management

Topic                 Performance Indicator                          Objectives
Increase Employee     Establishes and communicates work              Outline the performance management process.
Performance           objectives that support organizational goals   Outline the regulatory requirements for planning
                      and supports employees so that they meet       employee performance.
                      expectations.                                  Create performance elements and standards in relation
                                                                     to work outputs.
                                                                     Clearly communicate work objectives to employees.

Empower Employees     Delegates tasks and responsibilities in a      Delegate work to support employee commitment.
                      manner that affords employees the              Delegate work that provides for employee growth
                      opportunities to best use their talents and    opportunities as well as talent utilization.
                      increase their skill sets.                     Give employees the opportunity to make decisions that
                                                                     most impact their work outcomes.
Create Performance    All employees have a performance plan that     Describe elements and standards in relation to work
Plans                 links to organizational mission and goals.     outputs.
                                                                     Set meaningful goals to establish work priorities.
Conduct Performance   Conducts midyear review                        Conduct midyear review.
Feedback Meetings     Conducts end of year review                    Conduct end of year review.
                                                                     Provide frequent, constructive feedback.
Handle Unacceptable   Expediently identifies performance issues      Seek guidance from Employee Relations to help
Performance           and provides timely guidance and               employee be successful.
                      opportunities for employees to meet            Recognize the difference between a performance
                      expectations.                                  problem and misconduct.
                                                                     Describe the process for analyzing performance
                                                                     problems.
                                                                     Identify the steps for managing performance problems.
                                                                     Identify special considerations associated with
                                                                     performance problems.
Handle Misconduct     Expediently identifies conduct issues and      Define misconduct.
                      decisively addresses misconduct.               Include Employee Relations when handling issues of
                                                                     misconduct.
                                                                     Describe the elements of disciplinary action.
                                                                     Identify special considerations associated with handling
                                                                     misconduct situations.




                                                       A-5
Human Capital Management
For the purposes of the standard, Human Capital Management relates primarily to hiring
practices.

Table 5. Human Capital Management

Topic                    Performance Indicator                         Objectives
Hiring Practices         Ensures positions align with unit and         Describe supervisory responsibilities in the hiring
                         organizational requirements if part of        process.
                         supervisor’s role; Contacts appropriate HR    Apply Merit System Principles and avoid Prohibited
                         specialists for staffing and classification   Personnel Practices during the hiring process.
                         issues; Conducts hiring interviews and        Recognize primary strategies used for filling vacancies.
                         checks references.                            Understand the purpose of special selection priorities.
                                                                       Describe steps in the applicant ranking/rating process.
                                                                       Identify process for preparing for and conducting
                                                                       candidate interviews.
Onboarding New Hires     100 % of new hires on-boarded within          Use the USDA New Employee Onboarding Portal.
                         prescribed timeframe.                         Ensure all new hires are aware of administrative
                                                                       requirements.
                                                                       Incorporate new hires onto team so that they are
                                                                       immediately engaged in their workgroup.
USERRA and Hiring        Meets agency and Department goals for         Apply Veterans preference appropriately in the hiring
Veterans                 hiring Veterans.                              process.
                                                                       Ensure that employees who are called away from job
                                                                       assignments to perform military service are returned to
                                                                       the job appropriately once the service has been
                                                                       completed.
Hiring and Supervising   Complies with EEO regulations and policies    Comply with Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act to
Persons with             relating to employing individuals with        support affirmative action and nondiscrimination in
Disabilities             disabilities.                                 employment of individuals with disabilities.
                                                                       Comply with Section 503 to support affirmative action
                                                                       and prohibit employment discrimination by Federal
                                                                       government contractors and subcontractors with
                                                                       contracts of more than $10,000.
                                                                       Comply with Section 504 to provide accessible programs
                                                                       and a work environment that includes individuals with
                                                                       disabilities.
                                                                       Comply with Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act to
                                                                       ensure that electronic and information technology is
                                                                       accessible to individuals with disabilities.
                                                                       Comply with USDA Reasonable Accommodation Policy
                                                                       and Procedures.
                                                                       Comply with Executive Order 13548, “Increasing Federal
                                                                       Employment of Individuals with Disabilities”.




                                                          A-6
Need Dependent Elements
Optional elements are included to support new supervisors who may have additional duties. This
is important because not all supervisors have the same responsibilities. Supervisors should be
required to take courses that cover these topics if applicable.

    •   If the supervisors manages union employees: Take required course on labor relations,
    •   If the supervisor has spending authority and budget responsibilities: Take appropriate
        course,
    •   If the Supervisor is a GovTrip approver: Take required course.
    •   Agencies may develop additional training and training requirements for topics not listed
        here.


Table 6. Need Dependent Elements

Topic                  Performance Indicator                          Objectives
Managing Union         Functions in full compliance with collective   To be addressed by each agency dependent on each
Employees              bargaining rights of employees.                collective bargaining agreement. As required by labor
                                                                      agreements, training should be developed in consultation
                                                                      with the appropriate union.
Financial Management   Develops budgets in compliance with agency     Create budgets that support work unit and
                       and program requirements.                      organizational goals.
                       Tracks and spends funds in compliance with     Track and spend funds in compliance with agency
                       all Federal, agency, and program policies.     policies and procedures.

Managing GovTrip       All GovTrip transactions processed in a        Approve travel requests.
                       timely manner, in compliance with agency       Approve travel vouchers.
                       travel policies.




Supervisor Comprehensive Assessments
The OHRM will create and post in AgLearn a comprehensive assessment that the trainees will
complete after they have finished all other required training elements. All trainees will be
required to get a minimum score of 80% on the assessment to receive credit for completing the
required training curriculum. Trainees who do not pass the assessment with the minimum score
will be permitted to retake the assessment until they can obtain the minimum score. However,
they must successfully complete the comprehensive assessment by the end of their probationary
period. The training topics covered by the assessment are outlined below.




                                                        A-7
Table 7. Topics covered by the comprehensive assessment


Category                      Training Topic
Administrative /              Pay and Leave Policies
Regulatory
Administrative /              Time and Attendance
Regulatory
Administrative /              Managing Telework
Regulatory
Administrative /              Prohibited Personnel Practices and Merit Systems
Regulatory                    Principles
Administrative /              Workplace Violence and Prevention
Regulatory
Administrative /              Federal EEO Process
Regulatory
Developing Others             Developing and Managing IDPs
Performance Management        Increase Employee Performance
Performance Management        Handle Unacceptable Performance
Performance Management        Handle Misconduct
Human Capital                 Hiring Practices
Management
Human Capital                 Onboarding New Hires
Management




                                              A-8
          APPENDIX B – USDA Provided Training Curriculum
Agencies may select to use the curriculum provided by the USDA OHRM to meet the
requirements of this regulation as outlined in Section 5.b.(2). The USDA-provided curriculum
will be reviewed by the OHRM staff to ensure that it meets the curriculum standards and will be
available through AgLearn.

A detailed list of the courses and training topics may be obtained by contacting the OHRM.




                                              B-1
                                  Appendix C
                    Sample Supervisory Training Waiver Form
As permitted by USDA Regulation 4040-412-002 Section 5(C)(1)(c), a Mission Area Human
Resource Director (MAHRD) may waive the new supervisor training requirement under certain
conditions if an experienced supervisors is hired from another Federal department. This form
documents the waiver decision and must be submitted to the USDA OHRM.

Employee Information
Employee Name:                                                                                AgLearn ID:
Hire date at USDA:
Agency:                                         Agency and Department prior to coming to USDA:
Date that employee completed supervisory probation as required 5 CFR 315 Subpart I:
Years of Federal supervisory experience:

Skills Verification
Instructions: Verify whether the employee has each of the outlined skills.
    • If the employee has the identified skill, no further training is necessary.
    • If the employee does not possess the skill, the name of the training and completion date
        must be documented.



Table 1. Supervisor Administrative Functions and Regulatory Requirements

Topic                    Performance Indicator                          Possesses Skill   Training and Completion Date
                                                                        Yes / No
Pay and Leave Policies   Approves and validates leave using the
                         agency’s system.
Time and Attendance      Approves and validates time sheets using the
                         agency’s system, e.g., WebTA.
Managing Telework        All eligible employees who are interested
                         have telework agreements.
Prohibited Personnel     Manages work unit in compliance with
Practices and Merit      Prohibited Personnel Practices and Merit
Systems Principles       System Principles.
Ethics for Supervisors   Adheres to all policy and federal laws.        (May not be
                                                                        Waived)
Workplace Violence       Takes appropriate action to prevent and/or
and Prevention           address workplace violence.
Federal EEO Process      Complies with all EEO policies resulting in
                         zero substantiated complaints.




                                                          C-1
Table 2. Individual Leadership Competencies

Topic                   Performance Indicator                          Possesses Skill   Training and Completion
                                                                       Yes / No          Date
Leveraging Human Capital Attains maximum performance from each
                         team member; Provides each team member
                         with maximum career development/growth
                         opportunities.
Conflict Management     Fosters creative tension and manages and
                        resolves conflicts/disagreements in a
                        constructive manner.

Teambuilding            Facilitates cooperation and motivates team
                        members to accomplish group goals; Fosters
                        team commitment and trust.


Table 3. Developing Others

Topic                   Performance Indicator                          Possesses Skill   Training and Completion
                                                                       Yes / No          Date
Mentor/Coach            Provides long-term career growth guidance.
Employees               Uses coaching skills to match employee
                        performance to stated expectations or goals.

Managing AgLearn as a   Appropriately populates employee learning
Supervisor              plans on Ag Learn.
Developing and          Ensures development of IDPs that
Managing IDPs           incorporate personal and organizational
                        goals for 100% of eligible employees, and
                        upon request.




                                                         C-2
Table 4. Accountability and Performance Management

Topic                    Performance Indicator                          Possesses Skill   Training and Completion
                                                                        Yes / No          Date
Increase Employee        Establishes and communicates work
Performance              objectives that support organizational goals
                         and supports employees so that they meet
                         expectations.


Empower Employees        Delegates tasks and responsibilities in a
                         manner that affords employees the
                         opportunities to best use their talents and
                         increase their skill sets.
Create Performance       All employees have a performance plan that
Plans                    links to organizational mission and goals.
Conduct Performance      Conducts midyear review
Feedback Meetings        Conducts end of year review
Handle Unacceptable      Expediently identifies performance issues
Performance              and provides timely guidance and
                         opportunities for employees to meet
                         expectations.

Handle Misconduct        Expediently identifies conduct issues and
                         decisively addresses misconduct.


Table 5. Human Capital Management

Topic                    Performance Indicator                          Possesses Skill   Training and Completion
                                                                        Yes / No          Date
Hiring Practices         Ensures positions align with unit and
                         organizational requirements if part of
                         supervisor’s role; Contacts appropriate HR
                         specialists for staffing and classification
                         issues; Conducts hiring interviews and
                         checks references.



Onboarding New Hires     100 % of new hires on-boarded within
                         prescribed timeframe.




USERRA and Hiring        Meets agency and Department goals for
Veterans                 hiring Veterans.




Hiring and Supervising   Complies with EEO regulations and policies
Persons with             relating to employing individuals with
Disabilities             disabilities.




                                                          C-3
MAHRD Verification Statement
I attest that the EMPLOYEE possesses all of skills outlined in the USDA New Supervisor
Training Standard and has passed the new supervisor training assessment in AgLearn within 90
days of hire date at USDA.

Date Assessment Completed:
Score Attained:



First Name     Last Name      Mission Area                        Signature             Date
Signed
To be signed by MAHRD only.




                                             C-4
Appendix D – Questions and Answers on Implementation of the
Standard

#     Provision Question
Q1.   5.b.(2)     Can agencies select more than one approach to provide new supervisor
                  training?
      Agencies may select different approaches for broad categories of employees. For
      example, they may want to partner with another agency to provide training to new
      supervisors in a particular region while the remainder of new supervisors in the agency
      would use the USDA provided curriculum. The choices would need to be on record with
      the OHRM.

Q2.            How will agencies know which agency(s) have an approved program in
      5.b.(2)(c)
               place if they would like to partner with another agency?
      The OHRM will maintain records of which agencies have approved programs.


Q3.   5.b.(4)(b) The policy requires an implementation plan for agencies that maintain their
                  own training programs. How will this be administered?
      The agencies will submit their implementation plan to the OHRM to present to the
      Training Officers Consortium (TOC). The TOC will review the implementation plan for
      compliance with the training standard. Once approved by the TOC, the training program
      will be creditable for new supervisors. Until an agency’s training program is approved by
      the TOC, new supervisors may complete the USDA provided training.


Q4.   5.b.(4)(b) How far in advance should agencies provide their proposed training
                   implementation plans to the TOC for review?
      The TOC will take at least two months for staff to review proposed training programs
      and finalize the approval. Until an agency’s training program is approved, they will use
      the USDA provided training outlined in Appendix II.




                                             D-1
Q5.   5.b.      Do the training courses have minimum completion requirements – do the
                trainees need to pass a test to get credit for completing the courses?
      Some courses may have a knowledge check or test that will be required to receive credit
      for the course. Also, there will be an assessment completed through AgLearn once all of
      the other required courses are complete. New supervisors will need to complete the
      assessment as the final requirement in the curriculum. The testing requirement is
      addressed in Appendix I of this regulation.



Q6.   5.b.      Is mentoring a part of the probationary requirement for new supervisors?

      The mentoring requirement for new supervisor is covered under the policy DR4740-001.
      While mentoring is very important to the development of new supervisors, mentoring will
      not be a factor in completing probation under this policy.



Q7.   5.c.(1)   Will a supervisor who does not initiate training within 90 days of the
                appointment fail to meet the requirements of probation?
      No. This is a suggested timeline. Supervisors MUST complete all training elements
      before the end of the probationary period.



Q8.   5.c.(2)   Are new supervisors with supervisory experience in other Departments or the
                private sector required to complete USDA approved new supervisor training as
                part of their probationary requirement?
      The training requirement for new supervisors applies to all new supervisors in the USDA
      whether or not they have supervisor experience outside of the USDA. A supervisor who
      has previously served as a supervisor in a USDA agency is not required to complete the
      USDA approved new supervisor training.



Q9.   5.d.(1)   What happens to supervisors who fail to complete the training and pass the
                assessment before the end of their probationary period?
      Supervisors who fail to meet the training requirement will not be permitted to continue as
      supervisors. In compliance with 5 CFR 315, Subpart I, the employee will be moved to a
      position of at least equivalent pay grade to the job held prior their appointment as a
      supervisor. There is no guarantee to move back to the specific job held prior to
      appointment as a supervisor.



                                             D-2
