                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                   WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250



                DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                      Number:

                                                                             DR-4070-711


SUBJECT                                                      DATE:
                                                             September 30, 2010
Labor Relations                                              OPI: Office of Human Resources
                                                             Management – Labor and
                                                             Employee Relations Division


Section                                                                               Page

   1. PURPOSE                                                                         2
   2. CANCELLATIONS                                                                   2
   3. POLICY                                                                          2
   4. BACKGROUND                                                                      2
   5. DEFINITIONS                                                                     3
   6. DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY                                                        5
   7. RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                5
      A. Director, Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM)
      B. Heads of Mission Areas, Agencies, and Offices
      C. USDA Labor Relations Officer
      D. USDA General Counsel
      E. USDA Mission Area Human Resources Directors
   8. PROCEDURES                                                                      7
      A. Questions Concerning Representation
      B. National Consultation
      C. Negotiations
      D. Agency Head Review
      E. Negotiability Appeals
      F. Compelling Need Assertions
      G. Arbitration/Impasses/Unfair Labor Practices
      H. Judicial Reviews of FLRA Orders; FLRA-Initiated
            Enforcement/Temporary Relief/Restraining Orders;
            and Exceptions to Arbitration Awards
   9. RECORDS                                                                         9

   APPENDIX A      DELEGATIONS OF LABOR RELATIONS                                     A-1
                   AUTHORITIES IN USDA
1. PURPOSE

  This regulation contains the policies and general operating procedures for the labor
  relations program within the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), as a
  means of implementing USDA’s obligations pursuant to the Federal Service Labor
  Management Relations Statute (FSLMRS) and other relevant laws, rules, and regulations.
  This policy applies USDA-wide, including Mission Areas, Agencies, and Offices where a
  union holds or is seeking to hold exclusive recognition.

2. CANCELLATIONS

  This regulation replaces USDA Departmental Regulation DR-4070-711, dated February
  21, 2002, which is cancelled.

3. POLICY

  The FSLMRS establishes a legal right for Federal employees to organize and bargain
  collectively with Agency management over employees’ conditions of employment
  through labor organizations duly certified for such purposes. It is the policy of the USDA
  for management officials to meet their obligations under the FSLMRS, Presidential
  Executive Orders, and other controlling authorities. The USDA labor relations program
  promotes a collaborative approach to labor-management relations and a labor relations
  environment that improves the productivity and effectiveness of the Federal government
  and delivers the highest quality services to the American people.

  USDA Mission Areas, Agencies, and Offices are encouraged to establish and maintain a
  labor relations strategic plan that contains at a minimum: an assessment of the labor-
  management relationship, goals for the labor relations program, and the operating
  strategy to be used.

4. BACKGROUND

  The basis for labor relations in the Federal government is found in the FSLMRS, codified
  at 5 USC 7101-7135 (http://www.flra.gov/statute), and as implemented by regulations
  issued by the Office of Personnel Management (Title V, Code of Federal Regulations),
  the Federal Labor Relations Authority (http://www.flra.gov/regulations), the Federal
  Service Impasses Panel (http://www.flra.gov/chapxiv_subchapter_d), and case law. The
  authority to exercise the various rights and obligations under the FSLMRS and
  regulations flows from the Secretary of Agriculture to the Assistant Secretary for
  Administration (ASA) and, in turn, is delegated to management officials within the
  USDA. In order to ensure program consistency and integrity in the exercise of these
  responsibilities, it is necessary to establish a labor relations policy.




                                          2
5. DEFINITIONS

  Agency Head Review – A statutory requirement contained in 5 U.S.C. 7114(c) that
  negotiated collective bargaining agreements be reviewed for legal sufficiency and
  conformance with government-wide rules and regulations by the head of an agency. For
  the purposes of application of this provision of the law in the USDA, the Agency head is
  the Secretary of Agriculture.

  Bargaining Unit – A grouping of employees that the Federal Labor Relations Authority
  has found appropriate under the criteria of 5 USC 7112 (community of interest, effective
  dealings, efficiency of operations) for collective bargaining purposes. Certain types of
  employees cannot be included in units, e.g., management officials and supervisors. See 5
  USC 7112(b).

  Collaborative Labor Relations Strategy – This approach to labor relations relies on
  interest based problem-solving where union and management officials resolve issues that
  would otherwise be addressed through traditional position-based processes. The
  collaborative strategy is characterized by pre-decisional involvement by union
  representatives in issue identification and resolution, effective communication between
  the parties, and mutual trust. It does not involve co-management of the Agency by the
  union.

  Compelling Need Assertion – This is a position that may be taken by management in
  negotiations under 5 USC 7117 that seeks to impose a valid limitation on the scope of
  bargaining because there is a compelling need for a particular regulation. There are three
  "illustrative criteria" of compelling need: (1) the regulation is essential to the effective
  and efficient accomplishment of the mission of the agency, (2) the regulation is necessary
  to ensure the maintenance of basic merit principles, and (3) the regulation implements a
  mandate of law or Government-wide regulation in an essentially nondiscretionary
  manner. Disputed compelling need assertions may be submitted to the FLRA for
  resolution.

  Compliance Labor Relations Strategy – This method of conducting labor relations
  relies on the enforcement of rights and obligations created by the FSLMRS, collective
  bargaining agreements, and past practices. It is characterized by the exercise of formal
  labor relations dispute resolution mechanisms, defined results or decisions, and
  application of law and regulations. The procedures employed by this approach are
  typically adversarial.

  Exception to Arbitration Award – Pursuant to 5 USC 7122, either management or the
  union may raise a claim to the FLRA that an arbitration award is deficient because it is
  contrary to law, rule, or regulation or on grounds similar to those applied by Federal
  courts in private sector labor-management relations (e.g., award fails to draw its essence
  form the agreement, is based on a non-fact, denial of a fair hearing, and violation of
  public policy).



                                           3
Exclusive Recognition - The rights a union is accorded as a result of being certified as
the exclusive representative of the employees in a bargaining unit to, among other things,
negotiate bargainable aspects of the conditions of employment of bargaining unit
employees, be afforded an opportunity to be present at formal discussions, free dues
check-off arrangements and, at the request of the employee, to be present at Weingarten
examinations of unit employees.

Exclusive Representative - The labor organization certified as the exclusive
representative of a unit of employees either by virtue of having won a representation
election or because it had been recognized as the exclusive representative before passage
of the FSLMRS.

Federal Service Labor Management Relations Statute (FSLMRS) – Contained in
Title VII of the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978 and codified at 5 USC 7101-7135, this
is the law upon which Federal sector labor relations programs are based. It includes the
labor relations rights and responsibilities of management, unions, and employees, and it
establishes the Federal Labor Relations Authority and the Federal Services Impasses
Panel to administer its provisions.

Federal Labor Relations Authority (FLRA or Authority) – The independent agency
established by the FSLMRS that is responsible for, among other things: deciding
questions of representation; adjudicating unfair labor practices, negotiability appeals,
exceptions to arbitration awards, and compelling need disputes; and prescribing criteria
for granting national consultation rights. The FLRA is composed of 3 members and a
General Counsel who are nominated by the President and confirmed by the Senate.

Federal Service Impasses Panel (FSIP or Panel) – The independent office established
by the FSLMRS that is responsible for resolving bargaining stalemates that result from
parties not being able to agree on language that will be included in a negotiated
agreement. It is composed of at least seven (7) members appointed by the President.

Full-Performance Labor Relations Specialist – A Federal employee or contractor who
possesses and has demonstrated a full range of labor relations competencies typically
performed in a labor relations position classified at grade GS-12 or higher or equivalents.

Grievance - Under 5 USC 7103(a)(9), a grievance "means any complaint by: (a) an
employee concerning any matter relating to the employment of the employee; (b) any
labor organization concerning any matter relating to the employment of any employee; or
(c) an employee, labor organization, or agency concerning -- (i) the effect or
interpretation, or a claim of breach, of a collective bargaining agreement; or (ii) any
claimed violation, misinterpretation, or misapplication of any law, rule, or regulation
affecting conditions of employment[.]"

Impasse – The point during bargaining when the parties have reached a deadlock or
stalemate. In order for the matter to be properly submitted to the FSIP, the parties are
generally required to first seek mediation assistance from the Federal Mediation and


                                         4
  Conciliation Service (FMCS). Impasses in the Federal sector are controlled by the
  provisions of 5 USC 7119 and 5 CFR Part 2470.

  Labor Organization –Pursuant to the requirements of 5 USC 7103(a)(4), an
  organization that might be certified by the FLRA to exclusively represent bargaining unit
  employees over matters pertaining to grievances and conditions of employment.

  Level of Recognition –This is the organizational unit(s) of an Agency and a union for
  which the union was certified to represent bargaining unit employees. It is where the
  collective bargaining relationship officially exists.

  Management –Managers, supervisors, and executives who exercise certain authorities on
  behalf of the USDA that affect conditions of employment.

  National Consultation Rights – 5 USC 7113 gives certain certified labor organizations
  the right to be consulted on Agency-wide regulations before such regulations are
  promulgated. Section 7113 consultation rights are distinguished from section 7117(d)(1)
  consultation rights with respect to Government-wide regulations under which a union
  accorded such recognition must be consulted on proposed government-wide regulations
  before they are promulgated.

  Negotiability Appeal – The process by which the FLRA resolves disputes between
  unions and agencies over whether management’s declaration that a union’s bargaining
  proposal is non-negotiable. See 5 USC 7117(c)(1) and 5 CFR Part 2424.

  Unfair Labor Practice (ULP) – A violation of 5 USC 7116(a) by management and 5
  USC 7116(b) by a union.

  Union – See Labor Organization.

  Weingarten Rights/Examination Notice – Under 5 USC 7114(a)(2)(b), an employee
  being examined in an investigation is entitled to union representation if: 1) the
  examination is conducted by a representative of the agency; 2) the employee reasonably
  believes that the examination may result in disciplinary action; and 3) the employee asks
  for representation.

6. DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY

  The major Federal labor relations program functions that occur within the USDA,
  along with the officials who are authorized to perform those functions, are found in
  Appendix A. Requisite conditions associated with the exercise of these functions are
  also listed.

7. RESPONSIBILITIES

  a. Director, Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM) -
     The Director is responsible for the oversight and general administration of the

                                          5
   Department's labor relations program. The Director also ensures various authorities
   as delegated from the Assistant Secretary for Administration are exercised
   effectively, issues labor relations policy, conducts program reviews, and evaluates
   program effectiveness. The OHRM Director (or designee) is also responsible for the
   following and all other implied duties related to administering the labor relations
   program:
   (1) Representing the USDA before the FLRA, OPM, and other Federal and non-
       Federal agencies and organizations in matters affecting the policy, statutory, and
       regulatory responsibilities of the USDA at the departmental level in such matters.
   (2) Coordinating with the USDA Office of the General Counsel (OGC) on legal
       matters relative to labor relations issues involving proposed and pending litigation
       in the courts.
   (3) Guiding, supporting, and directing USDA Mission Areas, Agencies, and Offices
       in any phase of activity dealing with labor relations matters, except that proposed
       or pending court litigation shall be coordinated with OGC.
   (4) Establishing procedures to ensure the prompt receipt of information, reports, and
       correspondence as determined by OHRM regarding significant labor relations
       issues.

b. Heads of Mission Areas, Agencies, and Offices -
   Heads of Mission Areas, Agencies, and Offices are responsible for:
   (1) Implementing the USDA labor relations program consistent with the FSLMRS
       and this regulation.
   (2) Establishing a point-of-contact for labor relations at the Mission
       Area/Agency/Office level if a collective bargaining relationship exists within the
       Mission Area, Agency, or Office.
   (3) Ensuring the requirements for notification and coordination with the Department,
       as described in this regulation, are met.
   (4) Providing information and/or data to the Department, as requested, for USDA’s
       use and/or for responding to OPM or other Federal or non-Federal agencies.

c. USDA Labor Relations Officer -
   The USDA Labor Relations Officer (LRO) is responsible for overall implementation
   of the Department's labor relations program by exercising those authorities delegated
   from the Director of OHRM including: conducting Agency head reviews of collective
   bargaining agreements; initiating and conducting national consultations; issuing
   annual Weingarten notices at the Department level and reminders to the Mission
   Areas, Agencies, and Offices; and representing the USDA consistent with USDA
   delegations of authority. The LRO serves as the labor relations subject matter expert
   providing technical advice and assistance to the OHRM Director. The LRO also:
   provides technical advice, assistance, and training to USDA Mission Areas,
   Agencies, and Offices; conducts regular meetings of LROs from Mission Areas,
   Agencies, and Offices; and serves as the principal liaison in labor relations matters
   between the Department and other Federal and non-Federal agencies or
   organizations.

                                        6
  d. USDA General Counsel -
     The General Counsel or designee will serve as the principal contact with the
     Department of Justice on cases for which the USDA seeks judicial review of FLRA
     decisions. On request, the General Counsel may provide advice and assistance to the
     Director, OHRM. Mission Areas, Agencies, and Offices involved in third party
     proceedings (e.g., Unfair Labor Practice hearings, arbitrations) and other matters of
     law with respect to labor issues may only request OGC assistance through the OHRM
     Director.

  e. USDA Mission Area Human Resources Directors -
     Mission Area Human Resources Directors are responsible for labor relations program
     implementation within their respective areas of responsibility through the exercise
     and appropriate delegation of authorities, developing strategic labor relations plans,
     carrying out and supplementing USDA program policy, and performing internal
     program oversight. They ensure that adequate resources are made available to meet
     program requirements and meet the goals established in their strategic labor relations
     plans.

8. PROCEDURES

  a. Questions Concerning Representation
     The USDA LRO must be notified by the Mission Areas, Agencies, and Offices of any
     union organizing efforts for certification as the exclusive representative. A copy of
     all related representation petitions filed by a labor organization shall be sent to the
     LRO. Where there is doubt as to whether the group of employees that a labor
     organization seeks to organize is an appropriate unit under the FSLMRS, the Mission
     Area, Agency, or Office will promptly consult with the USDA LRO. The USDA
     LRO must be provided a copy of any Certification of Representation issued by the
     FLRA within three (3) business days after receipt by the Mission Area, Agency, or
     Office. The USDA LRO will promptly notify OPM and request a bargaining unit
     status code which, once assigned, will be provided to the involved headquarters locals
     and the appropriate Mission Area, Agency, or Office.

  b. National Consultation Rights
     If requested, labor organizations that qualify under the criteria established by the
     FSLMRS and 5 CFR 2426 will be granted National Consultation Rights (NCR) by
     the Department, Mission Areas, Agencies, or Offices, as appropriate.

  c. Negotiations
     At least thirty (30) calendar days prior to commencing negotiations for new or
     modified collective bargaining agreements subject to review by the Secretary of
     Agriculture, the Mission Area, Agency, or Office shall notify the USDA LRO that
     contract negotiations are anticipated with a description of all subjects that are
     expected to be difficult to reach agreement.




                                          7
d. Agency Head Review
   In accordance with 5 USC 7114(c), USDA Mission Areas, Agencies, and Offices
   shall submit to the USDA LRO for agency head review (AHR) all: 1) term and
   master collective bargaining agreements (CBAs) ; 2) supplemental agreements
   however designated, e.g., Letter of Agreement, Memorandum of Understanding, etc;
   3) term, master, and supplemental agreements that the parties agree to rollover; 4)
   provisions imposed on the parties by the FSIP or by an FSIP-appointed arbitrator; and
   5) final proposals before they are submitted to voluntary binding arbitration not
   directed by the FSIP.

   The following procedures apply:
   (1) The Mission Area, Agency, or Office will provide the USDA LRO executed (i.e.,
       signed) collective bargaining agreements for review within three (3) business days
       of: 1) execution of the agreement; 2) receipt of an order, decision, or award from
       the FSIP or an arbitrator appointed by the FSIP; or 3) agreement of the parties to
       rollover an existing agreement.
   (2) In the case of proposals that are intended to be submitted to voluntary binding
       arbitration not directed by the FSIP, management shall provide the USDA LRO
       the final proposals not less than ten (10) workdays prior to their submission to the
       arbitrator.
   (3) Submission shall be by e-mail, fax, express mail or hand delivery. Only one copy
       of the signed agreement (or final proposals if voluntary arbitration will be used)
       need be submitted. Electronic copies should be forwarded whenever possible.
   (4) The review will be completed according to the requirements of the FSLMRS.

e. Negotiability Appeals
   The Mission Area, Agency, or Office shall notify the USDA LRO of any
   negotiability appeals filed by a union in response to management's allegation that a
   bargaining proposal is non-negotiable under the FSLMRS. The following procedures
   apply:
   (1) Initial notification by the USDA Mission Area, Agency or Office, along with a
       copy of the written allegation of non-negotiability, must be sent to the USDA
       LRO within three (3) business days after issuance by management.
   (2) Copies of all appeal documents submitted by the union and FLRA orders received
       by a Mission Area, Agency or Office, must be submitted to the USDA LRO
       within three (3) business days of receipt by management.
   (3) Prior to filing statements of position with the FLRA or responses to union replies,
       USDA Mission Areas, Agencies or Offices must consult with the USDA LRO.
   (4) The USDA LRO must be provided by management copies of all documents
       served on the FLRA.

f. Compelling Need Assertions
   Mission Areas, Agencies, and Offices may not agree to proposals that are inconsistent
   with Departmental rules or regulations without prior Departmental approval.
   Requests to bargain exceptions to Department-wide rules or regulations must be
   submitted to the USDA LRO by memorandum describing the reasons for the request


                                        8
     for exceptions and containing the language of the specific proposal(s).

     Only the OHRM Director, or designee, may grant exceptions to Departmental rules
     and regulations to permit negotiations on specific proposals. If a request for an
     exception is denied because of a “compelling need” for the rule or regulation, the
     Department will assist the Mission Area, Agency, or Office defend this determination
     before the FLRA if contested.

  g. Arbitration/Impasses/Unfair Labor Practices
     Normally, notification to the Department of pending hearings before arbitrators,
     impasse resolution before the FSIP, and ULPs at the FLRA are not required.
     However, in the event the Mission Area, Agency, or Office has concerns regarding
     such cases and/or does not believe there is adequate expertise within their
     organization to address the matter, the Mission Area, Agency, or Office should
     consult with the USDA LRO so that a joint decision on how to proceed might be
     made.

  h. Judicial Reviews of FLRA Orders; FLRA-Initiated Enforcement/Temporary
     Relief/Restraining Orders; and Exceptions to Arbitrator Awards
     Prior to deciding whether to pursue a review of an FLRA decision or an exception to
     an arbitration award, the USDA Mission Area, Agency, or Office will contact the
     USDA LRO to discuss the case and merits of seeking the action. Immediate notice to
     the USDA LRO is also required by a Mission Area, Agency, or Office upon learning
     that the FLRA or FLRA General Counsel has initiated action to petition the U.S.
     Court of Appeals or U.S. District Court for enforcement of FLRA orders or
     temporary relief from actions giving rise to a ULP.
     (1) Judicial Review of FLRA Orders.
         After contacting the USDA LRO, the Mission Area, Agency, or Office seeking
         the review must submit a written request to the OHRM Director. The request
         must contain the reasons for the request, including legal arguments and
         appropriate citations. The request must be received by the OHRM Director no
         later than twenty (20) days after the date the FLRA order was issued. The OHRM
         Director will brief the Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA) and USDA
         Office of the General Counsel (OGC). After consultation with the ASA, OGC
         will decide whether to pursue the review with the Department of Justice and
         notify the appropriate parties of the decision.
     (2) Exceptions to Arbitration Awards.
         After contacting the USDA LRO, the Mission Area, Agency, or Office may
         proceed to file the exception with the FLRA in accordance with FLRA
         regulations.

9. RECORDS

  USDA Mission Areas, Agencies, and Offices, at the level of recognition, are expected to
  maintain the records indicated below. Records listed may be maintained at offices below
  the level of recognition consistent with the delegation of labor relations authorities.


                                          9
a. FLRA certification and FLRA representation decisions. Copies must be submitted to
   the USDA LRO.

b. Master collective bargaining agreements, current subordinate or mid-term
   agreements, and any supplemental agreements or memorandums of understanding.
   Copies must be submitted to the USDA LRO.

c. Grievance and arbitration files including Agency and arbitrator decisions, exceptions
   filed with the FLRA, and FLRA decisions.

d. Unfair labor practice (ULP) files including charges, FLRA orders, agency responses,
   settlement agreements, complaints issued, hearing records, and FLRA decisions,
   compliant compliance records (e.g. postings).

e. Impasse records, including positions presented by the parties to the Federal Services
   Impasses Panel (FSIP), mediated agreements, and FSIP orders, decisions and awards.

f. Negotiability case files including union requests for declarations, agency declarations,
   petitions filed, position filings, and FLRA decisions.

g. Strategic labor relations plans, collaborative labor-management agreements and/or
   charters, and meeting minutes, accomplishment reports, or records of agreements as
   applicable. Copies of the strategic plans and collaborative agreements or charters
   must be submitted to the USDA LRO.




                                        10
                               APPENDIX A
            DELEGATIONS OF LABOR RELATIONS AUTHORITIES IN USDA

    x = authorized to perform listed function. Function may be further re-delegated to a line
        manager or designated staff within USDA.
    / = provides recommendations and substantive staff work in the completion of the listed
        function
    O= authorized to perform the listed function and the function may not be re-delegated.

                                       USDA
   LR Function and         ASA OHRM USDA            Mission                Conditions
     Authority                 Director LRO         Areas,
                                                    Agencies,
                                                      and
                                                     Offices
1. Establish USDA           X      X          /
   policy, direction and
   guidance.
2. Performs national        X      X         O
   consultation (5 USC
   7113)
3. Represents USDA in       X      X         X          X       May be delegated to USDA
   negotiating                                                  line managers at level of
   collective                                                   recognition and to line
   bargaining                                                   managers below that level if
   agreements,                                                  subordinate CBA’s are
   including the                                                permitted in the Master CBA
   authority to execute                                         provided a full performance
   collective                                                   level Labor Relations Specialist
   bargaining                                                   is a negotiation team member.
   agreements (CBA).
4. Makes allegations        X      X         X          X       May be delegated to USDA
   concerning the duty                                          line managers at the level of
   to bargain-                                                  recognition provided a full
   negotiability (5 CFR                                         performance level LR
   2424, Subpart A)                                             Specialist concurs. The USDA
                                                                LRO must be notified of formal
                                                                declarations of non-
                                                                negotiability.
5. Represents the           X      X         X          O       Formal declarations of non-
   USDA before the                                              negotiability must be provided
   FLRA in                                                      to the USDA LRO for review
   negotiability                                                as well as all subsequent
   disputes (5 CFR                                              submissions to the FLRA by
   2424, Subpart C&                                             both labor and management.
   D)

                                             A-1
6. Represents the         X   X   X     X   Representation team must
   USDA at FSIP                             include a full performance
   proceedings-                             level LR Specialist. USDA
   impasses (5 CFR,                         LRO must be notified of any
   Part 2470)                               requests for assistance by the
                                            FSIP.

7. Agency Head            X   X   O         USDA LRO must receive
   Review (5 USC                            executed CBA within 3
   7114)                                    business days of contract
                                            execution.

8. Assertion of           X   X   O         Requests for exceptions to
compelling need                             department-wide rules or
(5USC 7117 & 5 CFR                          regulations must be submitted
2424.50)                                    to USDA LRO.
9. Filing exceptions to   X   X   X     X
                                            Mission Areas, Agencies, and
   arbitration awards
                                            Staff Offices must consult with
   with the FLRA (5
                                            USDA LRO prior to filing
   USC 7122 & 5 CFR
                                            exceptions.
   2425)
10. Agency                X   X   X     X   A full-performance level LR
    representation for                      Specialist must perform this
    election, unit                          function.
    clarification or
    consolidation
    petitions (5 CFR
    2422)
11. Agency                X   X   X     X   Function to be performed by a
    representation for                      full-performance level LR
    unfair labor                            Specialist, OGC attorney or
    practice (ULP)                          qualified contract counsel.
    proceedings (5
    CFR 2423)
12. Requesting judicial   X   /   /         Consult with USDA LRO prior
    review of FLRA                          to submitting written request to
    decisions (5 USC                        OHRM Director. USDA
    7123)                                   General Counsel, after
                                            consultation with the ASA,
                                            will decide whether
                                            Department will submit request
                                            to the Department of Justice.
                          X   X   X     X   Function to be performed by a
13. Agency
                                            full-performance level LR
   representative in
                                            Specialist, OGC attorney or
   arbitrations
                                            qualified contract counsel.

                                  A-2
                     X   X   X     X   Mission Areas, Agencies, and
14. Issuing annual
                                       Offices responsible for
  Weingarten
                                       distribution of notices to
  notice (5 USC
                                       bargaining unit employees
  7114(a)(3))
                                       after notices are issued.




                             A-3
