                                U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                       WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250



                                                                                              Number:
                         DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION
                                                                                              4040-410

SUBJECT: Creating Individual Development        DATE:    February 7, 2011
Plans (IDP)
                                                OPI:   Office of Human Resources Management

    Section                                                                          Page

    1 Purpose                                                                         1
    2 References                                                                      1
    3 Background                                                                      1
    4 Special Instructions                                                            2
    5 Policy                                                                          2
    6 Responsibilities                                                                4
    Appendix A Guidance for Developing and Individual Development Plan (IDP)          A-1
    Appendix B OPM Core Competencies                                                  B-1


    1. PURPOSE

      This Regulation establishes guidance for Individual Development Plans (IDPs) throughout
      USDA.

    2. REFERENCES

       This Regulation must be used in conjunction with:

      a. The Government Employees Training Act, Title 5, United States Code, Chapter 41
         and related guidance issued by the Office of Personnel Management;
      b. Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 410 - Training;
      c. 5 CFR, Part 412, Executive, Management, and Supervisory Development; and
      d. Departmental Regulation 4040-430, Performance Management, Section 9a(7); and 9c.

    3. BACKGROUND

      a. IDPs can be an effective tool for the development of USDA employees. As part of long
         term career planning, employees, supervisors and training managers can use IDPs to outline
         training and more importantly, create activities that will lead to a more engaged, effective
         and skilled workforce. IDPs are also an important part of succession planning by helping
         employees develop skills that will be needed in the future. The use of IDPs can also help
         close employee competency gaps.
  b. The use of IDPs to develop USDA employees was requested in the Listening Sessions in the
     2010 Cultural Transformation Initiative.

  c. Agencies must create a culture that encourages, supports, and invests in the short- and long-
     term development of their employees. Employees’ professional development should be an
     ongoing process to ensure employees are staying current—if not one step ahead—in their
     fields and mission-critical competencies. Planning for continuous development must be
     anchored to the agency’s mission, goals, objectives, and needs, as well as be tied to the
     employee’s work and career goals.

4. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS

  This is a new policy.

5. POLICY

  a. USDA promotes the use of IDPs as a positive way to develop effective and engaged
     employees. In that context, every employee should have an IDP. USDA requires IDPs for
     the following categories of employees (be sure that IDPs comply with any specific program
     guidance):

     (1) Presidential Management Fellows.
     (2) Senior Executive Service Candidate Development Program participants.
     (3) All non-bargaining unit employees.
     (4) Any employee who requests an IDP.

     If an employee declines an IDP, the supervisor should note on the IDP “No further
     development desired/required at this time,” or if the form has a related check box, check
     that box. The supervisor should also explain to the employee that the lack of an IDP does
     not preclude the employee from attending mandatory training or job-related, technical
     training when directed to do so. When using AgLearn as the primary tool for developing
     IDPs, create a “no training” IDP in AgLearn to reflect the declination.

  b. Agencies with bargaining units should provide notice to the appropriate labor organization
     and bargain with that organization to include IDPs for bargaining unit employees.

  c. Agencies and staff offices may establish additional categories of employees for whom an
     IDP is required.

  d. The use of “My Plan” in AgLearn is encouraged as the common tool for development of
     IDPs. An AD Form 881, Individual Development Plan, should be used when the My Plan
     tool is not.

  e. IDPs offer the opportunity for a variety of training and development options including, but
      not limited to classroom and online training. Supervisors and training managers should
      help identify creative activities to develop employees. Some possible options include:
                                                    2
  (1) Establishing an employee mentoring program. Assign mentors to individual
      employees;

  (2) Create a career development center that can serve as an organizational (agency)
      resource for supervisors and employees;

  (3) Formalize “shadowing” programs where employees can shadow other staff members.
      This can include coworkers as well as organizational leaders;

  (4) Facilitate employee participation in special task forces and work groups within and
      outside the program area that study, develop recommendations and monitor progress of
      important organizational issues;

  (5) Facilitate employee participation in details. While details are typically created to
      support special projects, or cover short term needs, organizations can establish
      “training details” whose sole purpose is career development versus completing a
      specific task;

  (6) Include visits to other organizations inside and outside of USDA to learn more about
      the organization’s mission;

  (7) Include networking opportunities in IDPs. Organizations can structure events to
      promote networking or find opportunities in the local area that can be used to help
      employees develop relationships outside the organization; and

  (8) Encourage structured interviews with subject matter experts and organization leaders.

f. Supervisors should consider the following sources to help identify possible training ideas:

  (1) The Agency’s Chief Training Officer who can provide assistance in assessing
      employee training requirements;

  (2) The Agency’s Office of Human Resources to see if the Office of Personnel
      Management (OPM) has established specific competencies for the employee’s
      occupation; and

  (3) OPM’s core competencies for federal employees in Appendix B.

g. While IDPs are independent of an employee’s performance plan they may be discussed
   with the employee during performance counseling sessions since training and individual
   development are closely aligned with performance.

h. OHRM has established a web site that provides guidance and tools for the creation and use
   of IDPs. That site is at www.IDP.usda.gov. Much of the material on the web site is also
   included in Appendix A. The information on the web site and in Appendix A is provided
                                                 3
     to assist you in the development of IDPs. The mandatory policy in this Regulation is in the
     main text of the document and not in the Appendices or on the web site.

6. RESPONSIBILITIES

  a. The Director, OHRM is responsible for:

     (1) Establishing USDA’s IDP policy and providing technical assistance and advice on
         issues that arise to Agencies and Staff Offices; and

     (2) Monitoring and evaluating compliance with Departmental policy.

  b. Agency and Staff Office Heads are responsible for:

     (1) Ensuring that supervisors and employees are aware of the value of IDPs; and

     (2) Affording training to supervisors and employees during leadership courses, new
         employee orientation and through recurring notices to employees on how to develop,
         how to use, and the value of, IDPs. These topics should also be made a regular part of
         staff and employee meetings.

  c. Agency and Staff Office Human Resources Officers are responsible for providing technical
     assistance to supervisors and employees in the development and use of IDPs.

  d. Supervisors are responsible for:

     (1) Ensuring employees have an IDP and that the IDP remains current;

     (2) Providing feedback to employees about job strengths and areas for improvement; and

     (3) Supporting employee training and development, and providing training opportunities
         and funding if related to the Department’s mission and funds are available.

  e. Employees are responsible for:

     (1) Working with their supervisors to create and maintain an IDP; and

     (2) Taking responsibility for self development and improvement on a continual basis.

                                            END




                                                  4
                               APPENDIX A
       GUIDANCE FOR DEVELOPING AN INDIVIDUAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN (IDP)



                                SECTION A - INTRODUCTION

1. What is an IDP?

   a. An IDP is:
     (1) A clear statement of an employee's career goals.
     (2) A map for attaining goals that specifies immediate and long-range developmental need.
     (3) An individually-tailored action plan to develop specific competencies (knowledge and
         skills) needed to improve performance in the employee’s present position or to prepare
         for new responsibilities.
     (4) A written plan for scheduling and managing an employee's development.
     (5) A tool for a supervisor to estimate resources needed for employee development training.
     (6) An agreement between the employee and supervisor based on funds available to meet
       the employee's and the organization's goals.
     (7) A tool for an organization to develop its workforce to meet future needs.

   b. An IDP is not:
      (1) A corrective action tool for poor performance.
      (2) An unofficial reward system.
      (3) A contract.

2. An IDP can be key to growth and development of an employee and instrumental in helping the
   employee advance.

3. Before creating an IDP for bargaining unit employees, be sure to check with your labor
   relations staff to ensure that you comply with any labor-management agreement.

4. Uses of the IDP include to:
   a. Identify employee skill gaps.
   b. Train and develop the organization’s workforce.
   c. Promote communication between employees and supervisors.
   d. Determine resources needed for training and developing the workforce.

5. Table A1 outlines the benefits of an IDP to Employees and Supervisors.




                                                  A-1
                                            TABLE A1

                   IDP BENEFITS FOR EMPLOYEES AND SUPERVISORS


            EMPLOYEE                                              SUPERVISOR
 Perform duties according to established job      Aid in the development of their employees to achieve
 standards.                                       the knowledge, skills and competencies according to
                                                  their performance standards.
 Enhance job performance.
                                                  Accurately document the current developmental needs
 Set reasonable goals.                            of their employees.

 Assess particular strengths and weaknesses.      Consider the unit's and/or agency's organizational needs,
                                                  mission changes, changes in technology, expected
 Schedule and plan individual development         turnover, staffing needs, program plans and future needs
 each year.                                       for particular skills.

 Be engaged and make a serious commitment
 of time. To be successful at career
 development, it may take several hours of
 your personal time, but can prove to be well
 worth the investment.



6. Relationship between the IDP and Performance Appraisals. An IDP and a performance
   appraisal have the same focus; fostering individual and organizational improvement. However,
   a performance appraisal is based on past performance while an IDP is focused on developing
   the individual’s future performance. They should work together, but they have different
   purposes.


                      SECTION B - OVERVIEW OF THE IDP PROCESS

1. The IDP Process. The IDP process is a continuing cycle of planning, implementation and
   evaluation between an employee and supervisor, for the mutual benefit of both the employee
   and the organization. It is more than a swift review of course catalogs. It requires time to
   analyze job requirements; assess current competencies; assess career goals; and make informed
   decisions about developmental needs.

2. The critical factors throughout all phases of the IDP process are interaction and effective
   communication between the employee and supervisor. For the process to be effective and
   meaningful, each phase must be approached as a joint endeavor.

3. Tools for the IDP Process. There are tools available for analyzing jobs to determine
                                                   A-2
  requirements. One that is readily accessible is the position description. Performance standards
  and performance elements also spell out job requirements.

4. Phases of the IDP Process. The IDP process consists of six phases. Table A2 gives an
   overview of the process and tells you where in this appendix to look for information on how to
   complete each phase.


                                           TABLE A2

                                          IDP PHASES


                         Phase        What Needs to be Done              Section
                           1   Pre-Meeting Planning                        B
                           2   Employee-Supervisor Meeting                 C
                           3   Selecting Optimum Developmental             D
                               Activity
                           4   Preparing the IDP Form                       E
                           5   Implementing the IDP                         F
                           6     IDP Follow-Up                              G


                      SECTION C – PLANNING FOR AN IDP MEETING

1. Purpose of Planning. The purpose of the planning phase is to prepare the supervisor and
   employee for their joint meeting. Both the employee and the supervisor have specific
   preliminary data-gathering responsibilities. This planning will not only provide time for
   discussion during the meeting, but should also facilitate the discussion by having this
   information readily available.

2. Overview. This section describes specific roles and responsibilities related to planning. As
   you will see, both the employee and the supervisor have many questions to answer and things to
   consider in preparation for the employee-supervisor meeting.




3. The table A3 gives an overview of the meeting planning process:
                                                   A-3
                                           TABLE A3

                        MEETING PLANNING PROCESS OVERVIEW


                   Employee's Role                   Supervisor's Role
                    Ask: Where Have I Been?           Review position description.
                    Ask: Where Am I Now?              Review performance appraisal.
                    Ask: Where Can I Go?              Review performance standards.
                                                      Consider future possibilities for
                                                      employee.

4. Responsibility for Developing an IDP. Both the supervisor and the employee are
   responsible for developing an IDP. While the employee completes the IDP, with the
   cooperation and assistance of the supervisor, it is the supervisor who normally has to approve
   individual activities/training on the IDP.

5. Developing an IDP is a collaborative effort. When the employee and supervisor systematically
   work through the steps in this guide, an important opportunity exists to:

   a. Discuss critical job requirements and responsibilities.
   b. Outline the knowledge and skills needed to perform the work.
   c. Identify an employee's talents and needs.
   d. Define individual job satisfaction.
   e. Improve both organizational and individual performance.

6. Employee's Responsibilities. This planning process should enable the employee to enter the
   employee-supervisor meeting with some confidence and a firmer perspective on where he/she
    is going. Employees have a two-fold role in developing their IDP.

   a. Initiator: Assesses current skills and competencies, explores developing options, looks at
      the needs of the organization and sees realistic, constant improvement as a responsibility to
      oneself and the Agency.

   b. Owner: Assembles information, weighs alternatives, makes trade-offs, and proposes
      objectives and activities.

   c. Employees should also themselves the following questions:

       (1) “Where Have I Been?” To determine where you have been, consider all previous
           training, development and job experiences. Include:
           (a) On-the-job training.
           (b) Formal training.
           (c) Developmental assignments.
                                                   A-4
       (d) Self-development activities.

   (2) “Where Am I Now?” To determine where you are now, read your present position
       description, performance elements, performance standards and past performance
       evaluations. Think about the work performed over the past year and develop these
       lists:

       (a) I am good at these parts of my job: ______.
       (b) In general, I am good at this kind of work: ______.
       (c) These managerial or technical competencies are necessary to perform my current
           duties: ______.
       (d) I need to develop or strengthen these competencies: ____.
       (e) I need these kinds of assignments or training to develop or strengthen these
           competencies: ______.

   (3) “Where Can I Go?” To determine where you can go, focus on these major areas:

       (a) Positions in which you are interested.
       (b) Short-range goals.
       (c) Long-range goals.

d. Tables A4 through A6 will help employees determine where to go and how to focus on
   positions they are interested in, as well as their short and long range goals.


                                          TABLE A4

                                      POSITIONS


             Step                            Employee's Action
              1      Consider a range of options (such as, positions in your unit, other
                     units of your agency, other USDA agencies) that might interest
                     you.
              2      To find out more about other unit positions, talk to the unit's
                     supervisor or contact the servicing personnel office.
              3      Based on this examination of options, decide on short-range goals
                     (1-2 years) and long-range goals (3-5 years).




                                          TABLE A5
                                               A-5
                                   SHORT-RANGE GOALS
                                        (1-2 years)


                 Step                             Employee's Action
                  1        Identify the technical or leadership competencies needed to
                           obtain your short-range goals.
                  2        Ask:
                              • How strong or weak am I in these competencies?
                              • Is it possible for me to develop these competencies?
                              • What kind of training or developmental activities will
                                  enable me to develop these competencies?
                  3        Review short-range goals again to ensure that they are realistic
                           and attainable.


                                           TABLE A6

                                    LONG RANGE GOALS
                                        (3-5 years)


                  Step                              Employee's Action
                   1       Identify the technical or managerial competencies needed to
                           obtain your long range goals.
                   2       Ask:
                              • How strong or weak am I in these competencies?
                              • What kind of training or experience will enable me to
                                 develop these competencies?
                              • How much?
                              • How long will it take?
                              • Are resources (such as funding and training opportunities)
                                 available for me to develop these competencies?
                              • What contribution can I make to the organization?
                   3       Review long-range goals to ensure that they are realistic and
                           attainable.
                   4      Rank in priority all the technical or managerial competencies that
                          need to be developed.


7. Supervisor's Responsibilities. In preparing for the employee-supervisor meeting, the supervisor
   should remember that he/she serves in the following roles:

  a. Consultant: Provides insights about employee's skills and potential and suggests ways to
     develop these skills, and where employee should focus efforts; shares limits and possibilities
                                                   A-6
     for financing training.

  b. Advisor: Shares knowledge about the organization, personal career experiences and
     recommended training.

  c. Planner: Gives insight into the employee’s IDP and decides what is in the best interest of
      the work unit as a whole.

  d. Evaluator: Determines if the investment in the training and developmental activities resulted
     in improved individual and work unit performance.

8. The supervisor should consider the following points concerning the employee's development in
   preparing for the employee-supervisor meeting: the employee's current level of performance
   and future possibilities for the employee.


                                           TABLE A7

                                   SUPERVISOR ACTIONS


            Step                                    Supervisor's Action
             1          Review the employee's current performance appraisal.
             2          Ask:
                            • What are the employee's strengths with regard to leadership or
                                technical competencies?
                            • Is the employee lacking some technical and leadership
                                competencies to perform well?
                            • How can the employee attain these competencies?
                            • Are there any other problems that may be affecting the
                                employee's ability to meet the performance standards?
                            • What program resources can be used to help the employee
                                improve competency levels?
              3         Review the current performance standards used for the appraisal.
              4         Consider the unit's and/or agency's organizational needs and strategic
                        priorities over the next few years, along with the employee's needs and
                        goals.
                        Ask:
                            • What changes in mission, technology, programs or staff are
                                expected?
                            • Should the employee be developed for added responsibilities? If
                                so, what kind? Where? How?
                            • What kind of development will the employee need to reach the
                                goals?
                            • What resources can be assigned to support this IDP?

                                                  A-7
                     SECTION D - EMPLOYEE-SUPERVISOR MEETING

1. Purpose of the Employee-Supervisor Meeting. The employee-supervisor meeting provides the
opportunity for open communication about all that has been considered during the pre-meeting
planning phase. The employee and supervisor each have specific responsibilities to ensure that the
meeting is effective and objectives are met so that an IDP can be prepared.

2. Employee's Responsibilities. Table A8 describes what the employee should review and discuss
with their supervisor during the meeting.


                                           TABLE A8

                       EMPLOYEES ACTION DURING IDP MEETING


              Step                                    Employee's Action
               1         Review performance appraisal results.
               2         Ask:
                              • Were the performance standards met? If not, identify career
                                  goals if skills or knowledge gaps exist that are amenable to
                                  development through an IDP.
                3        Review short- and long-range goals.
                4        Ask:
                            • Are the goals realistic?
                            • Discuss the unit's and/or agency's goals, needs and priorities.
                                To what extent do my individual goals mesh with those of the
                                unit and/or agency?
                            • Are the goals attainable?
                            • What is my level of commitment toward attaining the goals.
                5        Review current technical and/or managerial competencies.
                6        Ask:
                         •      What competencies are currently possessed?
                         •      What competencies need to be developed?
                7        Identify developmental needs by determining the difference between
                         the competencies currently possessed and those needed to meet
                         goals.
                8        Rank developmental needs based on the unit's and/or agency's
                         organizational needs and priorities, as previously reviewed.
                9        Discuss training and developmental activities to meet my needs.
               10        Select developmental activities and training that will meet needs.
                         Consider a variety of developmental approaches and strategies, and
                         listen to the supervisor's ideas. See Section D of this guide.


3. Supervisor's Responsibilities. During the meeting, the supervisor should:
                                                  A-8
   a. Provide feedback to the employee on everything discussed, striving for a two-way
      discussion.
   b. Be realistic and objective about which activities will best suit the needs of the employee, as
      well as the broader needs of the unit and/or agency.
   c. Discuss in detail the optimum developmental activities that are possible and appropriate.
   d. Take time to prioritize the developmental activities with the employee.
   e. Identify criteria used to evaluate employee's development.
   f. Provide employees to the extent possible time on the job, fiscal resources, or access to
      training and learning activities.


            SECTION E - SELECTING OPTIMUM DEVELOPMENTAL ACTIVITIES

1. The matching of identified developmental needs with available developmental activities
   (training and non-training) is a major step in the IDP process.

2. A major difficulty supervisors and employees encounter in matching needs with activities is
   that of selecting the optimum developmental activity, which provides maximum learning
   within the boundaries of the organization’s:

   a. Mission.
   b. Budget.
   c. Workload.
   d. Travel.
   e. Staffing.
   f. Time constraints.

3. To minimize this problem, a variety of developmental approaches and strategies should be
   considered. We often think of training only in terms of formal training courses. Actually
   there are four basic types of developmental experiences to consider in planning the IDP:

   a. On-the-job-training.
   b. Formal classroom training.
   c. Self-development.
   d. Developmental activities.

4. While all four types of experiences have their individual advantages and disadvantages, it is
   crucial to stress the importance of choosing the appropriate experience that most effectively
   and efficiently meets specific needs. Although it would be ideal to incorporate a combination
   of all four types, the resources available to the supervisor may not make this possible. That is
   why an open discussion between the employee and supervisor concerning all options is
   necessary to pinpoint what is feasible for approval.

   a. On-the-Job-Training. Structured on-the-job-training is the most frequently used method of
      individualized learning. In this situation, the employee is counseled and coached while
      actually performing official duties. It usually involves individual instruction by the
                                                    A-9
      supervisor or a designated staff member because of his/her experience in the task or
      procedure to be learned. This approach can be used to teach employees new procedures,
      tasks and technology.

   b. Formal Classroom Training. This training may take place away from your work site.
      Depending on the objectives, specific program and instructor's approach, this experience
      can be very valuable. It may be the only alternative you have to acquire specific or
      specialized technical or managerial competency.

   c. Self-Development. When an employee aspires to a new career and his/her developmental
      needs cannot be directly related to present or anticipated work assignments, or resources are
      not available, the employee may undertake self-development activities:

      (1) Taking evening or weekend courses at local schools.
      (2) Watching educational or training videotapes.
      (3) Using correspondence and other self-study courses.
      (4) Reading books and other publications or journals.
      (5) Using PC tutorials or computer assisted training programs.

      Remember, what employees want in terms of development and what the supervisor can
      authorize may be different. The supervisor by law can only authorize certain types of
      activities on the job. To meet all goals, it may be necessary for the employee to gain some
      competencies on their own time. Funding should be discussed between the employee and
      the supervisor.

   d. Developmental Activities. One of the best ways to train for added responsibilities or higher
      job opportunities is through developmental activities. With the support and assistance of
      the supervisor, the employee's present job can be restructured or arrangements made to have
      the employee temporarily transferred to another area to learn firsthand the necessary
      technical and managerial competencies required for effective performance in that job.
      Examples of developmental activities include the following list:

      (1) Shadowing: Providing the opportunity to observe a well qualified, journeyman level
          employee perform a particular skill. Immediately after the shadowing period, the
          employee needs to have the opportunity to perform the same skill and be given
          feedback on that performance.
      (2) Detail/Rotational Assignments: Short-term assignment particularly appropriate for
          important skills that make up a small portion of an individual's job, but can lead to full-
          time work in that field.
      (3) Task Force Assignments: This is particularly effective if the employee has an
          opportunity to work with well qualified people who will provide feedback to the
          learner on his/her performance and participation in the group.

5. Development of Job Aides. A job aid requires that the employee develop a product that will
assist in the performance of the job, while, at the same time, serving as a vehicle for learning job-
related information. Three types of job aids include: cross-program assignments; special work
                                                    A-10
projects; and coaching lower level employees.


                         SECTION F - PREPARING THE IDP FORM

1. The IDP form is a means of formally documenting a training plan. Once the employee-
   supervisor meeting has been held, use the My Plan feature in AgLearn or AD form 881,
   Individual Development Plan to create an IDP.

2. Table A9 describes the process of completing the IDP form.


                                           TABLE A9

                                      IDP COMPLETION


                 Step                Who                      Responsibilities
                  1        Employee                Completes the form.
                  2        Employee and Supervisor Discusses and agrees on contents of
                                                   the form.
                  3        Supervisor              Ensures that the form is properly
                                                   completed.
                  4        Employee and Supervisor Signs the form.
                  5        Employee and Supervisor Keeps a copy of the form.
                  6        Supervisor              Forwards a copy of the form to the
                                                   appropriate office.
                  7        Employee                Implements the IDP.


                          SECTION G - IMPLEMENTING THE IDP

1. Employee's Responsibilities. Completion of the IDP form acknowledges the employee's
   commitment to accomplish the planned training and development. To implement the plan
   effectively, three actions are required on the employee's part:

  a. Documentation: Formal training and developmental activities that involve exchange of
      funds, official time or both must be documented.
  b. Participation: Once the request for training is approved, it is up to the employee to carry
     through with the experience. The supervisor will support and guide the employee, but the
     primary responsibility for successfully reaching the goals rests with the employee. It will
      take time to reach the goals, but the long-term investment will be worth it.
  c. Evaluation: Just taking a course or being involved in a developmental assignment does not
     necessarily mean the employee has fully met his/her commitment. Training and
      development needs are identified primarily to enable one to perform with greater ease and
      efficiency on the job, thus helping the agency accomplish its mission. The crucial step is
                                                 A-11
      applying what is learned to the job and practicing it. After each developmental activity, the
      employee should meet and discuss with the supervisor the developmental experience and
      lessons learned and how those lessons can be applied to the employee’s current work.

2. Supervisor's Responsibilities. These include: periodically reassess employee's plan; meet with
employee after each training and developmental activity; and document how the IDP has resulted
in changes to the employee’s performance.


                        SECTION H - AFTER THE IDP IS COMPLETED

1. What will happen to the IDP? An analysis of all of the organization's IDPs can be used to
identify the agency's training needs and set its priorities. This process provides the agency with a
tool to develop total budget data regarding training, as well as scheduling work to accommodate
training needs. The IDP also provides the agency with some measure of the supervisor's interest
in employee development.

2. Reviewing or revising an IDP. An IDP is a plan for development, not a contract in stone. IDPs
should be reviewed, revised or both as follows: at progress reviews of the performance plans;
upon completion of training; and as performance plans and job assignments change.




                                                    A-12
                                     APPENDIX B
                               OPM CORE COMPETENCIES



1. A competency is an observable, measurable pattern of skills, knowledge, abilities, behaviors
and other characteristics that an individual needs to perform work roles or occupational
functions successfully. The reminder of this appendix describes OPM’s core competencies and
their associated behaviors.

2. Core Competency – Integrity/Honesty

a. Definition: Instills mutual trust and confidence; creates a culture that fosters high standards
of ethics; behaves in a fair and ethical manner towards others, and demonstrates a sense of
corporate responsibility and commitment to public service.

b. Behaviors

            •   Uses honesty and appropriate disclosure with management, peers, and partners.
            •   Encourages others to consider ethics as an integral factor in making individual
                   and team decisions.
            •   Takes actions which are consistent with stated personal and organizational
                   values.
            •   Makes a personal effort to treat and delegate to all group members fairly.
            •   Models and encourages high-standards of honesty, integrity, trust, openness,
                   and respect for others.
            •   Demonstrates congruence between statements and actions.
            •   Ensures that the organization’s activities, services, or products reflect higher
                   management policies.
            •   Creates a culture of ethical standards within organizations and communities.
            •   Helps create key values and shared vision and uses these principles to guide
                   action.
            •   Uses formal authority and power in a fair and respectful manner.
            •   Gives people considerable responsibility for their work.
            •   Earns and maintains the trust of others by acting with statements made.
            •   Maintains principles even when it is unpopular to do so.

3. Core Competency - Resilience

a. Definition: Deals effectively with pressure; maintains focus and intensity and remains
optimistic and persistent even under adversity. Recovers quickly from setbacks. Effectively
balances personal life and work.



b. Behaviors
                                                  B-1
           •   Maintains a state of readiness for emergencies, outbreaks, recalls, or other
               public health incidents so that rapid deployment or other actions may be
               executed without delay.
           •   Maintains professional composure when others disagree with own professional
               opinion or analysis.
           •   Reflects on negative experiences in order to draw out meaningful lessons and
               knowledge.
           •   Thinks flexibly and creatively under stress.
           •   Moves past unfortunate situations and faces new tasks with a clear mind and
               optimism.
           •   Recognizes and effectively deals with stress and pressure.
           •   Demonstrates a belief in one’s own abilities, ideas, and self worth and
               maintains a positive view of self during difficult times.
           •   Responds constructively to reversals and setbacks.
           •   Maintains a professional demeanor in stressful and difficult situations.
           •   Maintains a healthy balance between personal life and work.

4. Core Competency - Flexibility

a. Definition: Is open to change and new information; adapts behavior and work methods in
response to new information, changing conditions or unexpected obstacles. Adjusts rapidly to
new situations that warrant attention and resolution.

b. Behaviors

           •   Recognizes and helps remedy barriers to implementing change.
           •   Successfully provides a visible anchor for others in times of great change.
           •   Questions the status quo by asking how things can be done more efficiently or
               inefficiently to support the organization’s mission.
           •   Recognizes potential opportunities and is open to change when presented with a
               new perspective.
           •   Is open-minded and positive when dealing with change and uncertainty.
           •   Adapts to the situation or to others’ responses by basing actions and decisions
               on the situation.
           •   Prioritizes actions effectively and efficiently in order to respond to numerous
               and diverse challenges and/or demands.
           •   Changes mid-term strategies and operations, or modifies processes to meet
               long-term challenges and demands.
           •   Shifts gears at a moment’s notice to support the team in a crisis.
           •   Balances what needs to be done with what others want done.
           •   Remains open to new ideas and approaches.
           •   Works concurrently on relating or conflicting priorities without losing focus or
               attention.

                                               B-2
            •   Maintains organization’s productivity, quality, and morale during periods of
                change.
            •   Establishes a balance among competing objectives to accomplish overall
                organizational goals.
            •   Focuses on high priority issues or tasks while facing constant interruptions.

5. Core Competency - Interpersonal Skills

a. Definition: Considers and responds appropriately to the needs, feelings, and capabilities of
different people in different situations; is tactful, compassionate and sensitive, and treats others
with respect.

b. Behaviors

            •   Provides stability for other members of the team by remaining calm and
                rational in challenging situations.
            •   Establishes rapport with people by sharing own experiences, listening to others
                and identifying commonalities that create personal connections.
            •   Acts in a fashion that fosters an environment of understanding and acceptance
                of differences.
            •   Removes information barriers by listening to and respecting the ideas of others.
            •   Acts as an effective listener with diverse audiences.

6. Core Competency - Oral Communication

a. Definition: Makes clear and convincing oral presentations to individuals or groups; listens
effectively and clarifies information as needed; facilitates an open exchange of ideas and fosters
atmosphere of open communication.

b. Behaviors

            •   Communicates effectively when speaking to both technical and non-technical
                audiences.
            •   Maintains professional composure when others disagree with own professional
                opinion or analysis.
            •   Represents and articulates viewpoints in a manner that effectively influences
                people from other disciplines.
            •   Values diversity when communicating orally and in writing to internal or
                external audiences.
            •   Communicates effectively both internally and externally to build effective
                partnerships and inspire support and/or actions from others.
            •   Represents and articulates own viewpoints in a way that positively influences
                the conversation.
            •   Uses relevant data or information to create a meeting of the minds among
                stakeholders with differing viewpoints.

                                                   B-3
            •   Demonstrates competence in oral communications through one-on-one, small
                group and large group settings.
            •   Solicits input from individuals and organizations.
            •   Communicates effectively with diverse populations through the accurate use of
                demographic, statistical, programmatic and scientific information customized to
                the level of understanding, interest and comprehension represented by the
                audience.
            •   Uses data or concrete examples to provide direct persuasion in a discussion or
                presentation.
            •   Expresses ideas and facts in a clear, organized and convincing manner.
            •   Demonstrates the ability to express concepts, thoughts, and ideas clearly and
                concisely so as to be easily understood by all audiences.
            •   Communicates effectively with diverse populations.

7. Core Competency - Problem Solving

a. Definition: Identifies and analyzes problems; distinguishes between relevant and irrelevant
information to make logical decisions; provides solutions to individual and organizational
problems.

b. Behaviors

            •   Thinks “outside the box” when troubleshooting problems.
            •   When investigating particular conditions, facts, or programs, soundly integrates
                professional, scientific and/or regulatory perspectives.
            •   Asks questions to try to piece together “unrelated” information, events, or
                situations.
            •   Searches for and conceptualizes the underlying, systemic causes driving a
                problem.
            •   Identifies trends or patterns when reviewing data; rapidly identifies all possible
                references.
            •   Intuitively forms ideas that bring clarity to the many possibilities in a complex
                situation.
            •   Makes connections between and among seemingly different situations that
                reveal key issues or opportunities.
            •   Analyzes and integrates information to draw reasonable, logical conclusions.
            •   Solves problems by identifying causes and analyzing alternative solutions.
            •   Sees patterns or trends in the problem areas and develops and implements
                innovative approaches for addressing.
            •   Uses simple rules, past experience and common sense to identify and solve
                problems.
            •   Uses knowledge of theory or past trends to look at current situations.
            •   Creates new concepts that are not obvious to others nor learned from education
                or experience in order to solve issues.

                                                 B-4
            •   Uses several analytic or creative ways to break apart complex issues into
                component problems or issues.
            •   Displays foresight when approaching issues and finding a resolution.
            •   Takes corrective action when problems arise.

8. Core Competency - Continual Learning

a. Definition: Grasps the essence of new information; masters new technical and business
knowledge; recognizes own strengths and weaknesses; pursues self-development; seeks
feedback from others and opportunities to master new knowledge.

b. Behaviors

            •   Learns and develops new skills or behaviors to adapt to constant, sometimes
                turbulent change.
            •   Shows interest in or seeks out new approaches, tools, methods and/or
                technologies in own field or expertise on the job.
            •   Stays current with respect to industry standards, procedures, emerging trends,
                etc.
            •   Takes steps to maintain an in-depth understanding of key business issues and
                implications.
            •   Demonstrates an in-depth understanding of potential solutions in areas of
                expertise that could impact the business.
            •   Maintains broad learning perspective by tapping into the knowledge of a wide
                variety of sources to create a vision of the future and resulting problems or
                issues.
            •   Seeks and makes use of feedback from others.
            •   Invests time and energy into self development and growth.
            •   Creates a learning network or environment.
            •   Grasps new knowledge; masters new information.
            •   Seeks new sources of information to expand knowledge, skills, and abilities.
            •   Integrates knowledge, skills, and abilities into work process.
            •   Recognizes own strengths and weaknesses.

9. Core Competency - Written Communication

a. Definition: Expresses written facts and ideas in a clear, convincing, and organized manner.

b. Behaviors

            •   Communicates ideas effectively both internally and externally to build effective
                partnerships and inspire support and/or action from others.
            •   Articulates viewpoints in a way that positively influences the position of the
                document/report.

                                                B-5
•   Communicates effectively with diverse populations through the accurate use of
    various sources of information customized to the level of understanding,
    interest and comprehension represented by the audience.
•   Develops and keeps up-to-date technical or regulatory guidance, often for
    complex topics, that is readily understood by its users.
•   Communicates effectively in writing to both technical and non-technical
    audiences.
•   Presents technical information in a manner that effectively influences people
    from other disciplines.
•   Values diversity when communicating orally and in writing to internal or
    external audiences.
•   Transmits written information and ideas in a clear, concise, comprehensive,
    accurate, and organized manner, including articulation and grammar.
•   Uses relevant supporting data, concrete examples or other information to
    persuade others and build a common understanding among stakeholders with
    differing viewpoints.
•   Uses the media, advanced technologies, and community networks to
    communicate information, when applicable.
•   Communicates effectively in formal and informal written communications.
•   Conveys complex concepts in simple language.




                                   B-6
