                              U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                    WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


                                                                          Number:
           DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                          4050-537
SUBJECT:                                             DATE: September 1, 2004
Repayment of Student Loans
                                                     OPI:
                                                     Office of Human Resources Management

1     PURPOSE

      The authority to repay student loans is one of several flexibilities available to agencies to
      attract individuals to the Federal service, or to retain those highly qualified personnel.
      Student loan repayments should not be used to retain employees who leave for positions
      in other Federal agencies, nor to recruit employees from other Federal agencies.

2     AUTHORITY

      This policy constitutes the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) Repayment of
      Student Loans Plan. This Plan meets the requirements set forth in 5 United States Code
      (U.S.C.) Section 5379 and 5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 537.

3     REFERENCES AND RESOURCES

      a      Public Law 108-136, National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2004

      b      Public Law 108-123, Federal Employee Student Loan Assistance Act,
             November 11, 2003

      c      Public Law 101-510, National Defense Authorization Act for
             Fiscal Year 1991, November 9, 1990, codified as 5 U.S.C. 5379

      d      Public Law 89-329, Higher Education Act of 1965, November 8, 1965, codified
             as 20 U.S.C. 1071 to1099 and amended by Public Law 105-224, October 7, 1998,
             codified as 20 U.S.C. 1087aa to 1087gg

      e      Public Health Service Act codified as 42 U.S.C. 292, et seq.

      f      5 CFR Part 537

      g      National Finance Center Bulletin, Title I, Payroll/Personnel Manual, 01-15,
             September 21, 2001

      h      Internet sites: http://www.opm.gov/oca/pay/StudentLoan/
                             http://www.hqnet.usda.gov/intranet/refer.htm
DR 4050-537                                                                       September 1, 2004


                             http://www.nfc.usda.gov
                             http://www.opm.gov/fedregis/html/archive.htm

                             FR, Jun 22, 2000, Vol. 65, No.120, pages 38791 to 38794
                             FR, Jan 11, 2001, Vol. 66, No. 8, pages 2789 to 2793
                             FR, Mar 16, 2001, Vol. 66, No. 52, pages 15202 to 15203
                             FR, Jul 31, 2001, Vol. 66, No. 147, pages 39405 to 39406
                             FR, Apr 20, 2004, Vol 69, No. 76, page 21039

4      SPECIAL INSTRUCTION/CANCELLATIONS

       This regulation supersedes and modifies DR 4050-537, dated, April 2, 2002.

5      RESPONSIBILITIES

       The Director, Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM) is responsible for
       setting policy and providing overall technical guidance and direction for the
       Department’s Repayment of Student Loans Plan. OHRM will provide staff assistance
       and monitor compliance with Departmental policy, hereafter referred to as “the Plan.”

6      DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY

       Under the Plan, the General Officers and agency heads listed in Part 2, subpart D of title
       7 of the Code of Federal Regulations are delegated the authority to review and approve
       repayment of student loans. The repayments may be all or part of any outstanding
       federally insured student loan or loans previously taken out by a candidate who has been
       appointed to a job or to retain a current employee of the agency. The General Officers
       and agency heads, are responsible for ensuring that the repayments are granted in
       accordance with the requirements set forth in the Plan. Redelegations are encouraged and
       should be consistent with selection authority.

7      DEFINITIONS

       a      Agency. As used in this document means agencies, service and program offices
              of the Department whose head reports to the Secretary, an Under Secretary, or an
              Assistant Secretary.

       b      Employees. Candidates who have been appointed to jobs and are highly
              qualified, or current employees, except employees serving under Schedule C or
              noncareer Senior Executive Service appointments, are eligible for student loan
              repayments, if all other conditions are met.

       c      Student Loan. A loan made, insured or guaranteed under parts B, D, or E of Title
              IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 or a health education assistance loan
              made or insured under part A of Title VII of the Public Health Service Act, or
              under part E of Title VIII of that Act. A list of the qualifying student loans can be



                                                2
September 1, 2004                                                                      DR 4050-537


                found at the Internet site listed under “References”
                (http://www.opm.gov/oca/pay/StudentLoan/). Since updates to this list will
                occur, the site should be checked before making any decisions to grant student
                loan repayments.

8       REQUIREMENTS

        Employees who hold the following kinds of appointments are eligible to receive
        repayments for student loans:

        a       Temporary employees serving on appointments leading to conversion to term of
                at least 3 years or permanent appointments, or

        b       Term employees with at least 3 years left on their appointment; or

        c       Permanent employees; or

        d       Employees serving on excepted appointments with conversion to term, career, or
                career- conditional appointments (including, but not limited to, Career Intern or
                Presidential Management Intern appointments).

9       PAYMENT

        a       Criteria

                (1)    Loan repayments must be based on a written determination that, in the
                       absence of offering loan repayment benefits, it would be difficult to either
                       fill the position with a highly qualified candidate or to retain a highly
                       qualified employee in that position.

                (2)    Each determination for recruitment purposes (including the amount to be
                       paid) must be made before the employee actually enters on duty in the
                       position for which he or she was recruited.

                (3)    Payments authorized in order to recruit or retain an employee must be
                       based upon a written determination that the high or unique qualifications
                       of the employee or special need of the agency for the employee’s services
                       makes it essential to retain the employee and that in the absence of
                       offering student loan repayment benefits, the employee would be likely to
                       accept or leave for employment outside the Federal service. This
                       determination must be based on a written description of the extent to
                       which the employee’s declination of a job offer or departure of an
                       employee would affect the agency’s ability to carry out an activity or
                       perform a function that is deemed essential to an agency’s mission.




                                                 3
DR 4050-537                                                                      September 1, 2004


              (4)    Agencies should develop written criteria for granting student loan
                     repayments. These criteria can stipulate occupations, grade levels,
                     geographic areas, licenses, certifications, degrees, special experience, and,
                     other specifications needed to recruit employees or retain highly qualified
                     employees in the Federal service.

              (5)    An employee who receives a student loan repayment and moves to another
                     Federal agency or other USDA agency or Staff Office is not obligated to
                     repay the benefit, unless the employee has agreed to make a repayment in
                     this circumstance. The gaining agency is not obligated to reimburse the
                     losing agency for the amount of the student loan repayment.

              (6)    Management officials must adhere to merit system principles and take into
                     consideration the need to maintain a balanced workforce in which women
                     and members of racial and ethnic minority groups are appropriately
                     represented in government service.

              (7)    See Appendix A, for a Sample Recommendation of Approval for
                     Repayment of Student Loan.

       b      Conditions for Payment. Payments will be at the discretion of the individual
              authorized to make the determination and are subject to limitations, or conditions
              mutually agreed to in writing, between the agency and the employee. Payments
              may be applied only to the indebtedness outstanding at the time the agency and
              the employee enter into the service agreement, and may not begin before the
              employee enters on duty with the agency. Student loan repayment benefits must
              be in addition to basic pay and any other form of compensation otherwise payable
              to the employee involved. Payments will be made by the National Finance Center
              (NFC) directly to the holder of the loan by electronic funds transfer.

       c      Tax Withholdings. Tax withholdings must be deducted or applied at the time any
              payment is made. Tax withholding may not be spread out over time. Since these
              tax implications could create a financial hardship for the recipient of the
              repayment benefit, agencies can lessen the impact of tax withholding on a
              employee’s paycheck in one of the following ways:

              (1)    Agencies can make smaller payments at periodic intervals through the
                     fiscal year or subsequent years, rather than issue payments under this part
                     in one lump sum;

              (2)    Employees can write a check to the paying agency to cover the tax liability
                     rather than have the tax liability withheld from the employee’s paycheck;

              (3)    Agencies can deduct the amount of taxes to be withheld from the loan
                     repayment benefit before issuing payment to the holder of the loan;




                                               4
September 1, 2004                                                                      DR 4050-537


                (4)    Please consult the Student Loan Repayment and National Finance Center
                       (NFC) Internet sites for the latest information from the Internal Revenue
                       Service regarding tax liabilities and payment procedures. See also NFC
                       Bulletin, Title I, 01-15, dated September 21, 2001.

        d       Loans to be repaid. Before authorizing loan repayments, an agency must verify
                with the holder of the loan that the employee has an outstanding student loan that
                qualifies for repayment. Agencies should verify remaining balances with the
                holders of the loan to ensure that loans are not overpaid. An agency may repay
                more than one loan as long as the loan repayments do not exceed the limit. The
                amount paid by the agency is limited to $10,000 per employee per calendar year
                or a total career payment of $60,000 per employee.

        e       Size of payments. In determining the size of the loan payments, an agency should
                take into consideration the employee’s value to the agency, and how far in
                advance the agency can commit funds. If budgetary considerations are an issue,
                agencies have the discretion to determine the repayment benefit amount given to
                an employee each year. This type of arrangement must be included in the written
                service agreement with the employee. The amount paid by the agency is limited
                to $10,000 per employee per calendar year, or a total career payment of $60,000
                per employee.

        f       Employee responsibility. The employee will be responsible for making timely
                loan payments on the portion of the loan(s) that continues to be the employee’s
                responsibility. Payments do not exempt an employee from his or her
                responsibility and/or liability for any loan(s) the individual has taken out. The
                employee will also be responsible for any income tax obligations resulting from
                the loan repayment benefit.

        g       Service Agreements. Before any loan repayments may be made an employee
                must sign a written agreement to complete a specified period of employment with
                the agency and to reimburse the agency for loan repayment benefits if the
                employee is separated involuntarily on account of misconduct or failure to
                maintain an acceptable level of performance, or the employee leaves the agency
                voluntarily. This agreement may also specify any other employment conditions
                the agency considers to be appropriate, such as, but not limited to, the employee’s
                position and the duties he or she is expected to perform, work schedule, or level
                of performance.


                (1)    The minimum period of employment to be established under a service
                       agreement must be 3 years, regardless of the amount of loan repayment
                       authorized. Agencies can state in their service agreements that increases
                       or renewals of payments made under this part can be made without
                       requiring the employee to enter into a new service agreement, or agencies
                       can require an additional period of service, in the service agreement.



                                                 5
DR 4050-537                                                                    September 1, 2004




              (2)   If the employee fails to reimburse the agency for the amount owed, a sum
                    equal to the amount of the loan repayment must be recovered from the
                    employee under USDA’s regulations for collection by offset from an
                    indebted government employee under the authority of title 5 U.S.C. §5514
                    and 5 CFR Part 550 Subpart K, or through the appropriate provisions
                    governing debt collection if the individual is no longer a Federal
                    employee.

              (3)   There is no requirement to refund the loan repayment when the employee
                    fails to complete a period of employment established under a service
                    agreement because the employee is involuntarily separated for reasons
                    other than misconduct or failure to maintain an acceptable level of
                    performance or the employee leaves the agency voluntarily to enter into
                    the service of any other agency, unless reimbursement to the paying
                    agency is otherwise specified in the service agreement.

              (4)   Any amount repaid, or recovered from any employee will be credited to
                    the appropriation account from which the amount involved was originally
                    paid. If possible, any amount so credited will be merged with other sums
                    in such account and will be available for the same purposes and period,
                    and subject to the same limitations (if any), as the sums with which
                    merged.

              (5)   General officers and agency heads, designated above, and their specific
                    designees, are delegated the authority to waive in whole or in part, a right
                    of recovery of an employee’s debt if he or she determines that recovery
                    would be against equity and good conscience or against the public interest.
                    The delegation includes payments to or on behalf of employees, or former
                    employees, in full or in part, without regard to amount.

              (6)   A service agreement made under this part in no way constitutes a right,
                    promise, or entitlement for continued employment or noncompetitive
                    conversion to the competitive service. This language should be stated in
                    the service agreement

              (7)   See Appendix B, for Sample Agreement for Repayment of Student Loan.




                                              6
September 1, 2004                                                                         DR 4050-537


10      REPORTS AND RECORDS

        a       No later than November 15 of each year, Mission Areas and Staff Offices must
                provide OHRM/Personnel Policy and Partnership Division the following
                information for the previous fiscal year (See Appendix C):

                (1)    The number of employees given student loan repayments;

                (2)    The pay plan, series, grade, step, salary, title, and location of the
                       employees who received student loan repayments;

                (3)    The total amount of the student loan paid to each employee; and

                (4)    The total amount of student loan repayments made by the Mission Area or
                       Staff Office.

        b       Each Mission Area and Staff Office must keep a record of each student loan
                repayment determination and have the records available for review when
                requested. These records may be destroyed 3 years after the loan has been repaid,
                or after the Office of Personnel Management has evaluated the program,
                whichever is later.


                                               -END-




                                                  7
September 1, 2004                                                                                                 DR 4050-537
                                                                                                                   Appendix A
                                                      APPENDIX A

                         SAMPLE RECOMMENDATION AND APPROVAL
                          OF THE REPAYMENT OF STUDENT LOAN(S)

1. Agency Name                                                             2. Agency Code   3. Case No.          4. Personnel
                                                                                                                 Office Identifier




5. Name of Employee                                        6. Social Security No.           7. Duty Station Code




8. Position Title                                          9. Location (City, State)        10. Pay Plan/series/grade/step




11. Salary                    12. Organization                                              13. Effective Date




14. Accounting Code           15. Mail Check to (if applicable)




The following information must be attached, for review by the recommending and
approving officials for a student loan repayment:

·            A written justification outlining the difficulty experienced or expected in filling
             the position if a student loan is not repaid, and

·            A written determination that unusually high or unique qualifications of the
             employee or a special need of the agency exists.

             Or

·            A written determination that the employee is likely to leave the Federal
             Government if the loan is not repaid, and

·            A written description of the extent to which the employee’s departure would
             affect the agency.

·            In addition, the proposed amount of the loan repayment, along with the rationale
             for the amount proposed.

17. Recommended Amount $

Signature of Recommending Official                          Title                                         Date



18. Approved Amount $

Signature of Recommending Official                          Title                                         Date




                                                              A-1
DR 4050-537                                                       September 1, 2004
Appendix A


                         SAMPLE RECOMMENDATION AND APPROVAL
                          OF THE REPAYMENT OF STUDENT LOAN(S)

Comments/Changes:




Signature of Approving Official            Title                      Date



Comments/changes:




                                                       Form AD 1151 (9/2004)
                                         A-2
September 1, 2004                                                             DR 4050-537
                                                                               Appendix A

Privacy Act Statement

Public Law 104-134 (April 26, 1996) requires that any person doing business with the
Federal Government furnish a social security number or tax identification number. This
is an amendment to title 31, Section 7701. Furnishing the social security number, as well
as other data, is voluntary, but failure to do so may delay or prevent action on the
application. If your agency uses the information furnished on this form for purposes
other than those indicated above, it may provide you with an additional statement
reflecting those purposes.




                                           A-3
            September 1, 2004                                                               DR 4050-537
                                                                                             Appendix B



                                                  APPENDIX B




                            SAMPLE SERVICE AGREEMENT FOR A RECEIPT
                                         OF REPAYMENT OF STUDENT LOAN(S)

            In return for the repayment of my student loan(s) as described below, I hereby agree to

            remain an employee of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) - (the agency)

             for the period beginning                             following the effective date of the

            student loan repayment, unless I am separated for reasons beyond my control and which

            are acceptable to the above named agency. The amount of the repayment of student loan

            I will be receiving under this agreement is                         .

            I agree that if I do not remain in the agency and maintain an acceptable level of

            performance for the above specified period I will repay to the agency the total amount of

            student loan repayment benefits I have received. I understand that this service agreement

            does not constitute a right, promise, or entitlement for continued employment or

            noncompetitive conversion to the competitive service. I understand that under such

            circumstances these monies are recoverable from me as a debt due the United States

            Government, and the agency is not responsible for making your loan payments and any

            late fees you are charged.




Signature                                                                           Date




                                                                          Form AD-1152 (9/2004)



                                                          B-1
September 1, 2004                                                                             DR 4050-537
                                                                                              Appendix C



                                             APPENDIX C

                                     REPORTS AND RECORDS

a       No later than November 15 of each year, Mission Areas and Staff Offices must provide
        OHRM/PPPD the following information for the previous fiscal year:

                (1)    The number of employees given student loan repayments___________________

                (2)    The pay plan, series, grade, step, salary and title of the employees who received
                       student loan repayments (list below):




                (3)   The total amount of the student loan paid to each employee (list name of each
                      student and amount received below):




        (4)            The total amount of student loan repayments made by the agencies, service and
                       program offices                            .

b       OHRM will request Race, Sex, National Origin, and Disability information from the National
        Finance Center data base. This information will be reviewed and evaluated to determine if there
        are any disparities or issued related to protected groups by grade, salary, title location, amount
        paid, or between Mission Areas or Staff Offices.

c       Each Mission Are and Staff Office must keep a record of each student loan repayment
        determination and have the record available for review when requested. These records maybe
        destroyed after 3 years after the loan is repaid.



                                                   C-1
