                               U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                     WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


                                                                           NUMBER:
             DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                       DR-4090-920-
                                                                           002
SUBJECT:                                      DATE:
Senior Science and Technology Service         March 29, 2012
                                              OPI:
                                              Office of Human Resources Management


Section                                                     Page

   1. Purpose                                               1
   2. Authority                                             1
   3. References and Resources                              2
   4. Special Instructions/Cancellation                     2
   5. Responsibilities                                      2
   6. Delegations of Authority                              2
   7. Policy                                                2
   8. Definitions                                           3
   9. Eligibility                                           3
   10. Citizenship                                          4
   11. Probationary Period                                  4
   12. Pay and Compensation                                 4
   13. Performance Management                               4
   14. Peer Review Process                                  4
   15. Disciplinary Action for Cause and
       Non Disciplinary Separation without cause            5
   16. Reports and Records                                  6




 1.        PURPOSE

           This regulation establishes the policy and framework for implementing and administering
           the Senior Scientific Research Service (SSRS) to be further know within USDA as the
           Senior Science and Technology Service (SSTS).


 2.        AUTHORITY

           The Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002, Public Law 107-171, Section 7219
           establishes the Senior Scientific Research Service within the Department of Agriculture
           and authorizes the Secretary to appoint members of the Service. The service shall be know
           within USDA and further referred to in the regulation as the Senior Science and
           Technology Service (SSTS).
3.   REFERENCES AND RESOURCES

     a.     Public Law 107-171, Section 7219, The Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of
            2002, May 13, 2002

     b.     Public Law 105-185, Subtitle B of title VI of the Agricultural Research, Extension
            and Education Reform Act of 1998, June 23, 1998, codified as 7 United States Code
            (U.S.C.), Section 7651, et. seq.


4.   SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATION

     This Departmental Regulation supersedes DR-4090-920-001, dated March 7, 2003.


5.   RESPONSIBILITIES

     The Director, Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM), is responsible for setting
     Departmental policy and providing overall technical guidance and direction for the SSTS.

6.   DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY

     Authority to develop policies and procedures for implementing the SSTS at the Agency
     level consistent with this Departmental Regulation, is delegated to Agency heads.

     The Secretary delegates authority to appoint members of the SSTS to the Department of
     Agriculture (USDA) Chief Scientist.


7.   POLICY

     Members of the SSTS shall not be covered by the following provisions of Title 5 U.S.C.:

     a.     Those governing appointments in the competitive service;

     b.     Chapter 35, Subchapter I, Retention Preference;

     c.     Chapter 43, Performance Appraisal and Actions Based on Unacceptable
            Performance

     d.     Chapter 51, Classification;


                                          2
       e.     Chapter 53, Subchapter III, General Schedule Pay Rates; and

       f.     Chapter 75, Adverse Actions.


     8. DEFINITIONS

       a.     Agency-convened Peer Panel: A panel of scientists convened by agencies
              specifically to assess the impact, stature, and recognition of SSTS candidates.

       b.     Departmentally-approved Peer Review Process: Any process that the Department
              determines to be suitable to measure SSTS candidates’ contributions objectively
              and qualitatively, applying the similar standards used for any member of the
              national/international scientific community.

       c.     Outstanding Research: Research that establishes the candidate as a nationally and
              internationally recognized authority and leader in an area of widespread scientific
              interest and investigation. The work will have resulted in honors and/or awards
              from major national organizations, and service as an advisor and/or consultant on
              scientific and technological programs and problems. The candidate’s reputation as
              a scientific leader will serve as a recruiting attraction for recent graduates and/or
              collaborators, and is likely to be a major consideration in agency sponsorship of
              scientific programs in his/her field.

       d.     SSTS: A cadre of no more than 100 experienced and talented scientists, separate
              from the competitive Federal service, who conduct outstanding research or have
              conducted outstanding research and are now managing or leading science and
              technology programs in the field of agriculture or forestry.


9.     ELIGIBILITY

       To be eligible for appointment to the SSTS, an individual shall:

       a.     have conducted outstanding research in the fields of agriculture or forestry, as
              determined by a Departmentally-approved peer review process;

       b.     have earned a doctoral level degree at an institution of higher education [as defined
              in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001)];

       c.     meet the qualification standards prescribed by the Director of the Office of
              Personnel Management for appointment to a position at level GS-15 of the General
              Schedule (GS);


                                             3
      d.     be recommended by their Agency head and concurred on by the Director, OHRM;
             and

      e.     be approved by the USDA Chief Scientist.


10.   CITIZENSHIP

      Non-citizens may be hired subject to the same limitations as members of the excepted Civil
      Service.


11.   PROBATIONARY PERIOD

      An individual’s initial appointment to the Federal service shall become final only upon
      completion of a probationary period of uniform length determined by the Secretary or
      his/her designee and an assessment of the appointee’s performance as satisfactory during
      the probationary period. Individuals who have already completed an initial probationary
      period of Federal service will not be required to serve any additional period.


12.   PAY AND COMPENSATION

      a.     The SSTS is an ungraded system, with a single, flexible pay range, to include all
             members.

      b.     The rate of pay for a member of the SSTS shall not be less than the minimum rate
             for a GS-15 and not more than Level I of the Executive Schedule, unless a higher
             rate is approved by the President.

      c.     Annual adjustments to pay rates will be made effective on the first day of the first
             pay period on or after January 1 of each calendar year.


13.   PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT

      Members of the SSTS will be covered by a performance management plan developed by
      their respective agencies and approved by the Director, OHRM.


14.   PEER REVIEW PROCESS

      a.     All positions included in the SSTS will be professional research, research
             management, or science leadership positions. After favorable determinations as to

                                                4
           the outstanding quality of their research as set out in subparagraph 9a of this
           Departmental Regulation, candidates will be considered for SSTS membership as
           set out in subparagraphs 14b, 14c, and 14d below.

      b.   Agency-convened peer panels then will evaluate candidates.

      c.   Agency-convened peer panel determinations will be documented by a narrative
           evaluation report.

      d.   The narrative evaluation report and other case material for candidates passing
           Agency review by the Agency-convened peer panels and recommended for
           appointment into the SSTS by their Agency heads will be forwarded to OHRM for
           concurrence or non-concurrence by the OHRM Director. Candidates whose
           recommended appointments are concurred in by the OHRM Director will be
           forwarded to the USDA Chief Scientist for final review and appointment into the
           Service.


15.   DISCIPLINARY ACTION FOR CAUSE AND NON-DISCIPLINARY SEPARATION
      WITHOUT CAUSE

      a.   A member of the SSTS may be subject to disciplinary action, including reprimand,
           suspension from pay and duty, or removal from the SSTS, for misconduct,
           performance, national security considerations, or other cause determined by the
           Secretary or his/her designee. A member may also be involuntarily separated for
           non-disciplinary reasons without cause.

      b.   Employee Rights

           A member of the SSTS shall have the same right to appeal to the Merit Systems
           Protection Board and the same right to file a complaint with the Office of Special
           Counsel as an employee appointed to a GS-15 position.

           “Subject to the limitations under Section 7 of the Departmental Notice, other
           applicable regulations, and law, members of the SSTS will retain their right to
           Union Representation”

      c.   Involuntary Separation For Non-Disciplinary Reasons Without Cause

           (1)    A member of the SSTS who is separated from service involuntarily and
                  without cause and who, immediately prior to appointment to the SSTS, was
                  a career appointee in the civil service or the Senior Executive Service, may
                  be appointed by the Secretary to a GS-15 career position in the competitive
                  civil service.

                                             5
           (2)    A member of the SSTS who is separated from service involuntarily and
                  without cause and who, immediately prior to appointment to the SSTS, was
                  not a career appointee in the civil service or the Senior Executive Service,
                  may be appointed to a GS-15 position in the excepted civil service for a
                  period not to exceed two years.


16.   REPORTS AND RECORDS

      a.   Each agency will record the number of appointments, the source of the appointees,
           their earnings immediately prior to appointment, and their Service pay at
           appointment.

      b.   Each fiscal year, OHRM will request Race, Sex, National Origin, and Disability
           information from the National Finance Center database. This information will be
           reviewed and evaluated to determine if there are any disparities or issues related to
           protected groups.

      c.   All records pertaining to the SSTS will be maintained in accordance with the
           National Archives and Records Administration records schedule.




                                              6
