                              U.S DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                    WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                             NUMBER:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                      4050-550-02
SUBJECT:                                       DATE:
Pay Administration – Compensatory Time         June 20, 2008
Off for Travel                                 OPI:
                                               Office of Human Capital Management



Section                                                                                    Page

 1        Purpose                                                                           1
 2        References                                                                        1
 3        Special Instructions                                                              2
 4        Policy                                                                            2
 5        Delegations of Authority                                                          2
 6        Definitions                                                                       2
 7        Responsibilities                                                                  3
 8        Applicability                                                                     4
 9        Creditable Travel Time                                                            4
10        Crediting Compensatory Time Off for Travel                                        6
11        Usage of Accrued Compensatory Time Off for Travel                                 7
12        Forfeiture of Unused Compensatory Time Off for Travel                             7
13        Prohibition Against Payment for Unused Compensatory
          Time Off for Travel                                                               8
14        Inapplicability of Premium Pay and Aggregate Pay Caps                             8


1. PURPOSE

     The purpose of this directive is to set forth the Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) policy
     on Compensatory Time Off for Travel.


2. REFERENCES

     This directive must be used in conjunction with:

     a.    Public Law 108-411, Section 203(a), Federal Workforce Flexibility Act of 2004,
           October 30, 2004, Title 5, United States Code, section 5550b (5 U.S.C. 5550b); and

     b.    Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations, part 550, Subpart N, Compensatory Time Off for
           Travel, (5 CFR part 550, subpart N).
DR 4050-550-002                                                            June 20, 2008



3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS

   This directive implements a new USDA policy for selected issues related to Compensatory
   Time Off for Travel. The Federal Workforce Flexibility Act of 2004 established a new form
   of compensatory time off for time spent by an employee in travel status away from the
   employee’s official duty station when such time is not otherwise compensable.


4. POLICY

   It is USDA’s policy to authorize and approve compensatory time off for travel in accordance
   with the above referenced law and regulation and with the procedures set forth in this
   directive. Whenever possible, an employee’s travel should be scheduled within regular
   working hours.


5. DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY

   The authority to make determinations concerning compensatory time off for travel presently
   resides with the Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA) and the Director, Office of
   Human Capital Management (OHCM). The authority is hereby delegated to Agency and
   Staff Office Heads, as defined below, to administer the program within their respective
   organizations. Agency and Staff Office Heads are encouraged to re-delegate the authority to
   approve compensatory time off for travel to the lowest supervisory level practical.


6. DEFINITIONS

   a.   Agency. An organizational unit of the Department, other than a Staff Office as defined
        below, whose head reports to an Under Secretary.

   b.   Agency Head.         The head of a USDA Agency or an official who has been
        delegated the authority to act for the head of the Agency in the matter concerned.

   c.   Compensable. Time that is creditable as hours of work for the purpose of determining
        pay entitlement, even when that work time may not actually generate additional
        compensation because of applicable pay limitations.

   d.   Compensatory Time Off. Travel time that is credited under the authority of this
        directive.

   e.   Official Duty Station. The geographic area surrounding an employee’s regular work
        site that is the same as the area designated by the Agency/Staff Office for the purpose


                                               2
DR 4050-550-002                                                             June 20, 2008


        of determining whether travel time is compensable for determining overtime pay,
        consistent with the regulations in 5 CFR 550.112(j) and 5 CFR 551.422(d).

   f.   Regular Working Hours. The days and hours of an employee’s regularly scheduled
        administrative workweek established under 5 CFR part 610.

   g.   Scheduled Tour of Duty. An employee’s regular hours for which he or she may be
        charged leave under 5 CFR part 630 when absent. For full-time employees, it is the 40-
        hour basic workweek as defined in 5 CFR 610.102. For employees with an uncommon
        work schedule, as defined by 5 CFR 630.201, it is the uncommon tour of duty.

   h.   Staff Office. A Departmental administrative office whose head reports to the Secretary.

   i.   Staff Office Head. The head of a Staff Office or an official who has been delegated the
        authority to act for the head of the Staff Office in the matter concerned.

   j.   Travel. Officially authorized travel for work purposes that is approved by an
        authorized Departmental official or otherwise authorized under established
        Departmental or Agency/Staff Office policies. Time spent traveling by union officials
        in connection with representational activities is excluded.

   k.   Travel Status. Travel time, as described in Section 10 of this directive, that is
        creditable in accruing compensatory time off for travel, excluding travel time that is
        otherwise compensable under other legal authorities.

   l.   Usual Waiting Time. The time normally required by airlines for passengers to arrive
        before departing flights, to catch connecting flights, and to claim baggage at the final
        destination.


7. RESPONSIBILITIES

   a.   The Director, OHCM, is responsible for:

        (1)   Establishing USDA’s Compensatory Time Off for Travel policy and providing
              technical assistance and advice on issues that arise;

        (2)   Monitoring compliance with Departmental policy; and

        (3)   Reporting to the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), as required.


   b.   Agency and Staff Office Heads are responsible for:



                                                3
DR 4050-550-002                                                              June 20, 2008


        (1)   Establishing written procedures that address how compensatory time off for travel
              determinations will be made in their individual Agencies and Staff Offices and
              how employees may request credit for compensatory time off for travel under this
              directive;

        (2)   Ensuring that compensatory time off for travel determinations in their Agencies or
              Staff offices are made in accordance with the requirements set forth in this
              directive;

        (3)   Selecting the time and mode of transportation for the traveler;

        (4)   Monitoring and assessing the program; and

        (5)   Reporting to OHCM, as requested.


8. APPLICABILITY

   This directive is applicable to all USDA employees as defined in 5 U.S.C. 5541(2) without
   regard to whether the employee is exempt from or covered by the overtime pay provisions of
   the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, as amended. This includes employees in senior-level;
   scientific or professional; and prevailing rate (wage) positions. It excludes members of the
   Senior Executive Service and Senior Foreign Service or Foreign Service Officers.


9. CREDITABLE TRAVEL TIME

   a.   General. Subject to the conditions specified in this directive, Agency and Staff Office
        Heads must credit an employee with compensatory time off for travel for time in travel
        status if:

        (1)   The employee is required to travel away from his or her official duty station for
              work related purposes; and

        (2)   The travel time is not otherwise compensable hours of work under other legal
              authorities.

   b.   Travel Status.

        (1)   Time in travel status includes the time an employee actually spends traveling
              between the official and a temporary duty station, or between two temporary duty
              stations, and the usual waiting time that precedes or interrupts such travel, subject
              to the following exclusions:



                                                4
DR 4050-550-002                                                              June 20, 2008


              (a)   Travel time in connection with an employee’s permanent change of duty
                    station is not time in travel status.

              (b)   Extended (i.e., not usual) waiting time in the actual period of travel during
                    which the employee is free to rest, sleep, or otherwise use the time for his or
                    her own purposes is not time in travel status.

              (c)   Actual time spent at a temporary duty station is not time in travel status.

        (2)   Time in travel status ends when the employee arrives at the temporary duty
              worksite or his or her lodging in the temporary duty station, wherever the
              employee arrives first. Time in travel status resumes when an employee departs
              from the temporary duty worksite or his or her lodging in the temporary duty
              station, wherever the employee departs last.

        (3)   When an employee’s travel involves two or more time zones, the time zone from
              the point of first departure must be used to determine how many hours the
              employee actually spent in travel status for the purpose of accruing compensatory
              time off.

   c.   Travel from home to temporary duty station.

        (1)   If an employee is required to travel directly between his or her home and a
              temporary duty station outside the limits of the employee’s official duty station,
              the travel time is creditable as time in travel status if otherwise qualifying under
              this section. However, Agency and Staff Office Heads must deduct from such
              travel hours the time the employee would have spent in normal home-to-work or
              work-to-home commuting.

        (2)   In the case of an employee who is offered one mode of transportation and who is
              permitted to use an alternative mode of transportation, or who travels at a time or
              by a route other than that selected by the Agency and Staff Office Head, the
              Agency and Staff Office Head must determine the estimated amount of time in
              travel status the employee would have had if the employee had used the mode of
              transportation offered by the Agency and Staff Office Heads or traveled at the
              time or by the route selected by the Agency and Staff Office Heads. The
              employee must be credited with the lesser of the estimated time in travel status or
              the actual time in travel status.

        (3)   Employees who choose, for personal reasons, to return home at night or on a
              weekend, while on a multiple-day assignment, rather than using temporary
              lodging at the temporary duty station will only receive credit for travel from home
              to the temporary duty station on the 1st day and travel from the temporary duty
              station to home on the last day that otherwise qualifies as time in travel status.
              This credit is subject to the deduction of normal commuting time. Travel to and

                                                5
DR 4050-550-002                                                              June 20, 2008


              from home on other days is not creditable travel time unless the Agency and Staff
              Office Head, at his or her discretion, determines that credit should be given based
              on the net savings to the Government from reduced lodging costs, considering the
              value of lost labor time attributable to compensatory time off. The dollar value of
              an hour of compensatory time off for this purpose is equal to the employee’s
              hourly rate of basic pay, as defined in 5 CFR 550.103.

   d.   Time spent traveling to or from a transportation terminal as part of travel away from the
        official duty station.

        (1)   If an employee is required to travel between home and a transportation terminal
              located within the limits of his or her official duty station as part of travel away
              from that duty station, the travel time outside regular working hours to or from the
              terminal is considered to be equivalent to commuting time and is not creditable
              time in travel status.

        (2)   If the transportation terminal is located outside the limits of the employee’s
              official duty station, the travel time outside regular working hours to or from the
              terminal is creditable as time in travel status, but is subject to an offset for the
              time the employee would have spent in normal home-to-work or work-to-home
              commuting on the day(s) of travel.

        (3)   If the employee travels between a worksite and a transportation terminal, the
              travel time outside regular working hours is creditable as time in travel status and
              no commuting time offset applies.


10. CREDITING COMPENSATORY TIME OFF FOR TRAVEL

   a.   Employees must file requests in accordance with their Agency/Staff Office procedures
        within six pay periods of the ending date of travel or their requests may be denied. The
        date this request is made will not affect the time limit on forfeiture of unused
        compensatory time off for travel discussed in Section 12 of this directive.

   b.   If an employee files a request in accordance with the conditions set forth in this
        directive and the procedures established under Section 10a, that employee is entitled to
        credit for compensatory time off for travel under the conditions specified in this
        directive.

   c.   Agency/Staff Office Heads may authorize credit in increments of one-quarter of an
        hour (15 minutes).

   d.   Agency/Staff Office Heads must track compensatory time off for travel under this
        directive separately from other forms of compensatory time off.


                                                6
DR 4050-550-002                                                            June 20, 2008



11. USAGE OF ACCRUED COMPENSATORY TIME OFF FOR TRAVEL

   a.   An employee must request approval from his or her supervisor to schedule the use of
        his or her accrued compensatory time off for travel in accordance with procedures
        established by the Agency/Staff Office Head.

   b.   Compensatory time off may be used when the employee is granted time off from his or
        her scheduled tour of duty established for leave purposes.

   c.   An employee must use earned compensatory time off for travel in increments of one-
        quarter of an hour (15 minutes).

   d.   Compensatory time off for travel must be charged in the chronological order in which it
        was earned. Supervisors should take all necessary steps to avoid situations that might
        result in an employee accumulating compensatory time that cannot be used within the
        period specified in Section 14 below.

   e.   Compensatory time must be used by an employee before he or she may use annual
        leave, provided this shall not result in the employee losing any accumulated annual
        leave.

   f.   Except as provided in Section 12, an employee must use compensatory time off for
        travel by the end of the 26th pay period after the pay period during which it was
        accrued.


12. FORFEITURE OF UNUSED COMPENSATORY TIME OFF FOR TRAVEL

   a.   If an employee fails to use the compensatory time off for travel within 26 pay periods
        after it was accrued, he or she must forfeit the compensatory time off for travel.

   b.   Except as provided in (1) and (2) below, when an employee separates from Federal
        Service, any unused compensatory time off for travel is forfeited. An employee who
        separates or is placed in a leave without pay status in the following circumstances and
        later returns to service with USDA will hold his or her leave in abeyance:

        (1)   The employee separates or is placed in a leave without pay status to perform
              service in the uniformed services (as defined in 38 U.S.C. 4303 and 5 CFR
              353.102) and later returns to service through the exercise of a reemployment right
              provided by law, Executive Order, or regulation; or

        (2)   The employee separates or is placed in a leave without pay status because of an
              on-the-job injury with entitlement to injury compensation under 5 U.S.C. Chapter
              81 and later recovers sufficiently to return to work.

                                               7
DR 4050-550-002                                                             June 20, 2008



        Leave held in abeyance for the above reasons must be used by the end of the 26th pay
        period following the pay period in which the employee returns to duty, or such
        compensatory time off for travel will be forfeited.

   c.   When an employee voluntarily transfers to another Federal Department or Agency
        outside USDA, he or she must forfeit his or her unused compensatory time off for
        travel.

   d.   When an employee transfers to another Agency/Staff Office within the Department, the
        compensatory time off for travel will transfer with the employee subject to the
        limitations set forth in this directive.

   e.   If an employee fails to use his or her compensatory time off for travel by the end of the
        26th pay period after the pay period during which it was earned due to an exigency of
        the service beyond the employee’s control, Agency and Staff Office Heads may extend
        the time limit for using such compensatory time off for travel for up to an additional 26
        pay periods. Extension must be documented, in writing, and approved before the
        earned compensatory time period expires. Compensatory time off for travel not used in
        this 26 pay period extension will be forfeited.

   f.   If an employee moves to a Federal position not covered by this directive, the employee
        forfeits any unused compensatory time off; however, this requirement does not prevent
        the use of another legal authority to give the employee credit for compensatory time off
        equal to the forfeited amount. (See 5 CFR 550.1407(d))

13. PROHIBITION AGAINST PAYMENT FOR UNUSED COMPENSATORY TIME OFF
    FOR TRAVEL

   As provided by 5 U.S.C. 5550b, an individual may not receive payment under any
   circumstances for any unused compensatory time off for travel he or she earned under this
   directive. This prohibition against payment applies to surviving beneficiaries in the event of
   the individual’s death.


14. INAPPLICABILITY OF PREMIUM PAY AND AGGREGATE PAY CAPS

   Accrued compensatory time off for travel under this directive is not considered in applying
   the premium pay limitations established under 5 U.S.C. 5547 and 5 CFR 550.105 through
   550.107 or the aggregate limitation on pay established under 5 U.S.C. 5307 and 5 CFR part
   530, subpart B.




                                                8
