                                U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                       Washington, D.C.

                                                                                  NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION
                                                                                 4030-337-2
 SUBJECT:                                        DATE: November 1, 2010
                                                 OPI:
 Category Rating                                 Office of Human Resources Management


SECTION

1     PURPOSE                                                                            1
2     BACKGROUND                                                                         2
3     REFERENCES                                                                         2
4     APPLICABILITY                                                                      2
5     RESPONSIBILITIES                                                                   3
6     DEFINITIONS                                                                        3
7     POLICY                                                                             4
8     USE OF CATEGORY RATING                                                             4
9     QUALITY CATEGORIES                                                                 4
10    JOB ANNOUNCEMENT REQUIREMENTS                                                      5
11    RANKING APPLICANTS AND APPLYING VETERANS’ PREFERENCE                               5
12    REFERRAL AND SELECTION OF APPLICANTS                                               6
13    MERGING QUALITY APPLICANTS                                                         7
14    REPORTING REQUIREMENTS                                                             8
15    INQUIRIES                                                                          8
      APPENDIX A                                                                         A-1




1.    PURPOSE

      This directive establishes the Department of Agriculture’s policy on the use of Category
      Rating. Category rating is a method of evaluating applicants under the Department’s
      existing Delegated Examining authority and as prescribed in the Office of Personnel
      Management’s Delegated Examining Operations Handbook.

      The purpose of category rating is to increase the number of qualified applicants from
      which to choose while preserving veterans’ preference rights. Applicants with similar
      levels of job-related competencies are placed into the appropriate quality categories, and
      selection is made from the highest quality category.

2.    BACKGROUND
     a.   On June 15, 2004, the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) published final
          regulations that:

          (1)    Permit Federal Departments and agencies to develop and use a category-
                 based rating method as an alternative method to assess applicants for
                 positions filled through delegated examining; and

          (2)    Direct Departments and agencies to establish their own policies in order to
                 use category rating.

     b.   On May 11, 2010, the President issued a memorandum to Heads of Executive
          Departments and Agencies directing them to use the category rating approach for
          all delegated examining, rather than the “rule of three” approach for Federal
          hiring, by November 1, 2010.


3.   REFERENCES

     a.   Chief Human Capital Officers Act of 2002 (Title XIII of the Homeland Security
          Act);

     b.   Title 5, United States Code, Parts 3317, 3318, and 3319;

     c.   Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 337, Subpart C;

     d.   Federal Register (FR), Vol. 69, No. 114, pages 33271 to 33277, dated June 15,
          2004;

     e.   FR, Vol. 68, No. 114, pages 35265 to 35270, dated June 13, 2003;

     f.   Delegated Examining Operations Handbook, Chapter 5, Section B and Chapter 6;

     g.   Uniform Guidelines on Employee Selection Procedures, Title 29, CFR, Part 1607
          and Title 5, CFR Part 300; and

     h.   Presidential Memorandum dated May 11, 2010, “Improving the Federal
          Recruitment and Hiring Process.”


4.   APPLICABILITY

     a.   This issuance:


                                          2
            (1)     Establishes a framework and overall USDA policy for the use of category
                    rating.

            (2)     Applies to all competitive service positions filled through delegated
                    examining procedures, except positions filled using direct-hire authority.

            (3)     Remains in effect until revised, cancelled, or superseded.

     b.     Agencies operating under a Demonstration Project that mandates a particular
            method for assessing applicants should continue to follow their current
            legislation.


5.   RESPONSIBILITIES

     Agency/Staff Office human resources offices that use category rating are responsible for:

     a.     Complying with this policy and all OPM rules, regulations, and policies
            governing category rating;

     b.     Implementing this policy in their serviced agencies, and if needed, issuing
            supplemental directives or guidance that describe any agency-specific policies
            and procedures on category rating; and

     c.     Ensuring that selecting officials who use category rating are adequately trained on
            its use.


6.   DEFINITIONS

     The following definitions provide meanings for words as they are to be interpreted in the
     context of this directive.

     a.     Agency. An organizational unit of the Department, other than a staff office as
            defined below, whose head reports to an Under Secretary.

     b.     Category Rating. A ranking and selection procedure used to assess applicants for
            positions filled through competitive examining (the delegated examining process).
            Under category rating, applicants are evaluated based on job-related criteria and
            placed into predefined quality categories with individuals who possess similar
            levels of job-related competencies or knowledge, skills, and abilities. Category
            rating is synonymous with alternative rating as described in 5 U.S.C. §3319.

     c.     Competency. A measurable pattern of knowledge, skills, abilities, behaviors and
            other characteristics that an individual needs in order to perform work roles or
                                               3
            occupational functions successfully. Examples of competencies include: oral
            communication; flexibility; customer service; and leadership.

     d.     Delegated Examining. The process used to recruit, assess, rank, and select
            individuals for positions in the competitive service. Agencies may conduct the
            process only if granted the authority, in writing, by OPM. The delegated
            examining process allows all qualified U.S. citizens to compete for a position,
            including current and former Federal employees.

     e.     Preference Eligible. A qualified applicant who is entitled to veteran’s preference
            in the hiring process.

     f.     Quality Categories. Groupings of applicants with similar levels of job-related
            competencies.

     g.     Staff Office. A Departmental Administrative Office whose head reports to the
            Secretary or Assistant Secretary.


7.   POLICY

     It is USDA policy to:

     a. Comply with all applicable laws, rules and regulations and OPM policies governing
        category rating;

     b. Provide Agency/Staff Office human resources offices with a category rating
        framework to facilitate and streamline the assessment, referral, and selection of
        applicants for positions filled through the delegated examining process.


8.   USE OF CATEGORY RATING

     Category rating is used to fill permanent, term and temporary positions in the competitive
     service under delegated examining procedures and required for use beginning November
     1, 2010. Category rating is not required when using a direct hire authority.


9.   QUALITY CATEGORIES

     Agency/Staff Office human resources offices may use two or three quality categories to
     assess and rank applicants under category rating. Quality categories are:

     a.     Defined through a job analysis process consistent with the Uniform Guidelines on
            Employee Selection Procedures.
                                             4
      b.     Written to reflect the competencies that are needed to perform the job successfully
             and to distinguish differences in the quality of applicants’ job-related
             competencies.

      c.     Defined before issuing the job announcement.

      Appendix A shows examples of quality categories and assessment methods.
      Agency/Staff Office human resources offices may develop and use other appropriate
      methods for assessing applicants using category rating, provided two or three pre-defined
      quality categories are used. (“Not Qualified” may not be one of the quality categories.
      Only applicants who meet the basic qualification and eligibility requirements will be
      further assessed and placed into a quality category.)

      EXCEPTION: When using OPM’s Standing Registers, human resources offices must
      follow OPM’s established quality categories for each register.


10.   JOB ANNOUNCEMENT REQUIREMENTS

      Job announcements must include the following information for positions filled under
      category rating procedures:

      a.     A statement describing that category rating procedures will be used to rank and
             select eligible applicants. This statement must be included in the “How You Will
             Be Evaluated” or “Basis of Rating” or a comparable section of the job
             announcement.

      b.     A statement describing the quality categories. Categories will be defined as “Best
             Qualified, Well Qualified, and Qualified” or “Best Qualified and Qualified.”

      c.     A statement to describe how veterans’ preference is applied.


11.   RANKING APPLICANTS AND APPLYING VETERANS’ PREFERENCE

      Assessed applicants will be placed in the appropriate quality category and ranked
      according to veterans’ preference eligibility and non-preference eligibility. Within each
      category, all qualified preference eligibles are placed ahead of non-preference eligibles.
      Preference eligibles do not receive additional points under category rating procedures.

      a.     Within each quality category, first list qualified preference eligibles in
             alphabetical order by preference type:

             (1)     Compensable disability of 30 percent or more (CPS);
                                             5
           (2)    Compensable disability of at least 10 percent, but less than 30 percent
                  (CP);

           (3)    Compensable disability of less than 10 percent, derived preference, and
                  other “10 point” preference eligibles (XP); and

           (4)    Other preference eligibles not listed above (TP).

      b.   Then, list non-preference eligibles in alphabetical order.

      c.   For positions other than professional and scientific at the GS-09 level or higher,
           qualified CPS and CP preference eligibles are placed at the top of the highest
           quality category.

      d.   For professional and scientific positions at the GS-9 level or higher, qualified CPS
           and CP preference eligibles are placed at the top of the appropriate quality
           category for which rated.


12.   REFERRAL AND SELECTION OF APPLICANTS

      a.   Under category rating, eligible applicants are referred in the following order:

           (1)    Agency Career Transition Assistance Program (CTAP) and Interagency
                  Career Transition Assistance Program (ICTAP) eligibles. Agencies
                  should follow the procedures in their Career Transition Assistance Plan
                  supplements to determine if these applicants are referred and considered
                  before, or concurrently with, other applicants;

           (2)    Eligible applicants who lost consideration due to erroneous certification;
                  and

           (3)    Eligible applicants in the highest quality category, using either option
                  described below. (Agencies may make this determination on a case-by-
                  case basis.)

                  (a)     All eligible applicants in the highest quality category, with
                          preference eligibles listed ahead of non-preference eligibles; or
                  (b)     Only the preference eligibles in the highest quality category when
                          the number of preference eligibles equals or exceeds the number of
                          positions to be filled.



                                             6
           (4)    If there are fewer than 3 applicants in the highest quality category,
                  applicants from the next lower category may be combined with those in
                  the highest category. (See Section 13.)

      b.   Selections must be made from the highest quality category.

      c.   Any preference eligible in the highest quality category may be selected regardless
           of the type of preference to which he/she is entitled.

      d.   The Selecting Official cannot pass over a preference eligible to select a non-
           preference eligible unless a written objection is submitted and sustained in
           accordance with 5 U.S.C. 3318. Objections to preference eligibles shall be
           processed in accordance with the procedures outlined within Chapter 6 of OPM’s
           Delegated Examining Operations Handbook.

      e.   Agency/Staff Office human resources offices may take action on any request to
           pass over a preference eligible, except where OPM has retained this authority,
           including for:

           (1)    Preference eligibles with a 30% or more compensable disability (CPS)
                  and;

           (2)    Any preference eligible if the pass over request is based on a medical
                  reason.

           NOTE: Requests requiring OPM approval must be submitted to OHRM for
                 review and concurrence.


13.   MERGING QUALITY CATEGORIES

      a.   If there are fewer than three available applicants in the highest quality category,
           the two highest categories may be merged into one category. The newly merged
           category becomes the new highest quality category from which selection can be
           made. All preference eligibles in the merged category must be placed ahead of
           non-preference eligibles.

      b.   Merging is optional and can only be done when there are fewer than three
           applicants in the highest quality category. There is no limit to the number of
           times categories can be merged. The human resources specialist, in conjunction
           with the selecting official, may decide to merge categories at two places in the
           hiring process: (1) Before certifying/issuing the Certificate of Eligibles; or (2)
           Before making a selection if there are fewer than three available applicants
           remaining in the highest quality category.

                                            7
14.   REPORTING REQUIREMENTS

      a.     Annual audits on all certificates will be conducted in accordance with guidance in
             the OPM Delegated Examining Handbook and the USDA OHRM Human
             Resources Accountability process.

      b.     Agency and Staff Office human resources offices that use category rating must
             submit the following to OHRM, on an annual basis, for three years following the
             establishment of this category rating policy:

             (1)    Number of employees hired under category rating;

             (2)    The impact of category rating on the hiring of veterans and minorities,
                    including members of the following groups: American Indian or Alaska
                    Natives; Black or African American, and native Hawaiian or other Pacific
                    Islanders; and

             (3)    The way in which managers were trained in the administration of category
                    rating.

      c.     Unless notified otherwise, annual reports should be submitted as follows:


              Reports covering the period:        Due to OHRM,
                                                  Human Resources Policy Division
              November 1, 2010 through
              October 31, 2011                    November 30, 2011
              November 1, 2011 through
              October 31, 2012                    November 30, 2012
              November 1, 2012 through
              October 31, 2013                    November 22, 2013


15.   INQUIRIES

      Requests for policy interpretations should be directed to OHRM, Human Resources
      Policy Division.




                                              8
                                             APPENDIX A


        SAMPLE ASSESSMENT METHODS UNDER CATEGORY RATING

Several assessment methods may be used under category rating. The following are
examples and may be used at the discretion of the Agency/Staff Office human resources
office. Human resources offices may also develop and use other appropriate methods for
assessing applicants using category rating, provided two or three pre-defined quality
categories are used.

The following examples use three quality categories, but can be modified to use two
quality categories.


    A. Total Score Method

Place eligible applicants into quality categories based on the numerical scores obtained
through an applicant self-assessment system (e.g., Hiring Management or USA Staffing),
or based on the rating received for each job related competency and transmuting the raw
score to a score that ranges from 70 to 100 points. The applicant’s total score used shall
not include additional points for veterans’ preference.* For example:

    •    Best Qualified – Applicants who have a score between 95 and 100.**
    •    Well Qualified – Applicants who have a score between 85 and 94.
    •    Qualified – Applicants who have a score between 70 and 84.


*The numerical score of a preference eligible would not be augmented with additional points for veterans’
preference. Instead, preference eligibles are referred ahead of non-preference eligibles when placed into
the appropriate quality category.

**The cut-off scores for quality categories may be raised or lowered, as appropriate to show
distinguishable differences in applicant quality levels. In addition, numerical cut-offs must be identified
prior to issuing the job announcement. The minimum score for the “Qualified” category should be 70,
which is consistent with traditional delegated examining procedures.




                                                         A-1
    B. Proficiency Level of Job Related Competencies - Option 1

Eligible applicants are placed into quality categories based on their scores in specific job
related competencies. Those placed in the top category using this method are generally
considered as being highly proficient in all the requirements of the job and can perform
effectively in the position almost immediately or with a minimum amount of training
and/or orientation.

For example: Applicants for a Human Resources Specialist job announcement will be
rated on three competencies identified through the job analysis process: (a) Oral
Communication; (b) Written Communication, and (c) Technical Knowledge. Using a
rating schedule developed for the position, assign a rating for each job related
competency at a High level (5 points); Medium Level (3 points); or Low level (1 point).

Place eligible applicants into Quality categories that were pre-defined specifically for this job
announcement as follows:

                                             Quality Categories
                                  Human Resources Specialist, GS-201-12
Best Qualified    Applicant received a rating of “5” level in both Technical Knowledge and Written
                  Communication; and a rating of at least “3” in Oral Communication.
Well-Qualified    Applicant received a rating of “5” level in Technical Knowledge; and at least a rating of “3” in
                  both Written Communication and Oral Communication.
Qualified         Applicant met the basic eligibility and minimum qualifications requirements, but did not meet
                  the definition of Well-Qualified or Best-Qualified described above.


    C. Proficiency Level of Job Related Competencies – Option 2

Using a rating schedule developed for the position, rate each job related competency at a
High level, Medium Level, or Low level. Job related competencies were determined to
be of comparable importance.

Place eligible applicants into quality categories based on the number of job related
competencies rated at each level, as follows:

                                             Quality Categories

Best Qualified    Number of job related competencies rated at the “High” level is greater than, or equal to, the
                  number of job related competencies rated at “Medium” level, with no job related competencies
                  rated at the “Low” level.
Well-Qualified    Number of job related competencies rated at the “Medium” level exceeds the number of job
                  related competencies rated at the “High Level,” with no job related competencies rated at the
                  “Low” level.
Qualified         Applicant met the basic eligibility and minimum qualifications requirements, but did not meet
                  the definition of Well-Qualified or Best-Qualified described above.

    D. Possession Only of Job Related Competencies – Option 1
                                         A-2
Use the job analysis process to (1) identify the job related competencies needed for successful
job performance; and (2) identify indicators that show possession of each job related
competency. In this option (and in Option E below), applicants are assessed only on possession
of the job related competencies; their degree of proficiency is not rated.

For example: Applicants for a Human Resources Specialist job announcement will be
assessed on three job related competencies identified through the job analysis process:
(a) Oral Communication; (b) Written Communication, and (c) Technical Knowledge.
Based on the relative importance of the competencies for successful job performance,
quality categories were defined for this position as follows:

                                             Quality Categories

Best Qualified    Applicant demonstrates possession of all job related competencies identified as important for
                  successful job performance, i.e., Oral Communication, Written Communication, and Technical
                  Knowledge.
Well-Qualified    Applicant demonstrates possession of Technical Knowledge and Oral Communication.
Qualified         Applicant meets the basic eligibility and minimum qualification requirements, but does not
                  meet the definition of Well-Qualified or Best Qualified described above.



    E. Possession Only of Job Related Competencies – Option 2

In this option, all of the job related competencies were determined to be of comparable
importance. Place applicants into quality categories based on the number of job related
competencies they possess. For example:

                                             Quality Categories

Best Qualified    Applicant possesses all of the job related competencies identified as important for successful
                  job performance.
Well-Qualified    Applicant possesses a majority (i.e., more than half) of the job related competencies needed for
                  successful job performance.
Qualified         Applicant meets the basic eligibility and minimum qualification requirements, but does not
                  meet the definition of Well-Qualified or Best-Qualified described above.




                                                    A-3
