                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

     DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION NUMBER:
                             4050-531-002
 SUBJECT:                                                         DATE:
 Pay Administration – Superior Qualifications and Special         May 27, 2014
 Needs Pay Setting Authority                                      OPI: Office of Human
                                                                  Resources Management
                                                                  MManagmentManagement
Section                                                                             Page

1         Purpose                                                                      1
2         Special Instructions                                                         1
3         Coverage                                                                     2
4         Definitions                                                                  2
5         Policy                                                                       2
6         Delegation of Authority                                                      3
7         Responsibilities                                                             3
8         Eligibility for Superior Qualifications Appointment                          4
9         Criteria for Authorizing a Superior Qualifications Appointments              5
10        Determining the Rate of Pay                                                  6
11        Procedure for Requesting Approval of SQA                                     8
12        Relation to Recruitment Incentive                                            9
13        Documentation                                                                9
14        Appendix A/Superior Qualifications Checklist and Supplemental
          Approval Form                                                                A-1


1.        PURPOSE

          The purpose of this directive is to set forth the U.S. Department of Agriculture's
          (USDA) policy on the use of Superior Qualifications Authority (SQA).


2.        SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS

          This directive provides policies and procedures for requesting and authorizing
          the use of SQA to a General Schedule (GS) position in accordance with the
          provisions of Title 5 United States Code (U.S.C.), Section 5333 and the Code
          of Federal Regulations (CFR), 5 CFR Part 531, Subpart B, 5 CFR 531.212 and
          Guide to Processing Personnel Actions.

          Supplementation Guidance: Agencies and Staff Offices may not
          supplement this directive without prior approval of the Director, Office of
          Human Resources Management (OHRM). Approved supplemental


                                                 1
     regulations or internal guidance issued by Agencies or Staff Offices may
     not conflict with the contents of this directive. Agencies and Staff Offices
     must make this directive, and any approved supplemental regulations or
     guidance, available to all employees.


3.   COVERAGE

     This program applies to all USDA employees who are covered by 5 U.S.C. 6301(2). It is
     not appropriate for Federal agencies to use the SQA to compete with each other.

     Comparable authority exists to set advanced in-hire rates for Federal Wage System
     (FWS) employees. The rules governing these appointments are contained in OPM's
     Operating Manual for the FWS.


4.   DEFINITIONS

     Superior Qualifications: Unusually high, unique or superior qualifications particularly
     suited to the position in comparison with other qualified candidates. In addition, the
     candidate would be losing salary and/or benefits if employed at the first step of the
     grade; and

     Special Need: A documented need for a specific set of skills and/or expertise and
     recruitment has met with limited success. An individual who is singularly suited to a
     unique Departmental function; one who has special though not necessarily superior
     qualifications that meets the need of a position or a documented area of chronic labor
     shortage.


5.   POLICY

     Superior qualifications appointments, also known as appointments above the
     minimum or advanced-in-hire rates, are designed to help agencies compete with the
     private sector to attract applicants with superior or unique qualifications. Although
     this is a beneficial and effective authority, SQA is not simply intended to match a
     candidate’s existing rate of pay (current salary or competing job offer); it is a tool to
     help USDA appoint the best talent. Agencies have a fiscal responsibility to offer the
     lowest salary necessary to attract a candidate. The rate of pay may not exceed that
     authorized by regulation (i.e., may not exceed the step 10 of the grade to which the
     candidate is appointed).

     Appointments using SQA are set at a rate that approximates the applicant’s existing
     rate of pay. The rate of pay to be offered may not exceed a candidates existing pay
     by more than 20 percent (existing pay to include incentives, consulting pay, or fringe
     benefits).



                                              2
     A written determination to authorize a rate of pay above the minimum rate of a GS
     grade (i.e., step 1) or equivalent for the pay band must be requested and approved
     before the applicant enters on duty in the position to which appointed.

     A superior qualifications appointment should only be considered when the candidate
     otherwise might decline the position. The candidate must first decline a valid job
     offer at the step 1 of the grade or pay band. The declination of the original job offer
     must be documented in the file.

     Superior qualifications appointments are for journeyman level (e.g., career ladder
     position is a GS-9-12 with GS-12 as the journeyman/Full Performance Level) or
     senior level positions (e.g. experts, chiefs, etc. usually GS-13-15). Director,
     OHRM, must approve any request for exceptions.

     Superior qualifications appointments may not be made on the basis of the
     individual’s race, color, sex, age, religion, national origin or disabling condition.


6.   DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY

     The authority is hereby delegated to Under Secretaries, Assistant Secretaries, Agency
     Heads and Staff Office Heads, to administer the use of superior qualifications
     appointments. Under Secretaries, Assistant Secretaries, Agency Heads and Staff Office
     Heads may re-delegate this authority to no lower in the organization than their Mission
     Area Human Resources or Staff Office Director.

     At the discretion of the Director, OHRM, or designee, the delegations of authorities
     made under this directive may be revoked at any time where violations of this and other
     governing policies are discovered. The delegation of authority will be reinstated by the
     Director, OHRM, or designee, when the Agency and Staff Office puts the appropriate
     management controls in place to correct the violation.


7.   RESPONSIBILITIES

     a. Director, Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM):

         (1)    Sets policy and provides overall technical guidance and direction for this
                directive;

         (2)    Provides staff assistance to Under Secretaries, Assistant Secretaries, Agency
                Heads, Staff Office Heads, and their designees;

         (3)    Monitors compliance with Departmental policy; and




                                              3
          (4)   Reports to the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) as required.

     b. Under Secretaries, Assistant Secretaries, Agency Heads, and Staff Office Heads:

          (1)   Issue written procedures that address how superior qualifications
                determinations will be made and considered in their individual
                organizations;

          (2)   Ensure that superior qualifications determinations in their organizations are
                made in accordance with the requirements set forth in this and other
                governing documents;

          (3)   Monitor and assess implementation; and

          (4)   Report to OHRM, as requested.

          (5)   Agency and Staff Office Heads may re-delegate this authority to their
                Deputy Administrator for Management and/or their Mission Area Human
                Resources Director.


8.   ELIGIBILTY FOR SUPERIOR QUALIFICATIONS APPOINTMENT

     a.   Eligibility and 90 Day Rule

          To be eligible for an SQA, this must be the first Federal appointment for a
          prospective employee, or he/she must be returning from break in Federal service
          of at least 90 consecutive calendar days. Employment with the Government of
          the District of Columbia which began before Oct. 1, 1987, is considered as
          Federal service when determining eligibility.

     b.   Exception to 90 Day Rule

          There are certain types of service which do not block the use of the superior
          qualifications authority regardless of whether they occur immediately before the
          appointment is made. They are:

          (1)   Employment under a time-limited or non-permanent appointment in the
                competitive or excepted service (excluding Schedule C appointments under 5
                CFR 213);

          (2)   Employment under an appointment as an expert or consultant under 5 U.S.C.
                3109 and 5 CFR part 304;

          (3)   Employment under a provisional appointment designated under 5 CFR
                316.403; or



                                            4
          (4)     Employment under an Internship Program appointment under 5 CFR
                 213.3402 (Pathways).

9.   CRITERIA FOR AUTHORIZING A SUPERIOR QUALIFICATIONS APPOINTMENT

     An eligible candidate may be considered for SQA when the candidate (1) has
     superior qualifications, or (2) meets special need(s) of the agency.

     Superior qualifications appointments may be approved for positions at any grade of the
     General Schedule (or equivalent pay band) in the competitive or excepted service,
     whether permanent, temporary, full-time, or less than full-time. This applies to
     positions with regular or special rates.

     Even though these hiring actions are referred to as superior qualifications appointments,
     the authority to make them is solely a pay setting authority. It is not an independent
     authority to make the actual appointment. To use this authority, there must be an
     independent source of appointing authority such as being within reach as the result of a
     valid employment and recruitment process, being eligible for reinstatement, or being
     eligible under another appropriate hiring authority.

     a. Superior Qualifications

        Superior qualifications determination must be based either on the relevance of the
        candidate's experience and education to the particular work he or she will do, or on
        the quality of the candidate's accomplishments compared to others in their field.
        These qualities must be significantly higher than that needed to be minimally
        qualified for the position and be of a more specialized quality compared to other
        candidates;

     b. Critical/Special Need

        In rare situations, USDA will have a special need for an applicant who would add
        exceptional value to an agency but who does not meet one or both of the criteria
        described in this directive (does not have superior qualifications and/or is not giving
        up or foregoing income to accept the position). In these cases, an appointment
        above the minimum rate can still be made if it can be demonstrated that the
        applicant is needed to support an agency’s mission or significant project.

        However, it is unlikely that an applicant would meet the special need criteria if
        he/she does not have superior qualifications. In most cases the special need criteria
        would be used when the applicant is seeking a salary substantially higher (no more
        than 20%) of existing income or any firm job offers.

     c. Pay Rate Determination




                                             5
         In determining whether a superior qualifications appointment should be
         authorized, the recommending, reviewing and approving officials must thoroughly
         consider the potential difficulty that would be encountered of not filling a position
         with a high quality applicant or in meeting the special agency need. Justification
         for superior qualifications must be in writing and address one or more of the
         following as they apply to the request:

         (1) NOTE: Documentation of the consideration of a Recruitment
             incentive is outlined in Section 12, Relation to Recruitment Incentive.


10.   DETERMINING THE RATE OF PAY

      If the applicant is offered a SQA-based higher rate, an effort should be made by
      management to maintain equity between the pay of the new appointee and that of
      current employees doing comparable work within the work unit.

      Decision to set pay higher than the first step should be based on the candidate’s
      credentials that are not commonly found in the agency workforce or candidate pool
      and indicate the selected candidate’s competencies clearly exceed those of the other
      candidates. Decisions to pay above the first step should be based on a variety of
      factors that include, but are not limited to exceptional or high level work experience,
      professional licenses, and post-graduate degrees related to the position being filled
      when compared to others in the field.

      The SQA supported rate of pay should ensure that the initial compensation offer is
      sufficiently competitive to attract the applicant. In determining the pay rate the
      following factors (as applicable) must be addressed and considered in the justification:

      a. Matching Income

         The fact that an individual has superior qualifications by itself is not sufficient to
         justify an appointment above the minimum. It must be shown that accepting the
         appointment at the first step of the grade would cause the applicant to forfeit
         existing income or income which he/she is likely to earn.

      b. Fringe Benefits

         Fringe benefits may be considered if they substantially exceed the government's
         benefits package. It would not be proper to consider fringe benefits that are illegal for
         the government to provide; for example, transportation to and from work.

      c. Cost of Living

         Differences in the cost of living may be considered taking into account the
         location where the salary was or would be earned and comparing the salary to



                                               6
   payable rates of basic pay in the same location. Salaries which appear to be the
   same may be significantly different if differences in the cost of living are
   included.

d. Other Sources of Income

   In addition to their primary incomes, applicants may have other sources of
   income such as consulting fees. When accepting a Federal position, they may
   have to give these up, perhaps because of conflict of interest provisions or
   scheduling problems. If it is the Federal employment that will cause applicants
   to give up these sources of income, that income may be considered when
   determining the appropriate salary to offer. Income may not be considered if
   applicants will not have to give it up when accepting the Federal position.

   If an applicant can demonstrate a consistent pattern (3 to 5 years) of receiving
   bonuses or pay increases, these may be factored in when considering the
   income that would be forfeited.

e. Income from Work on a Less than Full-Time Basis

   If an individual does not have a salary but earns income from consulting fees or
   other work that is less than full-time, agencies should try to examine the pattern of
   earnings over several (3-5) years. The existence of one big contract should not
   necessarily be used to calculate the income that the applicant would be giving up.
   On the other hand, if he/she can show that this level of income is likely to continue,
   it should be considered. Steady increases in income may also be taken into account.

   It is not appropriate to prorate a salary that is earned on a part-time basis.

   It is not appropriate for agencies to use the superior qualifications authority to
   compete with each other. Thus, for example, if an individual has earned their
   primary income as a Federal consultant under 5 USC 3109, it would not be
   permissible to use those earnings to justify an appointment above the minimum.

f. Private Sector Offer

   There may be situations when an individual has a private sector offer that is
   substantially higher than his/her recurrent income. In these situations, the job offer
   may be considered. The private sector job offer must be documented in writing and
   dated within the past 30 days.

g. No Salary Information

   If an applicant is not currently earning a salary commensurate with his/her
   qualifications and does not have a specific job offer in hand but qualifications
   indicate that the candidate would command a higher salary, the agency could base



                                         7
           its salary offer on the salary that the applicant could reasonably expect to command.
           This situation is typical with applicants who have just completed a PhD program or
           law school and in some instances work for a nonprofit organization. This salary
           determination should be based on Bureau of Labor Statistics information, salary
           surveys, and/or current recruitment experiences for similar positions.

      h. Other Considerations

           (1) Budget considerations and policies;

           (2) The rates of pay previously authorized in similar situations;

           (3) The desirability of the geographic location, duties, and/or work environment
               associated with the position; and

           (4) Any other appropriate factor(s)


11.   PROCEDURE FOR REQUESTING APPROVAL OF SQA

      The recommending official (likely the supervisor of the position being filled) will
      prepare the request for superior qualifications appointment, including the justification
      and forward it in accordance with this directive and agency policy for consideration and
      approval. The written request should be initiated as soon as potential use of the incentive
      is identified and must be approved before the official offer of employment is
      made. Applicants should be advised that the offer is tentative until the request is
      approved. Requests for setting pay above the minimum level must include the following:

      a. Name of the appointee;

      b. Applicant’s resume or other form submitted as application for Federal employment;

      c. A copy of the position description, including the title, series, and grade of the
         position to which the applicant will be appointed;

      d. List of recruiting sources used along with a description and results of recent
         recruitment efforts (the Servicing HR Office (HRO) can assist with this information);

      e. Copy of Job Opportunity Announcement/Vacancy Announcement;

      f.   Recommended rate above minimum rate;

      g. Written justification for the appointment and rate taking into consideration criteria in
         sections 9 and 10 and the checklist;




                                                 8
      h. Reasons for authorizing a rate above minimum rate instead of, or in addition to, a
         recruitment incentive; and

      i. Declination of step 1 offer from employee.

      Notification of approval will be sent to the requesting/hiring office and to the Servicing
      HRO for action.


12.   RELATION TO RECRUITMENT INCENTIVE

      Regulations require that when considering appointments above the minimum rate,
      agencies must determine whether a recruitment incentive could meet the need instead of
      appointing at the higher step. In certain situations disparity between the employee's
      current income and the Federal pay scale is so great that both an appointment above the
      minimum and a recruitment incentive may be deemed necessary. This is permitted, but
      it is important to document both actions thoroughly. For information on the
      Recruitment Incentive please see Department Manual 4050-575-001, Pay
      Administration – Recruitment, Relocation and Retention Incentives, 7/21/2010.


13.   DOCUMENTATION

      Use of the SQA is monitored by organizations such as OPM and the U.S. Government
      Accountability Office in addition to USDA’s internal oversight. Therefore, it is
      important that agencies thoroughly document all cases. These records will be
      maintained for a minimum of two years after the employee’s entrance on duty date on
      the right side of the employees Official Personnel Folder (OPF). These records must
      include the documentation listed in sections 9, 10 and 12 and the Appendix A. This
      documentation will be made available for review upon request by OPM, authorized
      OHRM and agency officials (e.g., as part of Delegated Examining Unit audits, and
      Human Resources office and program reviews), and will be provided in response to
      special requests from another oversight organization.

      The documentation must be complete and maintained to permit reconstruction of the
      action. Documentation must include:

      a. The superior qualifications of the individual or special need of the agency that
         justified use of this authority;

      b. The factors considered in determining the individual's existing pay and, if
         applicable the reason for setting pay at a rate higher than that needed to match
         existing pay; and




                                               9
c. The reasons for authorizing a higher rate instead of or in addition to a recruitment
   incentive.


                                 -END-




                                         10
                                                                      Appendix A
                                                                     Form AD-3077


      USDA SUPERIOR QUALIFICATIONS CHECKLIST AND SUPPLEMENTAL
                           APPROVAL FORM
This form must be completed and placed on the right side of the OFFICIAL PERSONNEL FOLDER (OPF) of any applicant who is approved for an appointment
at an advanced rate under this authority.
Name:                                                                                              Grade and Step Requested
(Last, First, M.I.)
OFFICE /POSITION:
                                                         APPOINTMENT INFORMATION
1. The appointing authority?
2. Is authority appropriate?                                                           Yes         No
                                                         QUALIFICATIONS
1. Does the justification memorandum show that the candidate’s qualifications are demonstrably superior to what would be
expected of a well-qualified candidate and that the employee is forfeiting income?
                                                                                       Yes          No
OR
2. Does the justification memorandum and resume clearly show the candidate has a unique combination of education and/or
experience that meets the special needs of the agency?                                 Yes          No
                                                  EXISTING PAY/SALARY HISTORY
                              The justification memorandum includes the following (check all that apply):
    Salary               Fringe Benefits                   Bonuses                 Other Outside Income
    Bona Fide Offer (30 days)                    Avg. Salary for occupation                Forfeited Income
    Shortage Category                            Reasonable expectation of                 Other
    Special Need                              Employment
Is all required documentation provided (salary, education, income forfeiture, etc.)? Yes           No
    Complete and signed memorandum from Manager with justification for a superior qualifications appointment
    Copy of Position Description
    Description of the superior qualifications
    Candidate’s resume package
    All certificates referred to the manager for selection
    Income verification (W-2, tax return, check stubs, 1099’s, etc.)

                                                              FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY


Recommended by:_____________________________                                                     _________________
                                 Human Resources Specialist                                               Date




Concurrence by:_____________________________                                                      _________________
   (optional)          Agency/Staff Office Human Resources Officer                                       Date




    Approved             Grade/Step Approved:________________                                      Disapproved



Reviewed by:_____________________________                                                   _________________
                      Mission Area Human Resources Director                                             Date




                                                                           A-1
