                          U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


                                                                                    Number:
           DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                  4080-811-01
SUBJECT:                                           DATE:
USDA Child Care Tuition                                   August 23, 2002
Assistance Program
                                                   OPI:
                                                   Office of Human Resources Management

1      PURPOSE

       The regulation sets forth the authority, policy, and procedures for
       implementing the Department of Agriculture (USDA) Child Care Tuition
       Assistance Program (CCTAP).


2      POLICY

       Section 630 of Public Law Number 107-67, the Treasury and General
       Government Appropriations Act, 2002, permanently authorizes Executive
       agencies that provide or propose to provide child care services for Federal
       employees to use appropriated funds otherwise available to such agency for
       salaries and expenses to provide child care in a Federal or leased facility, or
       through contract, for civilian employees of such agency.

       USDA supports programs that provide child care tuition assistance to lower
       income employees and that allows them to receive quality child care
       services. We also recognize that this program assists in the recruitment and
       retention of employees while also improving morale.

       Mission areas/agencies/staff offices are authorized to provide child care
       tuition assistance, and may use appropriated funds, including revolving
       funds, that are otherwise available to agencies for salaries and expenses, to
       assist lower income Federal employees with the cost of child care in child
       care centers and licensed family child care homes. Each mission
       area/agency/staff office that provides child care tuition assistance will
       comply with the USDA CCTAP procedures (Appendix A) to ensure that the
       program may be treated as a dependent care assistance program under
       Section 129 of the Internal Revenue Code.


3      DEFINITIONS

      See Appendix A for definitions related to the USDA
      CCTAP.
4   AUTHORITIES

    a    Section 630 of Public Law Number 107-67, Treasury and General
         Government Appropriations Act, 2002.

    b    5 CFR 792, Office of Personnel Management regulation
         implementing the child care tuition assistance legislation.

    c    Section 129 of the Internal Revenue Code.


5   REFERENCES

    a    Office of Personnel Management Guide for Implementing the Child
         Care Legislation dated March 2000.

    b    USDA Child Care Tuition Assistance Program procedures
         (Appendix A).


6   RESPONSIBILITIES

    a    The Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA) will:

         Advise the Secretary of Agriculture, mission area/agency heads, and
         staff office directors in the development and implementation of
         policies, programs, and oversight of the USDA child care tuition
         assistance program.

    b    The Director, Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM)
         will:

         (1)    Advise the ASA in planning, developing, and implementing
                policies, programs, and system to manage the USDA child
                care tuition assistance programs; and,

         (2)    Provide and interpret USDA policies and standards for child
                care tuition assistance programs.

         (3)    Track the funds used in the CCTAP and annually report the
                results to the Office of Personnel Management.




                                    2
c   The Director, Safety, Health and Employee Welfare Division will:

    (1)    Provide oversight of the CCTAP; and,

    (2)    Provide agency officials with technical assistance and
           consultative services for complex child care tuition
           assistance issues.

d   Mission Areas/Agency Heads/Staff Office Heads will:

    (1)    Administer the child care tuition assistance program, when
           feasible, and when it will not have a negative impact on the
           mission.

    (2)    Follow the CCTAP procedures in Appendix A when
           implementing the child care tuition assistance program
           including the format of Appendix B; and the “Model
           Eligibility and Benefits Schedule” of Appendix C, when
           feasible, to implement the program.

    (3)    Designate a CCTAP Coordinator to oversee the program.

    (4)    Utilize a single contractor whenever possible to administer
           the program in order to reduce administrative costs.

    (5)    Submit a copy of their CCTAP to the Director of
           OHRM/SHEWD; Room 3027, South Building, Washington,
           D.C. 20250-9606, for review prior to implementation.

    (6)    Once approved by OHRM, the mission area/agency/staff
           office’s CCTAP will become a part of the USDA CCTAP
           and included in Appendix A. Any changes to the CCTAP
           must be provided to the CCTAP Administrator.

    (7)    Ensure any labor-management relations obligations are
           fulfilled prior to implementing the CCTAP.

    (8)    Track the utilization of the funds in the CCTAP and annually
           report the results to OHRM.




                              3
7   INQUIRIES

    Direct all inquiries to the Office of Human Resources Management; Safety,
    Health and Employee Welfare Division; Room 3027 South Building,
    Washington, D.C. 20250; telephone number (202) 720-8248.

                                  -End-




                                    4
DR 4080-811-01                                                               August 23, 2002


                                                                         Appendix A

                  CHILD CARE TUITION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

ARTICLE 1 – PURPOSE OF THIS PROGRAM

1.1.   The Department of Agriculture (hereafter referred to as USDA) establishes this
       program under Public Law 107-67, Section 630, to subsidize a portion of the cost
       of dependent care incurred by USDA’s employees.

1.2.   USDA also intends that the program qualify as a program providing dependent
       care assistance under Internal Revenue Code Section 129. Only the subsidies
       provided under these procedures for eligible child care expenses on behalf of a
       qualifying child who is also a qualifying dependent will be eligible for exclusion
       from the participant’s gross income under Section 129(a). Subsidies disbursed on
       behalf of a qualifying child who is not also a qualifying dependent must be
       included in the participant’s gross income.

ARTICLE 2 – DEFINITIONS

2.1.   “Benefits” means the amounts paid to participants under the plan to subsidize
       eligible child care expenses paid or incurred by the participant.

2.2.   “Child” means a member of a household maintained by an employee who bears
       the following relationship to the employee:

       (a)       A biological child who lives with the employee;

       (b)       An adopted child;

       (c)       A stepchild;

       (d)       A foster child;

       (e)       A child for whom a judicial determination of support has been obtained; or

       (f)       A child to whose support the employee who is a parent or legal guardian
                 makes regular and substantial contributions.

2.3    “Child Care Tuition Assistance Program Administrator” (CCTAP Administrator)
       means the Director of the Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM),
       who oversees the program and assures that child care tuition assistance offered by
       the organization meets all requirements of these procedures. Mission
       Areas/Agency Heads and Staff Office Directors implementing the child care
       tuition assistance program may designate a program administrator for their
       organization.



                                            A-1
DR 4080-811-01                                                                August 23, 2002




2.4.    “Child Care Tuition Assistance Program Coordinator” (CCTAP Coordinator)
        means the official within each organization who has been authorized to
        implement child care subsidies under this program for employees within that
        organization.

2.5.    “Code” means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.

2.6.    “Dependent” means any individual who is a dependent of a participant within the
        meaning of Code Section 152(a).

2.7.    “Earned Income” means all income, as defined under Code Section 32 (c)(2),
        including from wages, salaries, tips and other employee compensation, and net
        earnings from self-employment, but does not include any amounts received: (i) as
        pre-tax benefits under Code Section 129 on behalf of a qualifying dependent
        under the CCTAP or any other dependent care assistance program; (ii) as a
        pension or annuity; or (iii) as unemployment or workers’ compensation.

2.8.    “Educational Institution” means any college or university, the primary function
         of which is the presentation of a formal instruction and that normally maintains a
         regular faculty and curriculum and normally has a regularly enrolled body of
         students in attendance at the place where its educational activities are regularly
         carried on.

2.9.    “Effective Date” means (date selected for start of program).

2.10. “Eligible Child Care Expenses” means expenses incurred by a participant for
       qualifying services which are paid to a qualifying provider who is not: (i) a
       dependent of a participant or a dependent of the spouse of a participant, (ii) a
       child of a participant under the age of 19, and which are incurred to enable the
       participant or the participant’s spouse to be gainfully employed.

2.11. “Eligible Employee” means an individual employed on a full-time or part-time
      basis by an organization of USDA which offers child care subsidies, and meeting
      the eligibility requirements described in the employing organization CCTAP.

2.12.   “Employee” means an employee of USDA.

2.13.   “Highly Compensated Employee” means any person who is a highly
        compensated employee as defined in Code Section 414(q).

2.14.   “Maintaining a Household” means that an employee or, if married, an
        employee and spouse together, furnish over one half the cost of maintaining a
        household.




                                            A-2
DR 4080-811-01                                                                 August 23, 2002


2.15.   “Organization” means a major component of USDA such as a mission area,
        agency, Departmental Staff Office, or Office of the Secretary.

2.16.   “Participant” means any employee who has satisfied the eligibility requirements
         of Section 3.1, who has made application and been accepted by the CCTAP
         Coordinator for benefits under this program.

2.17.   “Program” means the USDA Child Care Tuition Assistance Program.

2.18.   “Program Year” means the 12-month period commencing on January 1 and
        ending on December 31.

2.19. “Qualifying Child” means a child of a participant who is: (i) age 13 or younger;
      or (ii) under age 18 and is physically or mentally incapable of caring for himself
      or herself.

2.20. “Qualifying Day Care Center” means a day care center, as described in Code
      Section 21 and regulations there under, that (i) complies with all applicable laws
      and regulations of the State and town, city or village in which it is located, (ii) is
      licensed to provide day care services in the state or location in which the day care
      center operates, (iii) provides care for more than six individuals (other than
      individuals who reside at the day care center) and (iv) receives a fee, payment or
      grant for services for any of the individuals to whom it provides services
      (regardless of whether the facility is operated for a profit).

2.21. “Qualifying Dependent” means: (i) a dependent of a participant who is under
      the age of 13; or (ii) a dependent of a participant who is under the age of 18 and
      who is physically or mentally incapable of caring for himself or herself.

2.22. “Qualifying Provider” for subsidies paid out of appropriated funds means an
      individual or a qualifying day care center licensed to provide child care services
      in the State or location in which they operate.

2.23. “Qualifying Services” means services performed:

        (a)      In the home of the participant, or outside the home of the participant, or at
                 a qualifying day care center;

        (b)      For the care of a qualifying child or qualifying dependent of the
                 participant;

        (c)      To enable the participant or the participant’s spouse to remain gainfully
                 employed; and

        (d)      For the primary purpose of assuring the qualifying child’s or qualifying
                 dependent’s well being and protection.



                                             A-3
DR 4080-811-01                                                                 August 23, 2002




        Qualifying services do not include services provided at a camp where the
        qualifying child or qualifying dependent stays overnight.

2.24.   “Spouse” means the husband or wife of a participant but does not include an
        individual legally separated from a participant under a decree of legal separation.

2.25. “Student” means an individual who during each of five calendar months during a
      plan year is a full-time student at an educational institution.

2.26.   “USDA” means Department of Agriculture.

ARTICLE 3 – ELIGIBILITY AND PARTICIPATION

3.1.    All employees employed by an organization that has a child care tuition assistance
        program will receive at least an annual notice in writing or electronically of their
        potential eligibility for child care tuition assistance.

3.2.    An employee who is employed by an organization that has a child care tuition
        assistance program and meets the eligibility requirements described in the
        CCTAP is an eligible employee.

3.3.    An employee is eligible for this program immediately upon becoming an eligible
        employee.

3.4.    An eligible employee will become a participant in the program upon application
        for benefits, and approval by the organization’s CCTAP Coordinator.

3.5.    If participant ceases to be an eligible employee, he or she will no longer be
        eligible to receive benefits under the program. If the employee again becomes
        an eligible employee, he or she may again become a participant in the program
        by applying and being accepted.

ARTICLE 4 – BENEFITS

4.1.    A participant in the program will be eligible to receive benefits under the
        procedures for all eligible child care expenses incurred by the participant or his or
        her spouse subject to the limitations of Article 6.

4.2.    Benefit Amounts.

        (a)      Benefits will be provided as a percentage of the eligible child care
                 expenses according to a schedule based on the participant’s total family
                 income.




                                             A-4
DR 4080-811-01                                                                 August 23, 2002


       (b)       The organization’s CCTAP Coordinator may adjust their organization’s
                 schedules in their CCTAP as necessary based on the availability of
                 funding for the program and to maintain an equitable distribution of
                 benefits for all eligible employees,

       (c)       As changes are made, organizations will issue amendments to their
                 programs noting the effective date and provisions of the adjusted benefits.

4.3.   A participant will be entitled to benefits under these procedures only for eligible
       child care expenses incurred after the later of; (a) the date he or she becomes a
       participant in the program; or (b) the effective date of the program.

4.4.   Each participant who desires to receive a benefit under the program for eligible
       child care expenses incurred by the employee for qualifying services must submit
       to his/her CCTAP Coordinator, on a form to be provided by the Coordinator, a
       statement containing the following information:

       (a)       Name, home address and employment information for each of the child’s
                 parents;

       (b)       Name, date of birth, child care enrollment information and weekly cost for
                 each child to be covered;

       (c)       Gross annual salaries of the father, mother and/or guardian, as appropriate,
                 and total gross family income as reported on the most recent Federal
                 income tax return;

       (d)       Amount and source of any other State, county or local child care subsidies
                 or tuition assistance;

       (e)       Completed and signed child care provider information form, along with
                 proof of the provider’s licensure and the provider’s Federal tax
                 identification number; and

       (f)       Such other information or documents as the CCTAP Coordinator may
                 require to administer the plan.

4.5.   Following receipt of the information required in Section 4.4, the CCTAP
       Coordinator will notify the participant whether he or she is eligible to receive
       benefits.

4.6.   Approval for and payment of benefits will be subject to the availability of
       appropriated funds, including revolving funds.

4.7.   If a participant ceases to be an eligible employee:




                                             A-5
DR 4080-811-01                                                                  August 23, 2002


       (a)       No benefits will be paid for eligible child care expenses incurred after the
                 date the participant ceases to be an eligible employee; and

       (b)       Unless the participant was discharged from employment for cause,
                 requests for benefits may be made after the date of termination for eligible
                 child care expenses incurred prior to the date of termination.

4.8.   The participant is responsible for notifying his/her CCTAP Coordinator
       immediately of any change to information submitted for the purpose of qualifying
       for benefits.

ARTICLE 5 – AUTHORIZATION AND PAYMENT OF BENEFITS

5.1.   At the end of each calendar month, the CCTAP Coordinator will send an invoice
       approval form to the qualifying provider named by the participant on his or her
       benefits application.

5.2.   The qualifying provider will certify on the invoice approval form that the
       qualifying services for that billing period were actually performed on behalf of the
       participant’s qualifying child.

5.3.   The participant will certify on the invoice approval form that the participant’s
       qualifying child in fact received the qualifying services for that billing period.

5.4.   The qualifying provider will then submit the completed invoice approval form to
       the CCTAP Coordinator for review and payment.

5.5.   The CCTAP Coordinator will review the submitted invoice approval form and
       may pay the benefit amount directly to the qualifying provider. Any amounts
       due the qualifying provider over and above that paid by the CCTAP Coordinator
       is the sole responsibility of the participant.

ARTICLE 6 - LIMITATONS ON BENEFITS

6.1.   The following amounts will not be subject to exclusion from the participant’s
       gross income:

       (a)       Benefits payable for eligible child care expenses on behalf of a qualifying
                 child who is not a qualifying dependent; or

       (b)       Benefits payable for eligible child care expenses that exceed the following
                 maximum amounts for the program year:

                 (i)    For a participant who is not married at the close of the calendar
                        year, the lesser of the participant’s earned income for the program
                        year (after all reductions in compensation), or $5,000;



                                             A-6
DR 4080-811-01                                                                   August 23, 2002




                 (ii)   For a participant who is married at the close of the program year,
                        the least amount of the following:

                        (a)     The participant’s earned income for the calendar year;

                        (b)     The earned income of the participant’s spouse for the
                                calendar year;

                        (c)     $5,000, if the participant and his or her spouse file a joint
                                Federal income tax return; or

                        (d)    $2,500, if the participant and his or her spouse file
                               a separate Federal income tax returns.

       If the foregoing amounts are changed by an amendment to Code Section 129, the
       amounts set forth shall be adjusted automatically to reflect the new amounts.

6.2.   For purposes of Section 6.1, a spouse of a participant who is not employed during
       any month in which the participant incurs eligible child care expenses, and which
       spouse is either physically or mentally incapable of caring for himself or herself
       or is a student, will be deemed to have earned income for such month of:

       (a)       $200, if there is one qualifying dependent for whom the participant incurs
                 eligible child care expenses; or

       (b)       $400, if there is more than one qualifying dependent for whom the
                 participant incurs eligible child care expenses.

6.3.   In accordance with Code Section 129(d), the average benefits provided to
       participants who are not highly compensated employees will be at least 55 percent
       of the average benefits provided to highly compensated employees. The
       organization’s CCTAP Coordinator may adjust the benefits payable to highly
       compensated employees to assure that the program remains in compliance with
       this provision.

ARTICLE 7 – FUNDING

7.1.   USDA organizations that offer child care tuition assistance will authorize the
       amounts required to pay benefits under these procedures from appropriated funds,
       including revolving funds. There will be no special fund out of which benefits are
       paid, nor will participants be required to make a contribution as a condition of
       receiving benefits.




                                             A-7
DR 4080-811-01                                                                  August 23, 2002


ARTICLE 8 – PLAN ADMINISTRATION

8.1.   USDA will administer the CCTAP according to its terms and subject to applicable
       law, for the exclusive benefit of persons entitled to participate in the program,
       without discrimination among them. In addition to all other powers provided by
       these procedures, USDA has authority to:

       (a)       Make and enforce rules and regulations as it deems necessary or proper to
                 efficiently administer the CCTAP;

       (b)       Interpret the program in good faith, and its interpretations will be final and
                 conclusive on all persons claiming benefits under the CCTAP;

       (c)       Decide all questions concerning the plan and the eligibility of any person
                 to participate in the CCTAP;

       (d)       Appoint agents, counsel, accountants, consultants and other persons as
                 needed to help administer the CCTAP; and

       (e)       Allocate and delegate, in writing, its responsibilities under the CCTAP.

8.2.   Organizations which elect to offer child care tuition assistance under this CCTAP
       must submit to the CCTAP Administrator a statement in a format prescribed by
       the CCTAP Administrator (Appendix B) that includes:

       (a)       The formula for determining eligibility for child care subsidies in that
                 organization;

       (b)       Procedures for notifying employees of the availability of benefits;

       (c)       The application process;

       (d)       The name, phone number and mailing address of the Child Care Tuition
                 Assistance Program Coordinator;

       (e)       Whether the program will be administered in-house or under contract;

       (f)       The name and mailing address of the official designated to serve as the
                 reviewing official for denial of claims under Article 9 below, if different
                 from the CCTAP Coordinator;

       (g)       The effective date of the program; and

       (h)       The signature of the organization’s head, or the person delegated authority
                 to act in his/her behalf, and effective date of the program.




                                              A-8
DR 4080-811-01                                                                August 23, 2002


8.3.   USDA organizations will make available to each eligible employee such records
       under the CCTAP as pertains to the eligible employee, by request under the
       Privacy Act.

8.4.   In administering the program, OHRM will be entitled, to the extent permitted by
       law, to rely conclusively on all tables, valuations, certificates, opinions and
       reports that are furnished by accountants, counsel or other experts employed or
       engaged, by USDA.

8.5.   Whenever, in the administration of the program, any discretionary action by
       USDA organizations are required, USDA organizations will exercise their
       authority in a nondiscriminatory manner so that all persons similarly situated will
       receive substantially the same treatment.

8.6.   The CCTAP Coordinators will provide to each participant a statement of the
       amount of benefits received by the participant during the program year.
       This statement will be furnished to the participant by January 31st following the
       end of the program year. The amount of child care tuition assistance provided to
       the employee will be reported on the employee’s Form W-2.

ARTICLE 9 – CLAIMS PROCEDURE

9.1.   A participant may make a claim for benefits by completing the invoice approval
       form in conjunction with the qualified provider, as described in Article 5.

9.2.   If a claim is wholly or partially denied, notice of the decision will be furnished to
       the participant and to the qualifying provider within a reasonable period of time,
       not to exceed 90 days after receipt of the claim by the CCTAP Coordinator or
       his/her designee, unless special circumstances require an extension or time for
       CCTAP Coordinator or designee will notify the participant prior to the end of the
       initial 90-day period. The extension may not exceed 90 days from the end of the
       initial period. The notification will include:

       (a)       The specific reason(s) for the denial;

       (b)       A description of any additional information necessary to make a decision;
                 and,

       (c)       An explanation of the program’s claims review procedure, as described in
                 Section 9.3.

9.3.   If a claim is denied, the participant may request in writing that the CCTAP
       Coordinator [or reviewing official, as designated under Article 8.2(f)] review the
       claim. Upon receipt of a request for review, the CCTAP Coordinator or
       reviewing official will review the decision and respond to the participant within
       60 days of receipt of the written request. If the CCTAP Coordinator or reviewing



                                              A-9
DR 4080-811-01                                                                 August 23, 2002


        official affirms the original denial of the claim, the participant may invoke the
        applicable grievance procedure, either:

        (a)      The negotiated grievance procedure outlined in the collective bargaining
                 agreement between the employing organization and the union for
                 bargaining unit employees; or

        (b)      The administrative grievance procedure currently in effect in the
                 organization for non-bargaining employees.

9.4.    If a dispute arises on any matter under this program, the CCTAP Coordinator may
        refrain from taking any other or further action in connection with the matter
        involved in the controversy until the dispute has been resolved.

ARTICLE 10 – AMENDMENT AND TERMINATION OF PLAN

10.1.   USDA may amend or terminate this program at any time. The benefits hereunder
        are not guaranteed and may be reduced by amendment to these procedures.

ARTICLE 11 – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

11.1.   This program and the benefits it offers do not provide any additional rights to
        participants or employees other than those expressly set forth herein.

11.2.   This program will be constructed administered and enforced according to the laws
        of the United States of America.




                                            A-10
DR 4080-811-01                                                               August 23, 2002




                                                                         Appendix B

                   CHILD CARE TUITION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
                 (INSERT MISSION AREA/AGENCY/STAFF OFFICE)

                             Appropriated Funds Program

   I.      Eligibility and Benefit Schedule

           Describe eligibility requirements and formula for determining level of child
           care tuition assistance.

   II.     Notification

           USDA requires that employees receive due notification of the availability of
           the child care tuition assistance. Briefly describe your notification procedures.
           (Under the USDA Child Care Tuition Assistance Program there must be at
           least an annual notification).

   III.    Program Administration and Application

           Describe how the program will be administered. If contracted, identify the
           contractor that will administer the program. Describe how employees may
           apply and where forms may be obtained.

   IV.     Child Care Tuition Assistance Program Coordinator

           Provide the name, phone number and mailing address of the individual who
           will serve as the Child Care Tuition Assistance Program Coordinator for the
           mission area/agency/staff office.

   V.      Systems Administrator

           Provide the title and mailing address of the individual who will serve as the
           Systems Administrator for the System of Records maintained in order to
           process applications for child care subsidies. The Department has a USDA-
           wide Notice of Systems of Record and will amend it to include each mission
           area/agency/staff office system.

   VI.     Reviewing Official

           If someone other than the Child Care Tuition Assistance Program Coordinator
           is to serve as the reviewing official for purposes of claims denials, list that
           person’s name, phone number and mailing address here.




                                           B-1
DR 4080-811-01                                                              August 23, 2002


                                                                                  2

   VII.    Appeals

           Briefly describe the process for appealing a denial of claims.

   VIII.   Signature of Approval

           Adopted to become effective as of (insert date) by:

           (Insert Organization Name)

           ______________________________________ Date: __________________
           (Signature of Mission Area Administra-
           tor/Agency Head/Staff Office Director
           or Person with Delegated Authority)




                                           B-2
  DR 4080-811-01                                                                 August 23, 2002


                                                                                Appendix C

               MODEL ELIGIBILITY AND BENEFIT SCHEDULE

                CHILD CARE TUITION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
  The following eligibility and benefit schedule is recommended for implementation by
  mission areas/agencies and staff offices implementing a child care tuition assistance
  program.



If Eligible Employee’s            Then the Plan will pay this      Monthly Subsidy Not to
Total Family Income is 1          percentage of the                Exceed3
                                  Participant’s Eligible Child
                                  Care Expenses2
Less than $39,000                 50%                              $500.00
$39,000 - $51,000                 30%                              $300.00
$51,000 - $59,999                 20%                              $200.00




         1
          Total Family Income refers to line 22 on Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Tax
  Return Form 1040 or line 14 on IRS Tax Return Form 1040A.
         2
           A Participant=s Benefits under this program will be reduced by the amount of
  other state or local child care subsidies received by the Participant and will be paid
  directly to the child care provider.
         3
             Subsidy Amounts apply to total costs of child care, not cost per child



                                                C-1
