U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE 

WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250 

DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION 

Number: 

4120-001 

 

SUBJECT: 

Annual Departmental Civil Rights Training 

DATE: 

June 14, 2016 

OPI: 

Office of the Assistant 
Secretary for Civil Rights 



 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Section Page 

 

1. Purpose 1 
2. Special Instructions 2 
3. Scope 2 
4. Policy 2 
5. Definitions 2 
6. Responsibilities 5 
7. Requirements 11 
8. Training Plan Elements 13 


Appendix A Authorities A-1 

 

 

1. PURPOSE 

 

This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the training policy for USDA civil rights 
programs and equal employment opportunity (EEO). It also establishes oversight and 
accountability responsibilities for Federal employees and Agencies delivering Federally 
assisted and Federally conducted programs for the U.S. Department of Agriculture 
(Department or USDA). Annual training plans must comply with the requirements of 
this DR, but nothing in the DR precludes Agencies, Staff Offices, National Appeals 
Division (NAD) or Office of Inspector General (OIG) from conducting additional and 
supplemental civil rights training throughout the year. 

 

 


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS 

 

This regulation supersedes DR 4120-1, Annual Departmental Civil Rights Training, dated 
September 18, 1998. 

 

Any exceptions or variations to mandatory civil rights training must be approved by the 
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights (OASCR). 

 

 

3. SCOPE 

 

This DR covers civil rights training responsibilities for USDA Agencies, Departmental 
Management, Staff Offices, NAD, and OIG. OASCR will provide guidance, oversight, 
and accountability over all civil rights training outlined in their annual training plans. 
Annual training plans must comply with the requirements of this DR, but nothing in the 
DR precludes Agencies, Staff Offices, NAD or OIG from conducting additional and 
supplemental civil rights training throughout the year. 

 

 

4. POLICY 

 

All Federal employees, including contractors, political appointees, and appointed 
representatives, as well as, those who represent USDA, those who administer USDA 
programs, and recipients who distribute USDA program benefits, are accountable and 
expected to understand, comply with and abide by USDA’s civil rights policies, 
procedures and practices as these pertain to employment and program delivery. 

 

OASCR is responsible for providing overall leadership, direction, oversight, and 
accountability for USDA’s annual civil rights training programs and for ensuring that 
training is designed in a manner that fully enables all USDA employees, those who 
represent USDA, those who administer USDA programs, and recipients who distribute 
USDA program benefits, to understand, prevent, and correct practices which could result 
in discrimination or have a discriminatory effect. 

 

5. DEFINITIONS 

 

a. Accountability. The obligation of holding agency officials, managers, 
supervisors, and other employees responsible for complying with the 
requirements contained in this DR. 


 

b. Ad Hoc Training. A special request for training or certification due to emerging 
or unanticipated civil rights issues. 


 

 


c. Agency. For purposes of this directive, agency is defined as a major program 
organizational unit of the Department with delegated authorities to deliver 
agricultural or food programs, activities, benefits, or services. The term “agency” 
does not include Departmental Management or Staff Offices. 


 

d. Agency Head. The administrator, chief, or director of an Agency who is the 
official named or designated to have primary responsibility for the management 
of the Agency as delegated under 7 C.F.R. Part 2. 


 

e. Agency Head Assessment. The annual assessment of Agency Heads and Staff 
Office Directors by OASCR, utilizing the Civil Rights Performance Plan and 
Accomplishment Report (the Plan), to evaluate and rate each Agency and Staff 
Office for effectiveness and compliance with the Department’s civil rights 
policies and regulations. The Plan requires the Agencies and Staff Offices to 
annually assess their civil rights activities and accomplishments and submit a 
report to OASCR to ensure civil rights accountability throughout USDA. The 
civil rights accomplishment rating issued by OASCR serves as a representative 
rating of the Agency Heads and Staff Office Directors. 


 

f. Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR). Any number of conflict resolution 
techniques that assist employees, managers, supervisors, Agencies, and USDA 
customers in resolving disputes. 


 

g. Annual Training. Begins on the first day of the fiscal year (October 1); and is to 
be completed by the last day of the fiscal year (September 30) or as determined by 
OASCR. 


 

h. Assisted Programs and Activities. Program services, benefits or resources 
delivered through a recipient of USDA funding or assistance to an ultimate 
beneficiary. 


 

i. Conducted Programs and Activities. Program services, benefits or resources 
delivered directly to the public by USDA. 


 

j. Departmental Management. USDA’s central administrative management 
organization that provides support to policy officials of the Department, and 
overall direction and coordination for the administrative programs and services of 
USDA. In addition, Departmental Management manages the Headquarters 
complex and provides direct customer service to Washington, D.C. area 
employees. 


 

k. EEO Complaint Process. All actions and procedures undertaken in an EEO 
complaint, including but not limited to, counseling, acceptance, dismissal, 
investigation, ADR, hearing, final agency decision, appeal, remand, and the right 
to file a civil action. 


 


l. Employee. An individual employed in any position within USDA. Contractors, 
interns, and volunteers may be included under this definition; however, specific 
criteria must be met in order for them to be classified an “employee” for EEO 
purposes. 


 

m. Federal Financial Assistance. Includes (1) grants and loans of Federal funds, (2) 
the grant or donation of Federal property and interests in property, (3) the detail of 
Federal personnel, (4) the sale and lease of, and the permission to use (on other 
than a casual or transient basis), Federal property or any interest in such property 
or the furnishing of services without consideration or at a nominal consideration, 
or at a consideration which is reduced for the purpose of assisting the recipient, or 
in recognition of the public interest to be served by such sale, lease or furnishing 
of services to the recipient, and (5) any Federal agreement, arrangement, or other 
contract which has as one of its purposes the provision of assistance. 


 

n. Managers. Employees in positions with vested authority to direct the work of an 
organizational unit, and are held accountable for the execution of specific line or 
staff functions, monitoring and evaluating the progress of the organization toward 
meeting goals, and making adjustments in objectives, work plans, schedules, and 
commitment of resources. Such individuals may serve as head or assistant head 
of a major organization within a bureau; or direct a specialized program of 
marked difficulty, responsibility, and national significance. 


 

o. Partners. Individuals or entities not employed by USDA who have a role in 
administering USDA funded programs including those who represent USDA, 
those who administer USDA programs and recipients who distribute USDA 
program benefits and contractors. 


 

p. Program Complaint Process. All actions and procedures undertaken in a 
discrimination complaint involving conducted or assisted programs and activities, 
including but not limited to, acceptance, dismissal, investigation, ADR, final 
agency decision, closures and where applicable, appeals and the right to file a 
civil action. 


 

q. Supervisors. Employees that accomplish work through the direction of other 
people. Those directed may be subordinate Federal civil service employees, 
whether full-time, part-time, intermittent, or temporary; non-Federal workers; 
unpaid volunteers; student trainees, or others. 


 

r. Supplemental Training. Training provided beyond the mandatory training 
required by this DR that offers more opportunity for in-depth knowledge and 
understanding of specific EEO topics, programmatic civil rights obligations or 
non-discrimination policies as determined by OASCR or other Federal oversight 
entities. Training of this type addresses emerging or perennial issues or corrects 
deficiencies found as a result of compliance reviews, assessments, or other 
investigations. 


 


s. Staff Office. An administrative office with a specialized support function. All 
Staff Offices report to the Secretary of Agriculture, with the exception of NAD, 
and OIG which are in the Secretary’s reporting chain but have independent 
authority and reporting responsibilities. Examples of Staff Offices are The Office 
of the Chief Financial Officer and Office of the General Counsel. 


 

t. Training. A program of instruction based on a course or courses related to an 
employee’s civil rights, job responsibilities, or professional 
development. Training is inclusive of traditional classroom, correspondence 
courses, self-study, online courses, university/college courses, professional 
conferences, seminars, and workshops that are educational or instructional in 
nature. Training is intended to improve individual and organizational 
performance and assist in achieving the agency’s mission and performance goals. 


 

u. USDA Civil Rights Training Community. USDA Agencies, Departmental 
Management, Staff Offices, NAD and OIG collectively partnering on civil rights 
training and related initiatives. 


 

 

6. RESPONSIBILITIES 

 

a. OASCR 


 

OASCR has lead responsibility for the guidance, oversight, and accountability of 
USDA’s training on civil rights. Specifically, OASCR is responsible for: 

 

(1) Providing: 






 

(a) by April 1 of each year, a notice to USDA Agencies, Departmental 
Management, Staff Offices, NAD and OIG, of the 
criteria/standards for preparing the proposed annual training plans 
for the ensuing fiscal year; 




 

(b) direction for the preparation and submission of the proposed 
annual civil rights training plans; 




 

(c) a response to USDA Agencies, Departmental Management, Staff 
Offices, NAD and OIG proposed annual training plans by August 
1; 




 

(d) assistance and oversight for special events and commemorative 
civil rights educational programs and activities for the benefit of 
USDA employees and partners; 




 

(e) leadership and guidance to ensure collaboration and information 
sharing within the USDA civil rights training community; 




 


(f) annual mandatory and supplemental civil rights training for 
Departmental Management, Staff Offices, NAD and OIG, upon 
request. 




 

(g) an approval or disapproval decision no later than September 15 of 
each year to all USDA Agencies, Departmental Management, 
Staff Offices, NAD and OIG annual training plans; 




 

(h) training in response to emerging or ad hoc civil rights issues; and 




 

(i) an assessment of Agency, Departmental Management, Staff 
Offices, NAD and OIG compliance with their training plan(s) and 
this DR, including the Agency Head Assessment process. 




 

(2) Assessing: 


 

(a) all USDA Agencies, Departmental Management, Staff Offices, 
NAD and OIG proposed annual training plans to ensure: 


 

1. accountability for training activities; 






 

2. anticipated training outcomes are in sync with their 
respective mission and civil rights objectives, and the 
intent of the DR on Training; and 






 

3. availability of adequate resources for conducting training 
activities. 






 

(b) the effectiveness and consistency of all USDA civil rights training 
plans (on EEO issues, conducted programs, and assisted programs 
including training of recipients), on an annual basis, and whether it 
supports the Department’s civil rights goals and helps to improve 
USDA’s record on civil rights and projects future training needs; 
and 


 

(c) USDA Agencies, Departmental Management, Staff Offices, NAD 
and OIG compliance reports, agency head assessments, complaint 
histories and other sources of pertinent information to identify 
areas where mandatory or supplemental training is required to 
correct deficiencies or address emerging issues. 


 

(3) Establishing: 

 

(a) civil rights training objectives which must be met by USDA 
Agencies, Departmental Management, Staff Offices, NAD and 
OIG; 


 


(b) completion dates; 


 

(c) partnerships with diverse professional and educational 
organizations to enhance USDA’s overall civil rights training 
program; 


 

(d) credentialed OASCR trainers (long-term and temporary) to assist 
with the development and implementation of USDA civil rights 
educational initiatives; and 


 

(e) a process that ensures all USDA Agencies, Departmental 
Management, Staff Offices, NAD and OIG certify all mandatory or 
other required civil rights training by the announced completion 
date. 


 

(4) Collaborating with: 








 

(a) USDA Agencies, Departmental Management, Staff Offices, NAD 
and OIG to ensure that they: 


 

1. achieve common civil rights goals through joint effort; 

 

2. create an evolving and dynamic body of knowledge; 


 

3. validate their employees have received appropriate training; 


 

4. establish a cadre of credentialed subject-matter experts to 
provide training; 


 

5. use a variety of training methods and techniques (e.g., 
classroom, webinar, USDA electronic learning systems, 
online, etc.) to deliver and monitor the effectiveness of civil 
rights training; and 


 

6. achieve civil rights training that results in transformative 
practices. 


 

(b) other Federal Departments, USDA Agencies, and entities (such as 
land-grant institutions), on civil rights training initiatives. 


 

b. USDA Agencies 


 

In conducting annual civil rights training, all USDA Agencies shall be held 
responsible for: 

 

(1) Providing: 




 


(a) annual mandatory and supplemental civil rights training to their 
respective employees, managers and supervisors, civil rights 
practitioners, employees who deliver conducted programs, 
employees who administer assisted programs, and recipients of 
assistance or benefits pursuant to the Agency’s OASCR-approved 
annual civil rights training plan; and 

 

(b) a cadre of credentialed trainers (long-term and temporary) for the 
development and implementation of all civil rights training 
outlined under their OASCR approved training plans. 


 

(2) Assessing: 


 

(a) training activities to ensure support of the Department’s civil rights 
goals; 




 

(b) capacity to provide mandatory civil rights and other required 
training; 




 

(c) methods for tracking, recording, and certifying that all employees 
have completed mandatory and other required civil rights training 
requirements by the announced completion date; 




 

(d) civil rights compliance reports, agency-head assessments, 
complaint histories and other sources of pertinent information to 
identify areas where supplemental or mandatory training is 
required to correct deficiencies or potential problems; and 




 

(e) effectiveness of the annual civil rights training, and the number of 
employees trained and/or expected to be trained. 




 

(3) Holding Agency Heads, Supervisors and Managers accountable through 
their performance review appraisal for: 


 

(a) ensuring that their training plans are implemented and effective; 
and 

 

(b) carrying out all of the responsibilities as required in this this DR. 

 

(4) Preparing: 


 

(a) a proposed annual civil rights training plan, for the ensuing fiscal 
year, that is submitted to OASCR no later than June 1 of each 
year; 


 


(b) a final OASCR approved annual civil rights training plan, for the 
ensuing fiscal year, that is ready for implementation no later than 
September 30 of each year; and 


 

(c) and submitting ad hoc civil rights training requests to OASCR 
within 15 business days of when the need arises. 


 

(5) Offering: 


 

(a) civil rights training opportunities to program participants in the 




assisted programs and activities administered by the Agency and to 
partners that assist the Agency in delivering assistance or benefits. 

 

(6) Collaborating with OASCR: 

 

(a) before and during the development and submission of the 
Agency’s proposed annual civil rights training plan; 


 

(b) to implement all training that OASCR requires to correct and/or 
prevent civil rights issues; 


 

(c) and other Departmental offices in designing, developing, and 
delivering the annual civil rights training, ensuring a variety of 
training methods and techniques are used to effectively deliver 
civil rights content and respond to a variety of learning styles; and 


 

(d) in supporting the Department’s annual civil rights training with 
funding, staff assistance, onsite coordination of training delivery, and 
by encouraging employees to apply the principles learned in civil 
rights training in the workplace. 


 

(7) Appointing a representative to: 

 

(a) serve as a primary point of contact to OASCR for all civil rights 
training; 


 

(b) serve on temporary teams and advisory groups to assist in USDA 
civil rights training initiatives, and to provide recommendations on 
a variety of related civil rights training priorities and actions; and 


 

(c) monitor results, impacts and effects of civil rights training to 
reduce compliance problems and the overall number of complaints. 


 

 


c. Departmental Management, Staff Offices, NAD and OIG 


 

To ensure annual civil rights training occurs, Departmental Management, Staff 
Offices, NAD and OIG, in collaboration with OASCR, shall be held responsible 
for: 

 

(1) Providing: 

 

(a) annual mandatory and supplemental civil rights training to their 
respective employees, managers and supervisors, and civil rights 
practitioners pursuant to the OASCR-approved final annual civil 
rights training plan. 

 

(2) Assessing: 

 

(a) training activities to ensure support of the Department’s civil rights 
goals; 


 

(b) capacity to provide mandatory civil rights and other required 
training; 


 

(c) methods for tracking, recording, and certifying that all 
Departmental Management, Staff Office, NAD and OIG 
employees have completed mandatory and other required civil 
rights training requirements by the announced completion date; 


 

(d) civil rights compliance reports, agency-head assessments, 
complaint histories and other sources of pertinent information to 
identify areas where supplemental or mandatory training is 
required to correct deficiencies or potential problems; and 


 

(e) the effectiveness of the annual civil rights training, and the number 
of employees trained and/or expected to be trained. 


 

(3) Holding Supervisors and Managers accountable through their performance 
review appraisal for: 


 

(a) ensuring that their training plans are implemented and effective; 
and 

 

(b) carrying out all of the responsibilities as required in this DR. 

 

(4) Preparing: 


 

(a) a proposed annual civil rights training plan, for the ensuing fiscal 
year, that is submitted to OASCR no later than June 1 of each 
year; and 



(b) a final OASCR approved annual civil rights training plan, for the 
ensuing fiscal year, that is ready for implementation no later than 
September 30 of each year. 


 

(5) Engaging OASCR: 


 

(a) before and during the development and submission of the 
proposed annual civil rights training plan; 




 

(b) to implement all training that OASCR requires to correct and/or 
prevent civil rights issues; 




 

(c) and other Departmental offices in the design, development, and 
delivery of the annual civil rights training to ensure a variety of 
training methods and techniques are used to effectively deliver 
civil rights content and respond to a variety of learning styles; and 




 

(d) in supporting the Department’s annual civil rights training with 
funding, staff assistance, onsite coordination of training delivery, 
and by encouraging employees to apply the principles learned in 
civil rights training in the workplace. 




 

(6) Appointing a representative to: 


 

(a) serve as a primary point of contact to OASCR for all civil rights 
training. 


 

 

7. REQUIREMENTS 

 

a. General Requirements. Annual civil rights training for USDA programs and 
employment is based on the non-discrimination requirements set forth by current 
civil rights laws and USDA policies and authorities. The training is to: 


 

(1) begin on the first day of the fiscal year (October 1); and is to be completed 
by the last day of the fiscal year (September 30). Agencies may submit a 
request to OASCR for an extension of time to complete the training. 
Written approval may be given on a case-by-case basis. 


 

(2) be delivered through a variety of training methods and techniques (e.g., 
classroom, webinar, online and via USDA’s electronic learning systems). 
For those employees unable to access the electronic learning systems, 
alternative delivery systems will be used, and information as to each 
employee’s completion of the training in an alternative manner will be 
documented by the agency in the USDA electronic learning system. 


 


(3) be provided to all Federal employees including contractors, political 
appointees, and appointed representatives, as well as those who represent 
USDA, and those who administer USDA programs, and recipients who 
distribute USDA program benefits. 


 

(4) be specific to the agency’s program delivery, outreach responsibilities, 
compliance with the applicable program and employment civil rights laws, 
and other issues as determined by OASCR. 


 

(5) be provided to recipients of federal financial assistance in assisted 
programs. 


 

(6) comply with relevant Office of Personnel Management guidance and 
Congressional mandates. 


 

(7) be accessible to individuals with disabilities and compliant with Section 
508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. 


 

(8) be accessible to individuals with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and 
compliant with DR 4330-005, Prohibition Against National Origin 
Discrimination Affecting Persons with Limited English Proficiency in 
Programs and Activities Conducted by USDA and 7 C.F.R 15 Final 
Guidance to Federal Financial Assistance Recipients regarding the Title 
VII Prohibition Against National Origin Discrimination Affecting Persons 
with Limited English Proficiency. 


 

(9) be tied to the agency’s civil rights goals based on its strategic plan and 
other civil rights evaluations. 


 

(10) be documented in each USDA agency’s annual civil rights training plans 
and reports with measurable goals, anticipated outcomes and results. 


 

(11) be consistent with the Training Elements outlined in Section 8 below. 


 

b. Each annual training plan will also contain a report: 


 

(1) assessing the effectiveness of the prior fiscal year’s training; 


 

(2) showing internal compliance with the actions in the Agency, Departmental 
Management, Staff Office, NAD and OIG prior fiscal year’s training 
plan; and 


 

(3) showing compliance with the elements of this DR. 


 

 


The plan should be formatted in accordance with the sample plan provided by 
OASCR. USDA Agencies, Departmental Management, Staff Offices, NAD and 
OIG may satisfy more than one of the requirements for the training elements in 
Section 8 below if a detailed curriculum is included with their proposed annual 
civil rights training plan. 

 

 

8. TRAINING PLAN ELEMENTS 

 

All USDA Agencies, Departmental Management, Staff Offices, NAD and OIG training 
plans must meet the following training elements in addition to any civil rights training 
tailored to their specific needs. The section below identifies the minimum requirements 
for each audience. 

 

a. All USDA Employees 

 

All USDA employees including contractors, political appointees, appointed 
representatives and interns, and volunteers (where applicable) must participate in 
annual civil rights training. 

 

Participation in the trainings is mandatory. New employees should be trained no 
later than 180 days after the date of their Entrance on Duty (EOD). Individuals 
whose appointments are less than 180 days should be trained within 30 days of 
the date of their EOD. Interns and students should be trained within two to four 
weeks of the date of their EOD. 

 

Employees will be required to take courses from these two categories: 
Foundations of Civil Rights and Civil Rights Special Emphasis. 

 

(1) Foundations of Civil Rights 

 

This category sets the foundation for all civil rights training for the 
Department; it must include the following topics: (1) origins and 
foundations of civil rights, (2) cultural sensitivity and diversity, (3) nondiscrimination 
in Federally Assisted and Conducted programs, (4) EEO 
laws and regulations, and (5) the EEO and Program complaint process. 

 

(2) Civil Rights Specialized Training 

Select trainings from the special training category will be taken annually. 
Examples of special trainings are: LEP, Gender Identity and Expression, 
Reasonable Accommodation in Employment and Program Activities 
Religious accommodation, Age Discrimination in Employment and 
Program activities, Anti-harassment, Sexual Harassment, Alternative 
Dispute Resolution, and Environmental Justice. 

 

 


b. All USDA Agency Heads, Supervisors and Managers 


 

Agency Heads, supervisors and managers must participate in any additional 
annual training on civil rights topics relevant to their positions. Examples 
include, but are not limited to, Anti-harassment, Bullying, Retaliation, No FEAR, 
ADR, LEP, Reasonable Accommodation in Employment and Program Activities, 
Religious Accommodation in Employment and Program Activities, Age 
Discrimination in Employment and Assisted Program Activities; Civil Rights 
Impact Analysis (CRIA), EEO Discrimination Complaint Process and Lesbian, 
Gay, Bisexual and Transgender (LGBT). 

 

Participation in this training is mandatory. 

 

c. All Employees Who Work in Civil Rights 


 

All employees who work in civil rights including political appointees, and 
collateral duty and full-time civil rights practitioners. 

 

These employees must participate in any additional annual civil rights training to 
remain current in their respective area of expertise (practice area) and 
knowledgeable of civil rights authorities. Examples include, but are not limited 
to, Anti-harassment, LGBT, LEP, Reasonable Accommodation in Employment 
and Program Activities, Religious Accommodation in Employment and Program 
Activities, Age Discrimination in Employment and Assisted Program Activities, 
New EEO Counselors and Investigators, Refresher Training for Experienced EEO 
Counselors and Investigators, CRIA, Data Collection, Civil Rights Compliance 
Reviews, Management Directive (MD) 715, CRES System (Database) 
Management, and ADR. 

 

Participation in this training is mandatory. 

 

d. All Employees Who Deliver USDA Conducted Programs 


 

All employees who deliver USDA Conducted Programs include employees that 
have direct contact with USDA customers, including but not limited to, loan 
officers, forest rangers, food inspectors, etc. 

 

These employees must participate in any additional annual training on civil rights 
topics relevant to the conduct of their duties in delivering the Department’s 
conducted programs. Examples include, but are not limited to, CRIA, Outreach, 
Demographic Data Collection, Anti-harassment, LEP, Reasonable 
Accommodation in Program Activities, Cultural Sensitivity, and LGBT. 

 

Participation in this training is mandatory. 

 

 


e. USDA Employees Who Administer USDA Assisted Programs and Recipients of 
Federal Financial Assistance 


 

 All employees who administer USDA Assisted Programs include employees that 
implement program services, benefits, or resources delivered through a recipient 
of Federal Financial Assistance. 

 

 Employees who administer assisted programs and recipients must participate in 
any additional annual civil rights training on topics relevant to the delivery of the 
Department’s assisted programs. Examples include, but are not limited to, CRIA, 
Outreach, Demographic Data Collection, Anti-harassment, LEP, Reasonable 
Accommodation in Program Activities, Age Discrimination in Assisted Program 
Activities, Cultural Sensitivity and LGBT. Agencies are required to include in 
their annual civil rights training plans, training for recipients. 

 

Participation in this training is mandatory. 


 

APPENDIX A 

 

AUTHORITIES 

 

a. Statutory Authorities 
a. Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. 





 

b. Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. 




 

(3) Rehabilitation Act of 1973. 


 

(4) Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967. 


 

(5) Section 403 of the Vietnam Era Veterans Readjustment Assistance Act of 
1974. 


 

(6) Section 307 of the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978. 


 

(7) Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972. 


 

(8) Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. 


 

(9) Americans with Disabilities Amendments Act of 2008. 


 

(10) The Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008. 


 

(11) The Equal Pay Act of 1963. 


 

(12) The Alternative Dispute Resolution Act of 1996. 


 

(13) The Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended by the Food Stamp 
Improvement Act of 1994. 


 

(14) The Notification and Federal Employee Antidiscrimination and 
Retaliation (No FEAR) Act of 2002. 


 

(15) The Age Discrimination Act of 1975. 


 

(16) 5 U.S.C. 301, Authority to Prescribe Departmental Regulations (January 3, 
2007). 


 

b. Regulatory and Executive Orders 


 

(1) 7 CFR Part 2 – Delegation of Authority by the Secretary of Agriculture 
and General Officers of the Department 



 

(2) 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, Federal Sector Equal Employment Opportunity. 


 

(3) 12 C.F.R. 202, Regulation B, Equal Credit Opportunity Act of 1977. 


 

(4) 28 C.F.R. 42.401 et seq., Department of Justice Guidelines for 
Coordination of Enforcement of Nondiscrimination in Federally Assisted 
Programs. 


 

(5) 7 C.F.R. Part 15, USDA Nondiscrimination Regulations. 


 

(6) 7 C.F.R. Part 16, Equal Opportunity for Religious Organizations. 


 

(7) 5 C.F.R. Part 720, Affirmative Employment Programs. 


 

(8) Executive Order 12898 (February 16, 1994), Federal Actions to Address 
Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income 
Populations. 


 

(9) Executive Order 13087 (May 28, 1998), Further Amendment to Executive 
Order 11478, Equal Employment Opportunity in the Federal Government. 


 

(10) Executive Order 13145 (February 8, 2000), To Prohibit Discrimination in 
Federal Employment Based on Genetic Information. 


 

(11) Executive Order 13152 (May 2, 2000), Further Amendment to Executive 
Order 11478, Equal Employment Opportunity in the Federal Government. 


 

(12) Executive Order 13166 (August 11, 2000), Improving Access to Services 
for Persons with Limited English Proficiency. 


 

(13) Executive Order 13672 (July 21, 2014), Further Amendment to Executive 


Order 11478, Equal Employment Opportunity in the Federal Government. 

 

(14) DR 4300-005 (January 14, 1998), Agency Civil Rights Programs. 


 

(15) DR 4330-003 (October 15, 2015), Nondiscrimination in USDAConducted 
Programs and Activities. 


 

(16) DR 4300-004 (May 30, 2003), Civil Rights Impact Analysis. 


 

(17) DR 4710-001 (April 5, 2006), Alternative Dispute Resolution. 


 

 

(18) DR 4330-005 (June 4, 2013), Prohibition Against National Origin 
Discrimination Affecting Persons with Limited English Proficiency in 



Programs and Activities Conducted by USDA. 


 

(19) Departmental Manual 4300-001 (July 20, 2001), EEO Complaint 
Processing Procedures. 


 

(20) 7 C.F.R 15 Final Guidance (November 28, 2014), to Federal Financial 
Assistance Recipients regarding the Title VII Prohibition Against National 
Origin Discrimination Affecting Persons with Limited English 
Proficiency. 


 

(21) Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) MD 110, 
(November 19, 1999), Federal Sector Complaint Processing Manual. 


 

(22) EEOC MD-715 (October 1, 2003), EEO Reporting Requirements for 
Federal Agencies. 


 

(23) Office of Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights Directive (November 12, 
2013), Section 508 Policy. 


 

(24) The annual Civil Rights Policy statement published by the Secretary of 
Agriculture. 


 

(25) Any other published regulations, policies, staff instructions, executive 
orders, statues, or directives related to non-discrimination. 


 

 


