                                 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                        WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


                                                                                   Number:
                       DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                     4370-001
 SUBJECT:                                                          DATE:
 Collection of race, ethnicity, and sex data for civil rights      October 11, 2011
 compliance and other purposes in regard to participation in the
                                                                   OPI:
 programs administered by the Farm Service Agency, the             Departmental Management
 Natural Resources Conservation Service, the Risk
 Management Agency, the Rural Business Service, the Rural
 Housing Service, and the Rural Utilities Service


1.    PURPOSE

      This Departmental Regulation (DR) implements sections 14006 and 14007 of the Food,
      Conservation and Energy Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2279-1(a) – (d). This DR establishes the
      USDA policy for the collection of race, ethnicity, and sex data for civil rights
      compliance, for the purposes of conducting oversight and evaluation of
      nondiscriminatory participation, and assessing outreach and participation in programs of
      the Farm Service Agency, the Natural Resources Conservation Service, Risk
      Management Agency, the Rural Business Service, the Rural Housing Service, and the
      Rural Utilities Service.

2.    SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATION

      This is a new Policy enacted by the 2008 Farm Bill and implemented by this
      Departmental Regulation. It does not cancel or replace any previous Departmental
      Regulations.

3.    POLICY

      Agencies will collect race, ethnicity, and sex data from applicants and participants in
      each program of the Department of Agriculture that serves agricultural producers and
      landowners. This regulation provides the format and procedures that Agencies will
      follow for collecting, storing, and reporting such information. This policy is intended to
      implement the requirements of sections 14006 and 14007 of the Food, Conservation and
      Energy Act of 2008 (7 USC 2279-1(a) – (d)).

4.    DEFINITIONS

      Within the context of this policy, the following abbreviations and definitions apply:

      a.      Agency. A major program organizational unit of the Department of Agriculture
              (“USDA”) with delegated authorities to deliver rural development, agricultural or
              food programs, activities, benefits, and services, i.e. the Farm Service Agency
     (“FSA”), the Natural Resources Conservation Service (“NRCS”), the Risk
     Management Agency (“RMA”), the Rural Business Service, the Rural Housing
     Service, and the Rural Utilities Service (collectively “the Rural Development
     Mission Area” or “RD”).

b.   Applicant. Any person, organization, or other entity that submits an application
     for Agency services, whether such application is complete or incomplete.

c.   American Indian or Alaska Native. A person having origins in any of the original
     peoples of North and South America (including Central America), and who
     maintains tribal affiliation or community attachment.

d.   Asian. A person having origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East,
     Southeast Asia, or the Indian subcontinent including, for example, Cambodia,
     China, India, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippine Islands, Thailand,
     and Vietnam.

e.   Black or African American. A person having origins in any of the black racial
     groups of Africa. [Terms such as “Haitian” or “Negro” can be used in addition to
     “Black or African American.”]

f.   Ethnicity. Characteristics of an individual common to a specific group based on
     birthplace, ancestry, culture, or language.

g.   Sex. Male or female designation.

h.   Hispanic or Latino. A person of Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican, South or Central
     American, or other Spanish culture or origin, regardless of race. [The term,
     “Spanish origin” can be used in addition to “Hispanic or Latino.”]

i.   Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander. A person having origins in any of the
     original peoples of Hawaii, Guam, Samoa, or other Pacific Islands.

j.   OAO. The Office of Advocacy and Outreach, USDA.

k.   OASCR. Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights, USDA.

l.   OMB. Office of Management and Budget, the Executive Office of the President.

m.   Participant. Any person or group of persons that participates in a program of an
     Agency that serves agricultural producers and landowners.

n.   Recipient. A State, public or private agency, institution, organization or any of
     their instrumentalities, or any individual to whom Federal financial assistance is
     extended, directly or through another recipient, for a program or activity,
     including any successor, assignee, or transferee thereof.


                                       2
     o.   RES. Data on the race, ethnicity, and sex of a particular Agency program
          applicant or participant, or a compilation or tabulation of such data on a number
          or group of program constituents.

     p.   SCIMS. The Service Center Information Management System is currently a database
          used by the Farm Service Agency, the Natural Resources Conservation Service, and
          the Rural Development Mission Area.

     q.   Secretary. The Secretary of Agriculture.

     r.   State. Each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of
          Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands of the United States, the American Samoa,
          Wake Island, the Canal Zone, all other territories and possessions of the United
          States, and any political subdivision of any State, or instrumentality of any State,
          including an agency, institution, or organization of the state political subdivision
          or instrumentality.

     s.   USDA. The United States Department of Agriculture.

     t.   White. A person having origins in any of the original peoples of Europe, the
          Middle East, or North Africa.

5.   PROCEDURES

     a.   All Agencies that have programs that serve agricultural producers and landowners
          will take the following actions:

          (1) Provide all Applicants and Participants with a RES form (Department of
              Agriculture form AD-2106).

          (2) Biannually compile program application and participation rate data by
              collecting and computing for each program of each such Agency, raw
              numbers of Applicants and Participants by race, ethnicity, and sex; and

          (3) Biannually compile the application and participation rate by race, ethnicity,
              and sex as a percentage of the total eligible all agricultural producers and
              landowners.

     b.   Each Agency must take the following actions:

          (1) Establish or revise, as necessary, current data collection procedures for USDA
              programs to allow OASCR or the Agency to analyze the demographics of
              their program participants and applicants.




                                            3
          (2) All Agencies must use the OMB-approved form (AD-2106).

          (3) Respondents must be informed that providing this information is to be used
              for statistical purposes only and will not be used to determine an Applicant’s
              eligibility for the service for which they have applied.

          (4) Minimize the burden of providing demographic information by taking the
              following actions where possible:

                  (a) Informing respondents that RES information need not be provided if
                      they have already provided that information. However, if a respondent
                      wishes to update or correct their data, Agencies will allow them the
                      opportunity to do so.

                  (b) Allowing RES to be collected on separate OMB approved program
                      forms, through either electronic or non electronic mechanisms, or a
                      combination of both electronic and non electronic collection
                      mechanisms, or at different times. All RES data collected shall be
                      entered into SCIMS or other Agency customer database.

                  (c) Utilizing an electronic medium such as the Internet when collecting
                      race, ethnicity, and sex data where possible.

          (5) The data will reside in the SCIMS database or other Agency customer
              database.

          (6) The data collection form, AD-2106 will be available through the USDA e-
              Forms web site at http://forms.sc.egov.usda.gov/. Applicants, Program
              Beneficiaries or Participants with an electronic credential may be able to
              submit the form electronically. Those without a credential may fill out the
              form on-line, print it, sign it, and deliver it to their Service Center by fax, mail
              or in person. The paper version of the form will also be available.

     c.   Agencies must not:

          (1) Collect data that is based on a visual assessment that is not provided by the
              respondent.

          (2) Change existing data unless changed by the customer by completing form
              AD-2106.

6.   RESPONSIBILITIES

     a.   Agencies must:




                                             4
     (1) Submit to the Secretary an annual report in a format proscribed by the
         National Agricultural Statistics Service (“NASS”), which conforms to this
         policy, on the race, ethnicity and sex of all program Applicants and
         Participants.

     (2) In developing such a Report, provide demographic data in such form and
         format as required by NASS, and seek the guidance and assistance of NASS
         as needed.

     (3) Ensure that reports are readily available on a USDA public website.

b.   OAO will:

     (1) Consult, advise, and provide technical assistance to Agencies to assist them in
         implementing this policy.

     (2) Monitor the administration of this regulation and take necessary steps to
         assure the full and orderly implementation of its requirements.

c.   OASCR will use the data, the analysis, and report submitted to the Secretary in
     planning and conducting compliance reviews.

                                    -END-




                                      5
