                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                   WASHINGTON, DC 20250

                                                                NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                        DR 4330-002
 SUBJECT: Nondiscrimination in Programs and Activities          DATE:
 Receiving Federal Financial Assistance from USDA               July 27, 2021
                                                                EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
                                                                July 27, 2026



Section                                                                                         Page

1. Purpose                                                                                        1
2. Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                             2
3. Scope                                                                                          2
4. Policy                                                                                         2
5. Complaint Processing                                                                           3
6. Monitoring of Compliance and Oversight                                                         5
7. Reasonable Accommodations                                                                      6
8. Reviews                                                                                        6
9. Roles and Responsibilities                                                                     6
10. Inquiries                                                                                     8

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                         A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                        B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                         C-1
Appendix D – Complaint Form Information                                                         D-1



1. PURPOSE

   a.     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of
          Agriculture (USDA) policy for ensuring programs and activities receiving Federal
          financial assistance from USDA are in compliance with applicable civil rights laws,
          including the prohibition against discrimination in those programs and activities.

   b.     This DR establishes the policy for achieving compliance through civil rights complaints
          against recipients of Federal financial assistance from USDA who operate those
          programs and activities.
2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  This DR supersedes DR 4330-002, Nondiscrimination in Programs and Activities Receiving
  Federal Financial Assistance From USDA, dated March 3, 1999.


3. SCOPE

  This regulation applies to all programs and activities receiving Federal financial assistance
  from USDA Mission Areas and agencies.


4. POLICY

  a.   No person will be excluded from participation in, denied the benefits of, or otherwise
       subjected to discrimination in programs or activities receiving financial assistance from
       USDA based on:

       (1) Race;

       (2) Color;

       (3) National origin;

       (4) Age;

       (5) Disability;

       (6) Because of prior civil rights activity;

       And as applicable:

       (7) Sex;

       (8) Religion; or

       (9) Political beliefs.

  b.   USDA will enforce this policy through the fair and efficient processing and addressing
       of complaints of discrimination and non-compliance with civil rights laws filed against
       recipients of USDA financial assistance. USDA will also enforce this policy through
       civil rights compliance reviews, which will be addressed in greater detail in another
       forthcoming DR.

  c.   No recipient of USDA financial assistance will retaliate against or intimidate a person
       because they:



                                                2
       (1) File a discrimination complaint against a recipient of financial assistance from
           USDA or participate in the processing of such a complaint;

       (2) Participate in or provide information for a civil rights review of a program or
           activity receiving financial assistance from USDA; or

       (3) Aid or support the enforcement of Federal civil rights laws or policies against a
           recipient or take other action in opposition to prohibited discriminatory practices by
           a recipient.


5. COMPLAINT PROCESSING

  a.   Filing a Complaint

       (1) Any individual or group of individuals that believe they have been subjected to
           discrimination in a program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance from
           USDA may file a complaint with the Secretary of Agriculture (Secretary), or the
           Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights (ASCR) or their designee.

       (2) Individuals or groups must file their complaint within 180 calendar days of the date
           of the alleged discrimination or non-compliance with the law. The ASCR may
           extend the filing deadline for good cause. All complaints must be signed by the
           complainant.

       (3) Complaints must be filed using either Form Agriculture Department (AD) 3027,
           USDA Program Discrimination Complaint Form or another written document with
           all the information required by Form AD-3027. See Section 5c(1)(c) below, for
           information regarding administrative closures. See Appendix D, Complaint Form
           Information, for the list of information required by Form AD-3027.

  b.   Voluntary Compliance and Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR)

       (1) During the complaint process, the USDA agency that provided financial assistance
           to the recipient named in a complaint will participate in efforts to bring the recipient
           into voluntary compliance with civil rights laws.

       (2) The ASCR will utilize ADR to achieve a recipient’s voluntary compliance with
           civil rights laws. The ASCR will determine where to utilize ADR.

       (3) The ASCR will forward all complaints having claims under the Age Discrimination
           Act of 1975, to the mediation agency designated by the Secretary, Health and
           Human Services, for possible resolution.




                                                3
c.   Complaint Intake and Notifications

     (1) The ASCR:

         (a) Will review each complaint to determine if it was timely filed and relates to
             civil rights laws USDA enforces. The ASCR will refer complaints not within
             USDA’s jurisdiction or subject to concurrent jurisdiction to the appropriate
             Federal, State, or local agencies;

         (b) Will keep the complainant’s identity confidential to the extent permitted by law
             until the complainant has provided written authorization to share their identity;

         (c) May close a complaint during any stage of the complaint process after a
             determination that procedural grounds exist for an administrative closure;

         (d) Will accept complaints for further processing if they are not closed during
             intake; and

         (e) Will promptly investigate all accepted complaints that indicate a possible
             failure by a recipient to comply with any applicable civil rights law, rule,
             regulation, or policy.

     (2) Good cause must exist for the ASCR not to investigate an accepted complaint. The
         ASCR will explain the good cause in the notification of disposition. In those
         situations, the ASCR will explore the feasibility of referring the complaint to the
         primary recipient (e.g., a State agency) for investigation.

d.   Investigations

     (1) Investigations must be conducted impartially. They will be limited to learning facts
         and collecting evidence relevant to determining if a recipient discriminated against
         a complainant in violation of a Federal civil rights law, rule, regulation, or policy,
         or was in non-compliance in another way.

     (2) The ASCR will conduct investigations in accordance with standards and
         requirements found in Federal statutes, regulations, Executive Orders, case law,
         policies, and guidance.

     (3) The ASCR will maintain a record of the evidence and findings of fact collected in
         the investigation.
e.   Complaint Adjudication and Disposition

     (1) When the investigation is completed, the ASCR will review and analyze the facts
         and evidence and apply proper legal standards to ensure findings of fact and
         conclusions of law are consistent with statute, regulation, and case law.



                                             4
       (2) If the ASCR finds no violation or determines that no further action is warranted, the
           ASCR will provide written notification to the recipient and the complainant of that
           decision.

       (3) If the ASCR determines that the recipient is in non-compliance with civil rights
           law, rule, regulation, or policy, the ASCR will promptly notify the recipient of that
           conclusion. The Mission Area or agency that provided funds to the recipient will
           then initiate efforts to bring the recipient into voluntary compliance.

       (4) If the Mission Area or agency, and recipient reach a resolution to bring the recipient
           into voluntary compliance with civil rights law, rule, regulation, or policy, the
           resolution will be documented in a signed written agreement between the recipient
           and the ASCR. If the complainant and recipient reach a resolution, the terms will
           be documented in a written agreement between them, and a signed copy will be
           provided to the ASCR.

       (5) If voluntary compliance is not achieved, the ASCR will issue a Final Agency
           Decision (FAD) that determines if the recipient discriminated or was in non-
           compliance with a civil rights law, rule, regulation, or policy. The FAD will
           summarize the facts and evidence, state findings of fact and conclusions of law for
           each issue and provide appeal rights if applicable. In appropriate circumstances, the
           ASCR will initiate proceedings under 7 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) §§
           15.8, Procedure for effecting compliance; 15.9, Hearings; and 15.10, Decisions and
           notices.

       (6) If the FAD concludes the recipient discriminated or was in non-compliance with a
           civil rights law, rule, regulation, or policy, the ASCR will direct the recipient to
           remedy the discrimination or correct the non-compliance or will direct or
           recommend resolution efforts aimed at achieving voluntary compliance. This may
           include payment of damages where permitted by law.


6. MONITORING COMPLIANCE AND NOTIFYING JUSTICE DEPARTMENT

  a.   When the ASCR issues a FAD with a finding of discrimination or non-compliance with
       a civil rights law, rule, regulation, or policy by a recipient and orders steps to remedy the
       discrimination or achieve compliance, the ASCR will monitor the recipient until there is
       full compliance with the FAD.

  b.   When the ASCR and the recipient sign an agreement to bring the recipient into
       voluntary compliance with the law, the ASCR will monitor the recipient until there is
       full compliance with the agreement. Similarly, the ASCR will monitor the recipient
       until there is full compliance with any agreement reached between the recipient and the
       complainant.




                                                5
  c.   Once the ASCR determines the recipient has achieved full compliance, the ASCR will
       issue a letter closing the complaint.

  d.   When a recipient refuses or fails to comply with any of the terms in a FAD or
       agreement, the ASCR will notify the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) and may take
       action under 7 CFR §§ 15.8-15.10 to terminate or suspend all USDA financial assistance
       to the recipient.


7. REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS

  The ASCR will make reasonable accommodations in the complaint process to assist
  complainants or other persons with a disability.


8. REVIEWS

  a.   USDA will conduct compliance reviews of programs and activities receiving financial
       assistance from USDA to ensure there is full compliance with Federal civil rights laws,
       rules, regulations, and policies.

  b.   Civil Rights Directors will develop annual compliance review schedules consistent with
       this USDA DR on compliance as part of their program for monitoring recipients.


9. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Secretary will:

       (1) Provide leadership, direction, and establish policy for USDA enforcement of civil
           rights laws and compliance with those laws by recipients of financial assistance
           from USDA; and

       (2) Ensure the availability of adequate resources to support and carry out a broad range
           of civil rights compliance and enforcement activities throughout USDA.

  b.   The ASCR or their designee will:

       (1) Direct, coordinate, and provide oversight over USDA’s enforcement of civil rights
           laws and compliance with those laws by recipients of USDA financial assistance
           through rules, regulations, policy, complaint processing, compliance reviews, and
           other actions;

       (2) Ensure USDA Mission Areas and agencies inform recipients of their civil rights
           compliance responsibilities through training, dissemination of information, and
           technical assistance;



                                              6
     (3) Review, supplement, or modify investigations, decisions, agreements, and other
         complaint processing actions taken by Mission Area or agency officials designated
         by the ASCR, and provide other oversight;

     (4) Process appeals, where applicable, of Mission Area or agency decisions; and

     (5) Recommend enforcement actions to DOJ to ensure recipients’ compliance with
         Federal civil rights requirements.

c.   Under and Assistant Secretaries, supported by their Civil Rights Directors, will:

     (1) Enforce compliance with civil rights laws by recipients of financial assistance from
         their Mission Areas;

     (2) Issue Mission Area directives and policy consistent with USDA rules, regulations,
         and policy;

     (3) Process complaints against recipients consistent with USDA rules, regulations,
         procedures, and established memoranda of understanding;

     (4) Ensure recipients’ compliance with FADs and settlement and voluntary resolution
         agreements, including timely implementation of corrective action plans; and

     (5) Develop annual compliance review schedules and conduct reviews of recipients.

d.   Agency Heads will:

     (1) Enforce compliance with civil rights laws by recipients of financial assistance from
         their agencies;

     (2) If applicable, ensure that recipients timely submit their signed Statements of
         Assurance or Federal-State Agreements;

     (3) Assist and cooperate with the ASCR and Civil Rights Directors in resolving
         recipients’ non-compliance; and

     (4) Collect and analyze data and information to evaluate success in ensuring recipients’
         compliance with civil rights laws.

e.   The General Counsel will:

     (1) Provide legal advice and guidance to support USDA’s programs to ensure
         compliance with civil rights laws by recipients of USDA financial assistance; and

     (2) Conduct legal sufficiency reviews, when required or requested by the ASCR, of:




                                             7
            (a) Findings of discrimination or non-compliance with civil rights laws;

            (b) The terms of settlement or voluntary resolution agreements;

            (c) Awards of compensatory damages and attorney fees; and

            (d) Other legal issues.


10. INQUIRIES

   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices should direct questions and inquiries
   regarding this DR to the Center for Civil Rights Operations (CCRO), Compliance Division,
   via email at CCROCOMPLIANCE@usda.gov.


                                            -END-




                                              8
                                  APPENDIX A

                       ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AD          Agriculture Department (Prefix for Departmental forms)
ADR         Alternative Dispute Resolution
ASCR        Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
CCRO        Center for Civil Rights Operations
CFR         Code of Federal Regulations
DG          Departmental Guidebook
DOJ         United States Department of Justice
DR          Departmental Regulation
EEOC        Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
FAD         Final Agency Decision
P.L.        Public Law
Secretary   Secretary of Agriculture
SM          Secretary’s Memorandum
U.S.C.      United States Code
USDA        United States Department of Agriculture




                                      A-1
                                           APPENDIX B

                                           DEFINITIONS


Civil Rights Director. An individual appointed by the Agency Head who is responsible for the
implementation of an equal employment program and for federally assisted and federally
conducted programs, to promote equal employment opportunity, and to identify and eliminate
discriminatory practices and policies. Civil Rights Directors report directly to their Agency
Heads. (Source: Adapted from Departmental Guidebook (DG) 0100-002, USDA Departmental
Directives Definitions Glossary, September 26, 2018; modified to delete language about Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) regulations which was not applicable)

Complainant. Any person or group of persons who believes they have been subjected to
discrimination in a program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance from USDA.
(Sources: Adapted from DR 4330-002, Nondiscrimination in Programs and Activities Receiving
Federal Financial Assistance From USDA, Section 6c (March 3, 1999 version); and DR 4330-
003, Nondiscrimination in USDA-Conducted Programs and Activities, Section 5e (October 15,
2015 version); this revised language is a slightly modified hybrid based on these two sources)

Complaint. A written statement that contains the complainant’s name and address and describes
a Recipient’s alleged discriminatory action in sufficient detail to inform the ASCR of the nature
and date of an alleged civil rights violation. The statement must be signed by the complainant(s)
or someone authorized to sign on behalf of the complainant(s). To accommodate the needs of
persons with disabilities, special needs, or who have Limited English Proficiency, a complaint
may be in an alternative format. (Source: Adapted from DR 4330-003, Section 5f (October 15,
2015 version); slightly modified for assisted complaints)

Discrimination. Different treatment or denial of benefits, services, rights, or privileges to a
person or persons, because of their membership in one or more of the protected classes listed in
Section 4 of this Departmental Regulation, by or in connection with a program or activity
receiving Federal financial assistance from USDA. Specific examples of prohibited
discriminatory actions are found in 7 CFR §15.3. (Source: 7 CFR §15.3, Discrimination
prohibited)

Federal Financial Assistance or financial assistance from USDA. Includes:

   a.   Grants and loans of Federal funds;

   b.   The grant or donation of Federal property and interests in property;

   c.   The detail of Federal personnel;

   d.   The sale and lease of, and the permission to use (on other than a casual or transient
        basis), Federal property or any interest in such property or the furnishing of services
        without consideration or at a nominal consideration, or at a consideration which is



                                               B-1
        reduced for the purpose of assisting the recipient, or in recognition of the public interest
        to be served by such sale, lease or furnishing of services to the recipient; and

   e.   Any Federal agreement, arrangement, or other contract which has as one of its purposes
        the provision of assistance. (Source: 7 CFR § 15.2(g))

Program or Activity. All of the operations of any entity listed in 7 CFR § 15.2(k), any part of
which receives Federal financial assistance from USDA. (Source: 7 CFR § 15.2(k))

Recipient. Any State, political subdivision of any State, or instrumentality of any State or
political subdivision (to include the District of Columbia and any U.S. territories and
possessions), any public or private agency, institution, or organization, or any entity or individual
in any State, to whom USDA extends Federal financial assistance, directly or through another
recipient, for any program or activity, including any successor, assignee, or transferee thereof,
but not including any ultimate beneficiary of the assistance. For purposes of this Departmental
Regulation, the term “recipient” includes entities that have applied for Federal financial
assistance. (Sources: 28 CFR § 42.102, Definitions; 7 CFR § 15.2(e))

Retaliation. Intimidation, threats, coercion, or discrimination against any individual because
they have made a complaint against or testified, assisted, or participated in a civil rights
investigation involving a recipient of financial assistance from USDA. (Source: 28 CFR §
42.107(e))




                                                B-2
                                          APPENDIX C

                             AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Age Discrimination Act of 1975, as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6101 et seq.

Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.

Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987, P.L. 100-259, as amended by, Civil Rights Act of 1991, P.L.
102-166, codified at 42 U.S.C. § 1981(a)

Compliance Procedures, 28 CFR Part 35, Subpart F

Coordination of Enforcement of Nondiscrimination in Federally Assisted Programs, 28 CFR Part
42, Subpart F

Delegations of Authority by the Secretary of Agriculture to the Assistant Secretary for Civil
Rights, 7 CFR § 2.25

Education Programs or Activities Receiving or Benefitting from Federal Financial Assistance, 7
CFR Part 15a,

Executive Order 12250, Leadership and Coordination of Implementation and Enforcement of
Nondiscrimination Laws, November 2, 1980

Food and Nutrition Act of 2008, as amended, HYPERLINK
"https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCODE-2019-title7/pdf/USCODE-2019-title7-chap51.pdf"7

Guidance to Federal Financial Assistance Recipients Regarding the Title VI Prohibition Against
National Origin Discrimination Affecting Persons with Limited English Proficiency, November
28, 2014

Guidelines for the Enforcement of Title VI, Civil Rights Act of 1964, 28 CFR § 50.3




                                               C-1
Implementation of Executive Order 12250, Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Handicap in
Federally Assisted Programs, 28 CFR Part 41

Nondiscrimination in Federally Assisted Programs of the Department of Agriculture —
Effectuation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 7 CFR Part 15, Subpart A

Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Age in Programs or Activities Receiving Federal Financial
Assistance from the United States Department of Agriculture, 7 CFR Part 15c

Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Disability in State and Local Government Services, 28 CFR
Part 35

Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Handicap in Programs and Activities Receiving Federal
Financial Assistance, 7 CFR Part 15b

Procedures for Complaints of Employment Discrimination Filed Against Recipients of Federal
Financial Assistance, 28 CFR Part 42, Subpart H; 29 CFR § 1691

Procedures for Coordinating the Investigation of Complaints or Charges of Employment
Discrimination Based on Disability Subject to the Americans with Disabilities Act and Section
504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 CFR § 1640

Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 794

Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000d

Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of
1988, 42 U.S.C. §§ 3601 et seq.

Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, 20 U.S.C. §§ 1681 et seq.

USDA, AD-3027, USDA Program Discrimination Complaint Form, January 19, 2012

USDA, DG 0100-002, Departmental Directives Definitions Glossary, September 26, 2018

USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System, January 4, 2018

USDA, DR 4300-003, Equal Opportunity Public Notification Policy, October 17, 2019

USDA, DR 4710-001, Alternative Dispute Resolution, April 5, 2006

USDA, SM 1076-023, Strengthening Civil Rights Management Functions, March 9, 2018




                                              C-2
                                         APPENDIX D

                            COMPLAINT FORM INFORMATION


The following required information from Form AD-3027, USDA Program Discrimination
Complaint Form, must be included if a Complainant uses a written format other than Form AD-
3027 to initiate a complaint:

1. Name of Complainant (First, Middle, Last).

2. Mailing Address (Street with number or P.O. Box, Apartment number, City, State, Zip
   Code).

3. Email Address.

4. Telephone Number (with Area Code) (include alternate telephone number if available)

5. Best way to reach you: Mail, phone, email, other (specify).

6. Do you have a lawyer or representative for this complaint? (Yes or No)

   a.   If yes, provide the Representative’s: First and last name; full address (including Zip
        Code), telephone, and email address.

7. Who do you believe discriminated against you? (including name(s) of person(s) involved if
   known).

8. Name of the program you applied for (if known/if applicable).

9. Name of the U.S. Department of Agriculture agency that provides Federal financial
   assistance for the program (if known):

   a.   Farm Service Agency;

   b.   Rural Development;

   c.   Food and Nutrition Service; or

   d.   Other.

10. What happened to you? State the date when the alleged discrimination occurred and then
    describe what happened. If the alleged discrimination occurred more than once, provide the
    other dates, and describe what happened. Include any supporting documents that would help
    show what happened. Include the address where the discrimination or incident occurred:
    City, State, Zip Code.



                                               D-1
11. It is a violation of the law to discriminate against you based on the following: race, color,
    national origin, age, disability, sex, religion, political beliefs, or in retaliation for prior civil
    rights activity. (Not all bases apply to all programs) You believe you were discriminated
    against based on which basis(es)?

12. Remedies: How would you like to see this complaint resolved?

13. Have you filed a complaint about the incident(s) with another Federal, state, or local agency
    or with a court? (Yes or No)

    a.   If yes, with what agency or court did you file?

    b.   When did you file (month/day/year)?

14. If you are filing this complaint more than 180 calendar days after the alleged discrimination
    occurred, please provide your “good cause” explanation for filing after that deadline.

15. Your signature or signature of your authorized representative.

16. Date you signed your complaint.

Mail Completed Form To:

USDA
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
1400 Independence Ave, SW, Stop 9410
Washington, D.C. 20250-9410

E-mail address:            program.intake@usda.gov

Telephone Numbers:

Local area:                (202) 260-1026
Toll-free:                 (866) 632-9992
Local or Federal relay:    (800) 877-8339
Spanish relay:             (800) 845-6136
Fax:                       (202) 690-7442




                                                    D-2
