                             U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                   WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                    Number:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                             4300-010
                                                                    DATE:
                                                                    December 28, 2016
SUBJECT:                                                            OPI:
Civil Rights Accountability Policy and Procedures                   Office of Assistant Secretary for
                                                                    Civil Rights/Office of Human
                                                                    Resources Management



Section                                                                               Page

1.   Purpose                                                                           1
2.   Special Instructions                                                              2
3.   Scope                                                                             2
4.   Policy                                                                            3
5.   Definitions                                                                       3
6.   Notices to Employees                                                              5
7.   Covered Actions                                                                   5
8.   Responsibilities                                                                  6
9.   Covered Actions Involving Senior Management Officials                             8

Appendix A Sample Civil Rights Accountability Case Cover Sheet                         A-1
Appendix B Sample Civil Rights Accountability Quarterly Report                         B-1
Appendix C Authorities and References                                                  C-1


1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the civil rights accountability policy and
     procedures for ensuring that appropriate disciplinary or corrective actions are taken when
     discrimination, retaliation, civil rights violations, harassment, bullying, or related misconduct
     occurs. The regulation strengthens existing civil rights policies within the U.S. Department
     of Agriculture (USDA or the Department) and requires agencies to establish training,
     alternative dispute resolution (ADR) strategies, and work to resolve complaints at the earliest
     possible opportunity.

     This DR establishes procedures that measure and evaluate both organizational and individual
     accountability in providing fair treatment for all USDA customers and employees, while
     ensuring its delivery of programs and the enforcement of civil rights.
2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS

  This regulation replaces DR 4300-010, Civil Rights Accountability Policy and Procedures,
  dated January 18, 2006.


3. SCOPE

  All employees, including Agency Heads, Staff Office Directors, managers and supervisors
  are responsible for a work environment free of discrimination or retaliation; have a duty to
  uphold the civil rights of customers and employees; and must ensure programs are delivered
  in compliance with USDA’s civil rights, nondiscrimination and equal employment
  opportunity policies. As a basic requirement, the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil
  Rights (OASCR), Departmental Management (DM), Agency Heads and Staff Office
  Directors will ensure this regulation is effectively administered and reported by agencies and
  Staff Offices in a timely manner.

  To deter violations, agencies and Staff Offices are required to provide training and resources
  to bring awareness to civil rights/equal employment opportunity and conflict management
  techniques. They are also required to employ the ADR techniques consistent with DR 4710-
  001, USDA Alternative Dispute Resolution. Disciplinary and corrective action in response to
  findings of discrimination, retaliation, civil rights violations, non-compliance with civil rights
  policies and agreements, violations of settlement agreements, or related misconduct in
  employment and program matters should be taken pursuant to prevailing laws, rules, and
  regulations.

  Management officials will be held accountable for their failure, and the failure of their
  employees, to actively support and adhere to USDA’s civil rights policies. Management
  officials shall be held accountable for discrimination, retaliation, civil rights violations, or
  related misconduct and will be evaluated in accordance with this policy and with the
  governing Federal and USDA regulations regarding discipline and adverse actions.
  Agency’s human resources (HR) and Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM) will
  determine if disciplinary or other corrective action is warranted.

  Also, management officials, including senior management officials, will be held accountable
  for enforcing civil rights notifications and electronic postings to create awareness of civil
  rights, conducting training, and taking appropriate action in response to findings of
  discrimination, retaliation, harassment, bullying, civil rights violations or related misconduct.
  Examples of such notifications and electronic postings include the Anti-Harassment policy,
  ADR DR, the Secretary’s Civil Rights Policy Statement, Notification and Federal Employee
  Antidiscrimination and Retaliation Act, and reasonable accommodation procedures.




                                                2
4. POLICY

  It is USDA’s policy to treat customers and employees fairly, with dignity and respect,
  regardless of race, color, national origin, disability, sex, political beliefs, age, marital,
  family/parental status, religion, protected genetic information, reprisal, or because all or a part
  of an individual’s income is derived from any public assistance program (not all bases apply to
  all programs).

  Agency officials, managers, supervisors and other employees shall be held accountable for
  providing training to their employees, and where appropriate, to program recipients on civil
  rights programs, obligations and the strategic civil rights goals of USDA. In addition, they
  will be held accountable for acts of discrimination, retaliation, civil rights violations, and/or
  related misconduct.


5. DEFINITIONS

  a.   Accountability. The obligation of holding agency officials, management and senior
       management officials, managers, supervisors, and other employees responsible for their
       conduct or omissions that have contributed to civil rights violations, which may include,
       but are not limited to, acts of discrimination, retaliation, or related misconduct.

  b.   Adverse Action. Adverse actions are defined by law at 5 United States Code (U.S.C.)
       Chapter 75, and include suspensions without pay, reductions in grade or pay, furloughs
       of 30 days or less, and removal

  c.   Agency. For purposes of this directive, agency is defined as a major program
       organizational unit of the Mission Area with delegated authorities to deliver agricultural
       or food programs, activities, benefits and services. The term “Agency” does not include
       Departmental Management or other Staff Offices.

  d.   Agency Head. The administrator, chief, or director of an Agency who is the official
       named or designated to have primary responsibility for the management of the Agency
       as delegated under Title 7, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 2.

  e.   Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR). Any number of conflict resolution techniques
       that use a neutral third party to assist employees, managers, supervisors, agencies, and
       USDA customers in resolving disputes.

  f.   Case Report. Memorandum reporting the results of an analysis and findings, including a
       brief statement of findings, and corrective actions required or disciplinary actions
       proposed.

  g.   Compliance Review. Inspections of agency employment and programs to determine
       compliance with civil rights laws and regulations.


                                                 3
h.   Conciliation Agreement. Conciliation is a category of dispute resolution that includes
     mediation and other similar resolution processes conducted between the participants or
     groups in conflict. Participants may be located in more than one location and/or the
     neutral conciliator may emphasize speaking with one participant at a time. Special
     emphasis is placed on restoring relationships during the process. Conciliation is often
     introduced to existing negotiations that may be deteriorating and in need of emphasis on
     addressing relationship aspects between the parties.

i.   Corrective Actions. Measures taken toward enhancing civil rights goals of USDA,
     which may be disciplinary or adverse actions and may include training or other similar
     actions.

j.   Customer(s). A person or group of persons who receive or enjoy the benefits, services,
     resources, and information or to participate in activities and programs conducted or
     funded in whole or part by USDA.

k.   Decision. A determination issued by an entity with authority to issue legal and/or
     administrative opinions, arrived at after consideration of the facts and applicable law.

l.   Disciplinary Action. An action taken with the intent to correct the conduct of an
     employee, which includes, among other actions, a letter of reprimand, suspension,
     reduction in grade or pay, or removal from the Federal Service.

m. Final Agency Decision (FAD). A final written determination issued by OASCR in an
   employment or program discrimination complaint.

n.   Analyses and Findings. Review of a Covered Action to determine if any inappropriate
     actions or inactions occurred and/or to identify systemic issues that contributed to the
     issuance of a Covered Action and to evaluate whether corrective action or a proposal of
     disciplinary action is appropriate.

o.   Management Official. A management official as defined in acts above who is also an
     employee having authority to hire, transfer, suspend, furlough, recall, promote,
     discharge, assign, reward, or discipline other employees; or having responsibility to
     direct them, adjust their grievances, or effectively recommend such action if, in
     connection with the foregoing, the exercise of authority is not of a merely routine or
     clerical nature but requires the use of independent judgment.

p.   Senior Management Official. A Senior Executive Service (SES), Senior Level (SL), and
     Scientific and Professional (ST) positions in the Competitive Service, and Senior
     Science and Technology Service (SSTS) positions in the Excepted Service or a political
     appointee (includes Schedule C appointments and non-career SES).

q.   Settlement Agreement. A voluntary, written and signed agreement by which parties to a
     dispute reflect the mutually agreed-to terms for resolving a dispute and bringing to an
     end to the processing of an informal or formal complaint of discrimination.
                                              4
  r.   Staff Office. An administrative office with specialized support functions as defined by 7
       CFR 2.4. All Staff Offices, with the exception of the National Appeals Division (NAD)
       and the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) report directly to the Secretary of
       Agriculture. NAD and OIG are in the Secretary’s reporting chain but have independent
       authority and reporting responsibilities.


6. NOTICES TO EMPLOYEES

  OASCR, Agencies, and Staff Offices must provide notice of this regulation to each of its
  employees and management. Copies may be distributed in printed format or e-mail, or
  employees and management may be notified that this regulation is available on the USDA
  website. Copies should also be provided in alternative formats or languages upon request
  and must be 508 compliant. Employees shall be notified of this regulation and subsequent
  changes to it within 90 days of publication or at the time of the employee’s appointment.


7. COVERED ACTIONS

  Agencies and OHRM will initiate a review of each of the following actions (Covered
  Actions) to determine whether disciplinary or other corrective actions are warranted:

  a.   Finding of Discrimination in any Final Agency Decision (FAD) on Equal Employment
       Opportunity and/or Program complaints of discrimination issued by OASCR (within 10
       days of issuance);

  b.   Decisions issued by an Administrative Judge of the Equal Employment Opportunity
       Commission (EEOC) that include a finding of discrimination;

  c.   Decisions issued by the EEOC Office of Federal Operations;

  d.   Decision issued by the U.S. Merit Systems Protection Board that include findings of
       discrimination on an affirmative defense;

  e.   Findings or recommendations made by OASCR regarding the non-enforcement of civil
       rights policies, laws, or regulations;

  g.   Federal Court decisions, Employment and/or Program Discrimination complaints with a
       finding of discrimination after a decision on whether or not an appeal is made or a final
       decision is issued;

  h.   As determined by OASCR, investigations, Compliance Reviews or audits of civil rights
       or related activities performed by entities within or outside of USDA that include formal
       findings of discrimination or misconduct related to civil rights;


                                               5
  i.    Settlement Agreements of EEO complaints (informal and formal);

  j.    Settlement agreements resulting from MSPB cases that include allegations of an
        affirmative defense.

  k.    Settlement Agreements of Program Discrimination complaints (informal and formal).


8. RESPONSIBILITIES

  a. ASCR shall:

       (1) Order such corrective measures in EEO and program complaints as may be
           considered necessary. Corrective measure may include recommending to the
           OHRM and the affected agency or office that appropriate disciplinary action be
           initiated when an employee has been found to have engaged in inappropriate actions
           or inactions occurred and/or to identify systemic issues that contributed to the
           issuance of a Covered Action; and

       (2) Review all Covered Actions and determine whether an Agency or any individual
           employee or Management Official should be commended for utilizing ADR in an
           exemplary manner. Covered Actions shall be handled in a manner to ensure that the
           confidentiality of any Settlement Agreement is protected except as required by law.
           In addition, any request for additional documentation or inquiry by an HR Director
           shall not contravene the confidentiality normally accorded to the ADR process,
           pursuant to the Administrative Dispute Resolution Act of 1996, or any other
           applicable privileges or restrictions on release of the agreement or other relevant
           materials.

  b. Agencies shall:

       (1) Forward pertinent case record information to the HR Director for the Agency or
           Staff Office and provide a copy of each Covered Action, along with a copy of the
           pertinent complaint file(s) maintained by OASCR, to include any pertinent EEO
           Counselor’s Report, Fact Finding Report(s), or Report(s) of Investigation, within 10
           calendar days of the date on which OASCR received notice of the Covered Action;

       (2) Forward to OASCR any Covered Actions not issued by OASCR, for official record
           keeping, as expeditiously as possible, but no later than fifteen (15) calendar days
           after receipt of the covered action;

       (3) Conduct an initial level of review of the circumstances leading to a Covered Action
           to determine if any inappropriate action(s) or inaction(s) occurred, and/or to identify
           systemic issues that may warrant appropriate corrective action;



                                                6
   (4) Complete a Civil Rights Accountability Case Cover Sheet (See Appendix A) that
       includes identification of the individual(s) whose actions or inactions gave rise to the
       initiation of the informal action or formal complaint that resulted in the Covered
       Action, identification of any systemic issues, and the findings relative to
       administrative action(s) to address and correct the actions or inactions of individuals
       and/or to correct systemic issues. Covered Actions shall be handled in a manner to
       ensure that the confidentiality of any settlement or conciliation agreement is
       protected except as required by law;

   (5) Ensure that appropriate corrective action is initiated, where there has been a finding
       of discrimination in a Covered Action, the occurrence of inappropriate
       action(s)/inaction(s) or systemic issue(s) and to deter others from engaging in similar
       conduct and to correct matters that may have an effect on USDA operations;

   (6) Timely implement proposed disciplinary and corrective actions;

   (7) Provide to OASCR and OHRM, the Civil Rights Accountability Case Cover Sheet
       and any requested supporting documentation; and

   (8) Prepare a written quarterly report setting forth the number and general description of
       disciplinary or corrective actions taken pursuant to this regulation, including Section
       9 (See Appendix B). The report shall set forth the specific nature of the disciplinary
       or corrective action initiated and shall identify the Covered Action giving rise to the
       inquiry that led to the disciplinary or corrective action. The fourth quarter report
       shall be provided to OASCR and OHRM no later than January15th of each fiscal
       year.

c. OHRM shall:

   (1) Conduct an independent preliminary review of all Covered Actions, including those
       identified under Section 9 below, and determine whether additional documentation
       such as the Counselor’s Report, informal and/or formal complaint of discrimination,
       Report of Investigation, or other relevant materials are needed to conduct an inquiry.
       Covered Actions shall be handled in a manner to ensure that the confidentiality of
       any settlement agreement (or conciliation agreement) is protected except as required
       by law. In addition, any request for additional documentation or inquiry by OHRM
       shall not contravene the confidentiality normally accorded to the ADR process,
       pursuant to the Administrative Dispute Resolution Act of 1996, or any other
       applicable privileges or restrictions on release of the agreement or other relevant
       materials;

   (2) Conduct an assessment of each Covered Action to identify any inappropriate
       action(s) or inaction(s) that occurred, and/or to identify ANY systemic issue(s) that
       gave rise to the initiation of the informal action or formal complaint that gave rise to
       the Covered Action; and


                                             7
     (3) Prepare a written report, at the end of each fiscal year, setting forth the number and
         general description of disciplinary or corrective actions taken pursuant to this
         regulation, including for Covered Actions pertaining to Senior Management
         Officials pursuant to Section 9 below. The report shall set forth the specific nature
         of the disciplinary or corrective action taken and shall identify the Covered Action
         giving rise to the inquiry that led to the disciplinary or corrective action. The annual
         report shall be provided to OASCR no later than January 15th of each year.


9. COVERED ACTIONS INVOLVING SENIOR MANAGEMENT OFFICIALS

  USDA will utilize the procedures described in this Directive for Covered Actions in which a
  Senior Management Official(s) was involved in any Covered Action.


                                            -END-




                                               8
                                       APPENDIX A

                     Sample Civil Rights Accountability Case Cover Sheet


Case Name:             Last Name, First Name, Middle Name

Case Number:           USDA Agency Case No.; EEOC Docket No.; MSPB Docket No.

Covered Action:        Identify the Covered Action being reviewed (e.g. FADi, SAii,
PMIiii, etc.)

Allegation(s):
FAD – Describe only those claims where discrimination was found.
SA – Describe the inappropriate action(s)/inaction(s) that led to the allegation(s).
PMI – Synopsis of those allegations having an affirmative action nexus.

Identification of Individual(s) critical to Decision/Outcome:
FAD – Identify by name, position, grade, & location the responsible individual(s) whose
action(s) or inaction(s) gave rise to the initiation of the informal or formal complaint that
gave rise to the Covered Action.
SA – Identify by name, position, grade, & location the responsible individual(s) whose
action(s)/inaction(s) were alleged to be inappropriate.
PMI – Identify by name, position, grade, and location the responsible individual(s) whose
action(s)/inaction(s) was alleged to be inappropriate.

Analysis of Inappropriate Conduct/Behavior/Systemic Issue:
FAD - Briefly describe the specific inappropriate action(s)/inaction(s) that resulted in the
finding of discrimination.
SA - What action(s)/inaction(s) adversely impacted the ability of the Agency to prevail
before a 3rd party and/or what action(s)/inaction(s) was inappropriate and/or misconduct
in nature?
PMI - What action(s)/inaction(s) was inappropriate conduct/behavior?

FAD/SA/PMI – What is the appropriate action(s) to correct the inappropriate
action(s)/inaction(s) to deter similar inappropriate conduct/behavior in the future?

Identification of systemic issues, if any:
FAD – What policy, practice, procedure resulted in the finding of discrimination?
SA – What policy, practice, procedure requires attention/revision/review?
PMI – What policy, practice, procedure requires attention/revision/review?
Note: If no evidence of a systemic issue(s) is identified in the analysis, state so in the
finding.




                                            A-1
               Sample Civil Rights Accountability Case Cover Sheet Cont’d

Agency Proposed Action:
FAD/SA/PMI – Based on the assessment identify what, if any, corrective actions the
Agency proposes to take to correct future occurrences. If no action was proposed, then
state why the Agency proposes no action.

Outline of Actions Taken:
FAD/SA/PMI – Describe what actions were taken and against whom, if any.




[Specialist Name]                                             Date
[Position, Agency}




i
  FAD – Final Agency Decision
ii
   SA – Settlement Agreement
iii
    PMI – Personnel Misconduct Investigation




                                               A-2
                                          APPENDIX B

                       Sample Civil Rights Accountability Quarterly Report


Agency/Staff Office:

Fiscal Year:                       Quarter:


Number of Covered Action Cases Reviewed:
       -   Final Agency Decisions
       -   EEOC Administrative Judge Decisions
       -   EEOC OFC Decisions
       -   MSPB Decisions
       -   Federal Court Decisions
       -   Settlement Agreements
           o Employment Complaints
           o Program Complaints
       -   EEOC Administrative Judge Decisions
       -   Personnel Misconduct Investigations

Number of Corrective Actions Initiated:
       -   Training
       -   Discipline
       -   +14 day suspensions
       -   -14 Day Suspension
       -   Removals/Terminations
       -   Official Reprimand
       -   Warning/Caution
       -   Other
           o Describe:




                                              B-1
                                    APPENDIX C

                        AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES



The Civil Service Reform Act of 1978, Pub. L. 95–454, 92 Stat. 1111 (CSRA)

Department Personnel Bulletin 751-3, Alternative Discipline, June 3, 1998

Department Personnel Manual, Chapter 751, Appendix A - USDA Guide for Disciplinary
Penalties

Departmental Regulations, 5 U.S.C. 301, January 3, 2012

DR 4070-735-001, USDA Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007

DR 4300-006, USDA Civil Rights Policy, June 30, 2000

DR 4300-007, Processing Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Complaints of
Discrimination, July 12, 2016

DR 4710-001, USDA Alternative Dispute Resolution, April 5, 2006




                                         C-1
