                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                               NUMBER:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                        DR 4300-003
                                                               DATE:
SUBJECT: Equal Opportunity Public Notification Policy          October 17, 2019
                                                               EXPIRATION DATE:
OPI: Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights        October 17, 2024



Section                                                                                    Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                1
2.   Scope                                                                                  2
3.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                     2
4.   Policy                                                                                 2
5.   Non-Discrimination Statement                                                           3
6.   Recipient Requirements                                                                 5
7.   And Justice for All Posters                                                            5
8.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                             6
9.   Inquiries                                                                              8

Appendix A Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                       A-1
Appendix B Definitions                                                                      B-1
Appendix C Authorities and References                                                       C-1
Appendix D Form AD-475-A, Assisted Programs                                                 D-1
Appendix E Form AD-475-B, Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
           and Food Distribution Program on Indian Reservations Programs                    E-1
Appendix F Form AD-475-C, Conducted Programs                                                F-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of
          Agriculture’s (USDA) policy for ensuring positive and continuing notification of its
          equal opportunity policy to the public and USDA employees.

     b.   This DR is also designed to enhance customer awareness of the USDA Non-
          Discrimination policy and other pertinent information ensuring broad dissemination of
          the policy to the public.
2. SCOPE

  This DR applies to all programs and activities conducted in whole, in part, or assisted by
  USDA, its Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This regulation replaces DR 4300-003, Equal Opportunity Public Notification Policy,
       dated June 2, 2015.

  b.   This policy is effective immediately and remains in effect until it is either superseded or
       expires.

  c.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices shall align their equal opportunity public
       notification policies and procedures with this DR within 6 months of the publication
       date.


4. POLICY

  It is the policy of USDA:

  a.   That no person shall be discriminated against on the basis of race, color, national origin,
       religion, sex, disability, age, marital status, family/parental status, income derived from
       a public assistance program, political beliefs, reprisal or retaliation for prior civil rights
       activity, in any program or activity conducted or funded by USDA. (Not all prohibited
       bases apply to all programs)

       This policy will be communicated to the public through all appropriate USDA public
       information channels and to the local population served or directly affected by a
       recipient’s program or activity, in English and other languages appropriate to the local
       population, and in alternative means of communication (e.g., Braille, large print, and
       audiotape). All communication posted on a website must comply with Section 508 of
       the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended;

  b.   To ensure that its outreach activities encompass protected groups, underrepresented
       populations, Tribal communities, Socially Disadvantaged, Beginning and Limited
       Resource Farmers and Ranchers, Veteran Farmers, 1890 Historically Black Colleges
       and Universities, 1994 Land Grant Institutions, Hispanic Serving Institutions, Tribal
       Colleges and Universities, institutions serving Asian American and Pacific Islanders,
       and institutions serving individuals with disabilities through dissemination of public
       notifications;




                                                 2
  c.   To use positive examples of program participation by all protected groups in all forms of
       visual, print, electronic, and audio public information materials; and

  d.   To prohibit USDA employee participation in any public meeting if it is known that in
       such meetings customers have been or will be illegally discriminated against based on
       Federal laws or regulations, because of their race, color, national origin, religion, sex,
       disability, age, marital status, family/parental status, income derived from a public
       assistance program, political beliefs, reprisal or retaliation for prior civil rights activity,
       in any program or activity conducted or funded by USDA.


5. NON-DISCRIMINATION STATEMENT

  a.   The Non-Discrimination Statement provided below must be posted in all USDA Mission
       Areas, agencies, and staff offices and included on all materials produced by USDA for
       public information, public education, or public distribution.

  b.   The statement must be made available in English, in other languages appropriate to the
       local population served or directly affected by any USDA program or activity, and in
       alternative means of communication (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape).

  c.   All communication posted on a website must comply with Section 508 and with all
       applicable Federal civil rights laws, regulations, Executive Orders, and USDA
       regulations and policies.

                                     USDA’s Non-Discrimination Statement

           In accordance with Federal civil rights law and U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) civil
           rights regulations and policies, USDA, its Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, employees,
           and institutions participating in or administering USDA programs are prohibited from
           discriminating based on race, color, national origin, religion, sex, disability, age, marital status,
           family/parental status, income derived from a public assistance program, political beliefs, or
           reprisal or retaliation for prior civil rights activity, in any program or activity conducted or
           funded by USDA (not all bases apply to all programs). Remedies and complaint filing
           deadlines vary by program or incident.

           Program information may be made available in languages other than English. Persons with
           disabilities who require alternative means of communication to obtain program information
           (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, American Sign Language) should contact the State or local
           Agency that administers the program or contact USDA through the Telecommunications Relay
           Service at 711 (voice and TTY). Additionally, program information may be made available in
           languages other than English.




                                                    3
         To file a program discrimination complaint, a complainant should complete a Form
         AD-3027, USDA Program Discrimination Complaint Form, which can be obtained
         online at https://www.ocio.usda.gov/document/ad-3027, from any USDA office, by
         calling (866) 632-9992, or by writing a letter addressed to USDA. The letter must
         contain the complainant’s name, address, telephone number, and a written description
         of the alleged discriminatory action in sufficient detail to inform the Assistant
         Secretary for Civil Rights (ASCR) about the nature and date of an alleged civil rights
         violation. The completed AD-3027 form or letter must be submitted to USDA by:

        (1) Mail: U.S. Department of Agriculture
                  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
                  1400 Independence Avenue, SW
                  Washington, D.C. 20250-9410; or

        (2) Fax: (833) 256-1665 or (202) 690-7442; or

        (3) Email: program.intake@usda.gov

        USDA is an equal opportunity provider, employer, and lender.


d.   Exceptions to Including the Full USDA Non-Discrimination Statement.

     (1) If the size of the material is too small to include the full statement provided above,
         the material must, at a minimum, include the following statement in print in the
         same size as the text:

             “USDA is an equal opportunity provider, employer, and lender.”

         Where appropriate, a recipient may state:

             “This institution is an equal opportunity provider.”

     (2) Similarly, when an audio or video presentation does not reasonably lend itself to
         including the full statement, the presentation will, at a minimum, include the
         following statement, presented in a conspicuous and meaningful manner:

             “USDA is an equal opportunity provider, employer, and lender.”

         Where appropriate, a recipient may state:

             “This institution is an equal opportunity provider.”




                                              4
6. RECIPIENT REQUIREMENTS

  a.   All prohibited bases do not apply to all programs. The specific bases for Federally
       assisted programs can be found at Appendix D for Assisted Programs and Appendix E
       for the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) and the Food Distribution
       Program on Indian Reservations (FDPIR) programs.

  b. In accordance with section 6(a), above, the applicable Non-Discrimination Statement for
     recipients must be included on all print and non-print materials, including, but not limited
     to, audio, video, website, brochures, newsletters, and by-laws. If the size of the material
     is too small to include the full statement, the material must at a minimum, include the
     following statement in print in the same font size as the main text:

           “This institution is an equal opportunity provider.”

  c.   Recipients are required to notify applicants with disabilities and limited English
       proficiency (LEP) persons of their right to free language assistance and accommodations
       and to provide these services upon request.


7. AND JUSTICE FOR ALL POSTERS

  a.   The USDA “And Justice for All” posters will be the primary method utilized to inform
       customers of their rights. The “And Justice for All” posters will be used for this purpose
       except when appropriate substitutes in outdoor areas are necessary. There are three
       versions of the “And Justice for All” posters: Form AD-475-A is the poster that applies
       to assisted programs; Form AD-475-B is the poster that applies to both the Food and
       Nutrition Service SNAP and FDPIR programs; and Form AD-475-C is the poster that
       applies to conducted programs. Please see Appendices D, E, and F for additional
       information on each of these posters.

  b.   If the material is too small to permit the full Non-Discrimination Statement to be
       included, the material will, at a minimum, include the alternative statement described in
       Section 5.d(1), in print in the same size as the text. Similarly, when an audio or video
       presentation does not reasonably lend itself to the full statement, the presentation will, at
       a minimum, include the alternative statement presented in a conspicuous and meaningful
       manner, as described in Section 5.d(2); and

  c.   Sound judgement will be applied as to the need for the statement in specific situations.
       Questions about the appropriateness of including the statement may be referred to
       OASCR for policy guidance.

  d.   All “And Justice for All” posters must be printed at 11” width x 17” height. The
       minimum text size to be used on the posters is 14 point. Mission Area, agency, and staff
       office officials can obtain “And Justice for All” posters by contacting the Office of



                                                5
       Communications. Recipients must contact the sponsoring Mission Area, agency, or staff
       office Civil Rights Division to obtain “And Justice for All” posters.

  e.   The applicable “And Justice for All” posters must be prominently displayed in all
       offices where there is a USDA presence and where customers can view it.

  f.   Please note that institutions participating in or administering USDA programs must
       display the appropriate “And Justice for All” poster wherever program delivery is being
       conducted.


8. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The ASCR will:

       (1) Provide equal opportunity leadership, coordination, and direction for USDA’s
           federally assisted and conducted programs;

       (2) Provide policy guidance to Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, and recipients
           upon request consistent with any findings resulting from ASCR’s monitoring of the
           Mission Area, agency, staff office, or recipients’ civil right compliance activities;

       (3) Provide the necessary format for, and any changes to, the USDA Non-
           Discrimination notices and/or posters;

       (4) Authorize in writing any variations to the text of the Non-Discrimination Statement;

       (5) Ensure through its compliance review process that notices of the current USDA
           Non-Discrimination Statement are prominently posted in USDA Mission Areas,
           agencies, and staff offices, and in languages appropriate to the local population
           likely to be served or likely to be directly affected by a recipient’s program or
           activity; and

       (6) Monitor Mission Area, agency, staff office, and recipient actions through
           established review activities for compliance with this policy.

  b.   The Director, Office of Communications will:

       (1) Review and monitor all pertinent internal USDA materials and public information
           materials submitted to it for applicable communication requirements;

       (2) Work closely with OASCR to design any required changes to the “And Justice for
           All” posters;

       (3) Print “And Justice for All” posters for Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices,
           upon request utilizing Form AD-78, Request for Printing and Binding;



                                               6
     (4) Review all Mission Area, agency, or staff office requests to ensure the poster
         language complies with the policy and guidance established in this regulation, and
         make appropriate revisions when necessary before materials are printed, published,
         or placed on websites; and

     (5) Review all contractor-prepared materials to ensure compliance with the policy and
         guidance established in this regulation and withhold final approval of deliverables
         until they are in full compliance.

c.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Heads will:

     (1) Seek approval from OASCR regarding any new or revised Non-Discrimination
         Statements;

     (2) Post the Non-Discrimination Statement in its entirety on all materials produced by
         USDA and its agencies for public information, public education, or public
         distribution;

     (3) Post the “And Justice for All” posters and the Non-Discrimination Statement on its
         websites or incorporate a link to the postings found on USDA’s website;

     (4) Ensure through normal review processes that field offices are complying with
         public notification requirements;

     (5) Ensure through their review processes that notices of the applicable Non-
         Discrimination Statement are prominently posted in recipient offices and locations;

     (6) Obtain and distribute appropriate posters to recipients;

     (7) Ensure the Non-Discrimination Statement is posted in English and other languages
         appropriate to the local population likely to be served or likely to be directly
         affected by a recipient program or activity;

     (8) Establish outreach programs at the local level to ensure all persons, especially those
         who previously may not have participated fully, are made aware of the availability
         of USDA programs and services, how to effectively use them, and to encourage
         them to participate;

     (9) Include appropriate references to the USDA’s equal opportunity policy in public
         speeches and meetings;

     (10) Provide materials in alternative communication methods (e.g., Braille, large print,
          American Sign Language, audiotape) upon request. Additionally, this information
          should be available in other languages, as applicable;




                                             7
      (11) Ensure all information listed on their websites comply with Section 508
           requirements; and


9. INQUIRIES

  All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices shall direct questions and inquiries
  regarding this DR to the Center for Civil Rights Operations (CCRO) Compliance Division
  via email at CCROCompliance@usda.gov.


                                              -END-




                                             8
                        APPENDIX A

            ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

AD       Agriculture Department (for Departmental forms use only)
ASCR     Assistant Secretary of Civil Rights
CCRO     Center for Civil Rights Operations
CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
DR       Departmental Regulation
FDPIR    Food Distribution Program on Indian Reservations
LEP      Limited English Proficiency
OASCR    Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
OPI      Office of Primary Interest
SNAP     Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
TARGET   Technology and Accessible Resources Give Employment Today
TTY      Text Telephone
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                       A-1
                                        APPENDIX B

                                        DEFINITIONS


a. Agency. Organizational units of the Department, other than staff offices as defined
   below, whose heads report to officials within the Office of the Secretary, Deputy
   Secretary, Under Secretaries, Assistant Secretaries, and Assistant to the Secretary.

b. Beneficiary. A person or group of persons with an entitlement to receive or utilize
   the benefits, services, resources, and information, or participate in activities and
   programs conducted or funded in whole or in part by USDA.

c. Complaint. A written statement (except as provided below) that contains the
   complainant's name and address and describes an agency’s alleged discriminatory
   action in sufficient detail to inform OASCR of the nature and date of an alleged civil
   rights violation. The statement must be signed by the complainant(s) or someone
   authorized to sign on behalf of the complainant(s). The complaint does not need to be
   written or signed if it is submitted in an alternate format to accommodate the
   complaint filing needs of a person who has an LEP, a disability, or other special need.

d. Compliance Review. A written review of an agency's compliance with civil rights
   requirements, to be prepared by OASCR or an Agency and to identify each finding of
   non-compliance or other civil rights-related issue. The review is conducted at the
   discretion of OASCR or an agency, or if there has been a formal finding of non-
   compliance.

e. Federally Conducted Programs and Activities. Program services, benefits, resources,
   or information delivered directly to the public by USDA.

f. Federally Assisted Programs and Activities. Programs and Activities of an entity that
   receives Federal financial assistance. “Assistance” or “benefits” refers to the transfer
   of money, property, services, or anything of value, the principal purpose of, which is
   to accomplish a public purpose of support or stimulation authorized by Federal
   statute. Assistance includes, but is not limited to, grants, loans, loan guarantees,
   scholarships, mortgage loans, insurance, and other types of financial assistance,
   including cooperative agreements; property, technical assistance, counseling,
   statistical, and other expert information; and service activities of regulatory Agencies.
   It does not include the provision of conventional public information services.

g. Languages Appropriate to the Local Population. Languages determined to be
   consistent with the requirements and guidance provided in Executive Order 13166,
   Improving Access to Services for Persons with Limited English Proficiency; DR
   4300-005, Prohibition Against National Origin Discrimination Affecting Persons
   with Limited English Proficiency in Programs and Activities Conducted by USDA;
   and USDA’s Guidance on Services for Persons with LEP in assisted programs.



                                        B-1
h. Limited English Proficiency (LEP) Persons. Persons who do not speak English as
   their primary language and have a limited ability to read, speak, write, or understand
   English.

i. Materials. This term includes print (e.g., brochures, newsletters, and by-laws) and
   non-print (e.g., audio, video, and website) types of communication.

j. Mission Area. A group of agencies with related functions that report to the same
   Under or Assistant Secretary. Research, Education, and Economics is an example of
   a Mission Area.

k. Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights (OASCR). The office of the Civil
   Rights Officer for USDA responsible for providing leadership and direction for the
   fair treatment of all USDA customers and employees while ensuring the delivery of
   quality programs and enforcement of civil rights. OASCR has the authority to
   delegate civil rights functions to heads of USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
   offices. OASCR is also responsible for evaluating Agency Heads on their
   performance of civil rights functions.

l. Office of Communications. The office that provides leadership, expertise, counsel,
   and coordination for the development of communication strategies, which are vital to
   the overall formulation, awareness, and acceptance of USDA programs and policies;
   also serves as the principal USDA contact point for the consistent and timely
   dissemination of information.

m. Recipient. Any State, political subdivision of any State, or instrumentality of any
   State or political subdivision (to include the District of Columbia and any United
   States territories and possessions), any public or private Agency, institution,
   organization, or any other entity or individual in any State to whom Federal financial
   assistance is extended, directly or through another recipient (sub-recipient), including
   any successor, assignee, or transferee thereof, and excluding any ultimate beneficiary.

n. Section 508 Compliant. Compliance with the requirements of Section 508 of the
   Rehabilitation Act ensures that Federal information is accessible to individuals with
   disabilities unless an undue burden would be imposed on the USDA or an Agency.

o. Staff Office. A Departmental administrative office, the head of which reports to any
   official within the Office of the Secretary (OSEC).




                                        B-2
                                            APPENDIX C

                                AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES

7 CFR Part 2, Delegations of Authority by the Secretary of Agriculture and General Officers
of the Department

7 CFR Part 2.24, Agriculture, Delegations of Authority by the Secretary of Agriculture and
General Officers of the Department, Delegations of Authority to the Deputy Secretary, Under
Secretaries, and Assistant Secretaries, Assistant Secretary for Administration

7 CFR Part 15, Nondiscrimination

7 CFR Part 16, Equal Opportunity for Religious Organizations

12 CFR 1002.1, Equal Credit Opportunity Act of 1977 (Regulation B), as amended

28 CFR 42.401 et seq., Department of Justice, Coordination of Enforcement of Non-
discrimination in Federally Assisted Programs

Age Discrimination Act of 1975

Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990

Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act of 2008

Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987

Executive Order 13166, Improving Access to Services for Persons with Limited English
Proficiency, August 11, 2000

Food Stamp Act of 1977

Section 504, Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended

Section 508, Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended

Title IV, Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. 2000d, et seq.

Title IX, Education Amendments of 1972, 20 U.S.C. 1681, et seq.

USDA, AD-78, Request for Printing and Binding

USDA, AD-475-A, Assisted Poster




                                            C-1
USDA, AD-475-B, Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) and Food
Distribution Program on Indian Reservations (FDPIR)

USDA, AD-475-C, Conducted Poster

USDA, AD-3027 USDA Program Discrimination Complaint Form

USDA, DR 4330-005, Prohibition Against National Origin Discrimination Affecting Persons
with Limited English Proficiency in Programs and Activities Conducted by USDA




                                        C-2
                                          APPENDIX D

                         AD-475-A: “AND JUSTICE FOR ALL”
                    POSTER LANGUAGE FOR ASSISTED PROGRAMS



In accordance with Federal law and U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) civil rights
regulations and policies, this institution is prohibited from discriminating on the basis of
race, color, national origin, sex, age, disability, and reprisal or retaliation for prior civil
rights activity. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.)

Program information may be made available in languages other than English. Persons
with disabilities who require alternative means of communication for program
information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, and American Sign Language) should
contact the State or local Agency that administers the program or contact USDA through
the Telecommunications Relay Service at 711 (voice and TTY). Additionally, program
information may be made available in languages other than English..

To file a program discrimination complaint, a complainant should complete a Form
AD-3027, USDA Program Discrimination Complaint Form, which can be obtained
online at https://www.ocio.usda.gov/document/ad-3027, from any USDA office, by
calling (866) 632-9992, or by writing a letter addressed to USDA. The letter must
contain the complainant’s name, address, telephone number, and a written description of
the alleged discriminatory action in sufficient detail to inform the Assistant Secretary for
Civil Rights (ASCR) about the nature and date of an alleged civil rights violation. The
completed AD-3027 form or letter must be submitted to USDA by:

    (1) Mail: U.S. Department of Agriculture
              Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
              1400 Independence Avenue, SW
              Washington, D.C. 20250-9410; or

    (2) Fax: (833) 256-1665 or (202) 690-7442; or

    (3) Email: program.intake@usda.gov.

“This institution is an equal opportunity provider.”




                                          D-1
                                         APPENDIX E

                       AD-475-B: “AND JUSTICE FOR ALL”
               POSTER LANGUAGE FOR SNAP AND FDPIR PROGRAMS



In accordance with Federal law and U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) civil rights
regulations and policies, this institution is prohibited from discriminating on the basis of
race, color, national origin, sex, religious creed, disability, age, political beliefs, or
reprisal or retaliation for prior civil rights activity.

To file a program discrimination complaint, a complainant should complete a Form
AD-3027, USDA Program Discrimination Complaint Form, which can be obtained
online at https://www.ocio.usda.gov/document/ad-3027, from any USDA office, by
calling (866) 632-9992, or by writing a letter addressed to USDA. The letter must
contain the complainant’s name, address, telephone number and a written description of
the alleged discriminatory action in sufficient detail to inform the Assistant Secretary for
Civil Rights (ASCR) about the nature and date of an alleged civil rights violation. The
completed AD-3027 form or letter must be submitted to USDA by:

   (1) Mail: U.S. Department of Agriculture
   (2) Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights 1400 Independence Avenue, SW
   (3) Washington, D.C. 20250-9410; or
   (4)
   (5) Fax: (833) 256-1665 or (202) 690-7442; or

   (6) Email: program.intake@usda.gov.

“This institution is an equal opportunity provider.”




                                         E-1
                                          APPENDIX F

                        AD-475-C: “AND JUSTICE FOR ALL”
                  POSTER LANGUAGE FOR CONDUCTED PROGRAMS



The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs
and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, religion, sex, disability, age,
marital status, familial/ parental status, income derived from a public assistance
program, political beliefs, reprisal or retaliation for prior civil rights activity. (Not all
prohibited bases apply to all programs.)

Program information may be made available in languages other than English. Persons
with disabilities who require alternative means of communication for program
information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, and American Sign Language) should
contact the State or local Agency that administers the program or contact USDA through
the Telecommunications Relay Service at 711 (voice and TTY). Additionally, program
information may be made available in languages other than English.

To file a program discrimination complaint, a complainant should complete a Form
AD-3027, USDA Program Discrimination Complaint Form, which can be obtained
online at https://www.ocio.usda.gov/document/ad-3027, from any USDA office, by
calling (866) 632-9992, or by writing a letter addressed to USDA. The letter must
contain the complainant’s name, address, telephone number and a written description of
the alleged discriminatory action in sufficient detail to inform the Assistant Secretary for
Civil Rights (ASCR) about the nature and date of an alleged civil rights violation. The
completed AD-3027 form or letter must be submitted to USDA by:

   (1) Mail: U.S. Department of Agriculture
             Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
             1400 Independence Avenue, SW
             Washington, D.C. 20250-9410; or

   (2) Fax: (833) 256-1665 or (202) 690-7442; or

   (3) Email: program.intake@usda.gov.

“USDA is an equal opportunity provider, employer, and lender.”




                                         F-1
