                                   U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                      Washington, D.C. 20250



                                                                          Number:
        DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                           4330-003
                                                                          DATE:
SUBJECT:                                                                  October 5, 2015
Nondiscrimination in USDA-Conducted Programs and Activities
                                                                          OPI:
                                                                          Office of the Assistant
                                                                          Secretary for Civil Rights




                                      TABLE OF CONTENTS

   Section                                                                   Page

   1.     Purpose                                                            1
   2.     Special Instructions/Cancellations                                 1
   3.     Scope                                                              2
   4.     Policy                                                             2
   5.     Definitions                                                        2
   6.     Roles and Responsibilities                                         4
   7.     Complaint Processing                                               7
   8.     Instructional Manuals and Directives                               11

   Appendix A    Authorities                                                 A-1



   1.     PURPOSE

          The purpose of this Departmental Regulation (regulation) is to establish policy and to
          provide guidance to the agencies and employees of the United States Department of
          Agriculture (the Department or USDA) in order to ensure compliance with and
          enforcement of the Department’s prohibitions against discrimination in its conducted
          programs and activities.


   2.     SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

          This regulation supersedes DR 4330-003, Nondiscrimination in USDA-Conducted
          Programs and Activities, dated March 3, 1999.
3.   SCOPE

     This regulation has as its primary focus the processing of discrimination complaints
     pertaining to programs and activities conducted by USDA and its agencies.


4.   POLICY

     It is USDA’s policy to ensure that no person in the United States is subject to prohibited
     discrimination in programs and activities conducted in whole or in part by USDA based
     on race, color, national origin, disability, sex, political beliefs, age, marital status,
     family/parental status, religion, reprisal. or because all or a part of an individual’s income
     is derived from any public assistance program. The policy, in part, is enforced by:

     a.     USDA’s conduct of its programs and activities in a manner consistent with
            applicable Federal and USDA civil rights requirements; and

     b.     Timely and appropriate processing of program discrimination complaints filed
            against USDA.

     No person shall be subjected to reprisal or harassment because he/she filed a
     discrimination complaint; participated in or contributed to the identification,
     investigation, prosecution, or resolution of civil rights violations in or by any USDA-
     conducted program or activity; or otherwise aided or supported the enforcement of
     Federal or USDA civil rights laws, rules, regulations, or policies.


5.   DEFINITIONS

     a.     Agency. An organizational unit of the Department with delegated authority to
            deliver USDA programs, activities, benefits, and services to the public. Heads of
            agencies receive their delegated authority as prescribed in 7 C.F.R. Part 2. The
            term “Agency” does not include Departmental Management or other staff offices.

     b.     Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR). Any resolution procedure in which
            parties agree to use a third-party neutral to resolve complaints or issues in
            controversy. ADR methods include, but are not limited to, mediation, facilitation,
            fact finding, arbitration or use of ombudsman, or any combination thereof.

     c.     Agency Position Statement (APS). A written statement providing the agency’s
            position that binds the agency responding to the allegations made by the
            complainant in the discrimination complaint. The APS must contain, at
            minimum, a written statement summarizing the underlying, relevant facts and
            responding to each of the complainant’s allegations, and must be signed by an
            agency official who is authorized to provide a binding statement on behalf of the
            agency. An APS must also contain all supporting documentation requested by the
            Office of Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights (OASCR).
                                               2
d.   Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights or OASCR. The civil rights officer for
     USDA responsible for the performance and oversight of all civil rights functions
     within USDA, and who retains the authority to delegate civil rights functions to
     heads of USDA agencies and offices.

e.   Complainant. A person (or group of persons) who believes that he/she has been
     subjected to prohibited discrimination by a USDA agency in the delivery of
     program benefits or services, or while participating or attempting to participate in
     activities and programs conducted by USDA.

f.   Complaint. A written statement that contains the complainant’s name and address
     and describes an agency’s alleged discriminatory action in sufficient detail to
     inform the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights (ASCR) of the nature and date of
     an alleged civil rights violation. The statement must be signed by the
     complainant(s) or someone authorized to sign on behalf of the complainant(s). To
     accommodate the needs of persons with disabilities, special needs, or who have
     Limited English Proficiency, a complaint may be in an alternative format.

g.   Complaint Investigation. An impartial process designed to obtain the facts and
     evidence relevant to a factual determination of whether the complainant was
     subjected to the alleged discrimination in violation of USDA civil rights
     regulations and applicable statutes.

h.   Conducted Programs and Activities. Program services, benefits or resources
     delivered directly to the public by USDA.

i.   Days. Mean calendar days, not business days.

j.   Discrimination. Unlawful treatment or denial of benefits, services, terms,
     conditions, rights or privileges to a person or persons because of their race, color,
     national origin, age, disability, sex, marital status, family/parental status, religion,
     political beliefs, reprisal, or because all or a part of an individual’s income is
     derived from any public assistance program. .

k.   Final Agency Decision (FAD). A written statement signed by the ASCR or
     his/her designee setting forth the issues and allegations, related facts and
     evidence, and findings and conclusions identified in response to a complaint
     investigation of a USDA agency or instrumentality. The FAD notifies the
     complainant and appropriate agency representative(s) whether and to what extent
     the agency has violated any civil rights requirements.

l.   Settlement Agreement. A voluntary written agreement that resolves a complaint
     wherein USDA or one of its agencies agrees to effect corrective or remedial
     action.
m.   USDA Program Discrimination Complaint Form. A form which assists USDA
     customers in filing a discrimination complaint. A completed and signed USDA
                                        3
          Program Discrimination Complaint Form (AD-3027) satisfies the requirements
          set forth in the definition of Complaint.


6.   ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

     a.   The Secretary of Agriculture (Secretary) shall set the direction, provide
          leadership, prescribe regulations, set overall civil rights policy, and ensure
          programmatic civil rights compliance and enforcement throughout the
          Department, including:

          (1)    Ensuring the availability of resources adequate to support and carry out a
                 broad range of civil rights compliance and enforcement activities
                 throughout the Department; and

          (2)    Accomplishing his/her responsibilities directly and through the broad
                 delegation of authority for civil rights to OASCR and other USDA
                 agencies, offices, and employees.

     b.   OASCR shall provide the overall leadership, coordination, and direction in
          USDA’s civil rights programs, including:

          (1)    Providing oversight, leadership, coordination and direction for the USDA
                 civil rights compliance and enforcement program;

          (2)    Delegating to general officers of the Department and heads of
                 Departmental agencies, under the direction of OASCR, to ensure oversight
                 of Departmental civil rights activities and the responsibility for the day-to-
                 day management and administration of the Department’s civil rights
                 enforcement activities as OASCR deems appropriate or necessary;

          (3)    Ensuring that agencies and their instrumentalities actively support and
                 adhere to all civil rights policies, directives, findings and decisions;

          (4)    Systematically reviewing, evaluating, and holding Agency Heads and
                 Administrators to a high accountability standard for civil rights
                 performance;

          (5)    Having the sole responsibility to ensure the adequacy and sufficiency of
                 investigations, adjudications, and resolution of complaints, and sole
                 authority for determining whether discrimination has occurred in USDA
                 conducted programs and activities, and ordering appropriate corrective or
                 remedial action;

          (6)    Issuing policies, directives, procedures, rules, and regulations to ensure
                 that the Department fully achieves its civil rights compliance and
                 enforcement obligations;
                                            4
     (7)    Recommending sanctions to secure agency compliance with applicable
            civil rights laws;

     (8)    Ensuring through training, dissemination of information, technical
            assistance, and other appropriate methods, that the Department’s civil
            rights employees (including contract employees and consultants)
            demonstrate and maintain the highest level of current technical
            competence, skills, knowledge, and abilities;

     (9)    Providing leadership and proactively promoting civil rights at USDA, and
            provide guidance and oversight to USDA agencies and customers;

     (10)   Developing and implementing a comprehensive civil rights strategic plan
            that encompasses the full scope of the Department’s civil rights
            obligations, supplemented by an annual operating plan for strategy
            accomplishment, and disseminate the plan throughout the Department; and

     (11)   Serving as a clearinghouse for information dissemination and exchange
            with USDA agencies, governmental and non-governmental civil rights
            communities.

c.   Agency

     Each Agency Head shall:

     (1)    Establish, maintain and ensure an effective, proactive civil rights
            compliance and enforcement program in accordance with the policies,
            guidelines, and directives promulgated by OASCR;

     (2)    Provide adequate and appropriately trained and qualified staff and other
            resources as necessary to ensure efficient and effective accomplishment of
            the Department’s civil rights obligations;

     (3)    Timely collect and make available all race, ethnicity, and gender data and
            information on all program applicants and participants in conducted
            programs as necessary and requested by OASCR to enable efficient and
            effective monitoring and evaluation of the Department’s program of civil
            rights compliance and enforcement;

     (4)    Cooperate with and provide assistance as requested by OASCR in the
            investigation of any complaints, including the timely submission of an
            APS, ensuring access to information, and resolving any issues of non-
            compliance;

     (5)    Timely and effectively implement corrective actions and remedies in
            response to a finding resulting from a FAD concluding that the agency has
                                     5
                 engaged in prohibited discriminatory policies, practices, or procedures in
                 providing USDA programs or activities; and

          (6)    Adhere to Departmental Regulations, Departmental Manuals, and all other
                 policy guidance regarding complaint processing promulgated by OASCR.

     d.   USDA Office of the General Counsel (OGC)

          Upon request of OASCR, OGC shall:

          (1)    Provide legal expertise, advice, and support to OASCR to ensure the
                 accomplishment of the Department’s civil rights compliance and
                 enforcement obligations;

          (2)    Conduct legal sufficiency reviews of draft program complaint FADs and
                 Settlement Agreements in such cases as OASCR deems advisable; and

          (3)    Provide legal advice relating to other legal issues involved in complaints
                 and civil rights compliance reviews.


7.   COMPLAINT PROCESSING

     a.   Complainant’s Right To File

          (1)    Any person who believes that he/she or any specific class of individuals
                 has been subjected to discrimination by any USDA agency in the delivery
                 of USDA program services or benefits, or while participating in programs
                 or activities conducted by USDA, may personally or through a
                 representative file a complaint with OASCR.

          (2)    Complainants may use the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint
                 Form to ensure that they have provided the necessary information. The
                 USDA Program Discrimination Complaint Form may be obtained from
                 any USDA office or online from the OASCR website.

          (3)    If a complaint alleging discrimination is submitted or filed with any
                 agency within USDA other than OASCR, the receiving agency will refer
                 the complaint to OASCR within five calendar days of the date the
                 complaint was received.

          (4)    Under certain circumstances, a complainant may file a complaint against
                 USDA in federal court. Once a complainant has elected to file in court or
                 the United States Attorney has brought litigation in federal court against a
                 complainant on behalf of USDA, USDA will close administrative
                 discrimination complaints that involve the same or essentially the same
                 claims or issues. Complainants who file in court may not seek redress
                                           6
              through USDA’s administrative complaint process for the same or
              essentially the same claims.

b.   Timeliness

     (1)      To be timely, complaints must be in writing, as defined above, and filed
              within 180 calendar days from the date the complainant knew or should
              have known of the alleged discrimination.

     (2)      OASCR retains the authority to waive the timeliness requirement when it
              finds that good cause is shown by the complainant.

c.   Intake

     (1)      OASCR will issue an acknowledgement to the complainant in writing
              following OASCR’s receipt of the complaint.

     (2)      OASCR will review each complaint to determine whether it is complete,
              timely filed, within USDA jurisdiction, subject to the authorities enforced
              by USDA, and whether the complaint must be resolved based on an
              investigation or whether it is appropriate for an early resolution or pre-
              investigation settlement process.

     (3)      In situations where a complaint lacks information sufficient to determine
              jurisdiction and acceptance, and is therefore incomplete, OASCR will
              request additional information from the complainant, in writing. The letter
              will advise the complainant of the information needed to complete the
              complaint and that the information must be submitted within 30 calendar
              days of the date of receipt of the letter.

     (4)      If a complainant is not able to respond to the request for information
              necessary to complete his/her complaint in a timely manner, the
              complainant may request an extension of time for submitting the
              information. If a complainant does not submit the information in a timely
              manner, OASCR may administratively close the complaint. OASCR will
              inform the complainant and agency in writing of an administrative closure.

     (5)      OASCR will make appropriate referrals of any complaints that are not
              within OASCR’s jurisdiction or which are the subject of concurrent
              jurisdiction with another Federal, State, or local agency. The complainant
              will be notified of the referral in writing.

     (6)      If OASCR accepts the complaint, it will notify the complainant in writing.
              The acceptance letter will, at a minimum, include:

              (a)    the date the complaint was received;

                                        7
            (b)      the case number assigned;

            (c)      any other information that may be specifically required by the
                     appropriate statute;

            (d)      a notice that the complainant may wish to consult with an attorney
                     regarding their options;

            (e)      information relating to ADR; and

            (f)      an OASCR contact name and telephone number.

d.   Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR)

     (1)    OASCR has the option to offer ADR to USDA customers or applicants at
            any time OASCR determines ADR techniques may facilitate the
            resolution of discrimination complaints, concerns or disputes regarding the
            administration of programs conducted by USDA.

     (2)    OASCR will offer ADR as an early resolution option to all USDA
            customers who file a program discrimination complaint that is accepted
            for processing. All program complaints will be referred to OASCR’s
            division that is designated to provide ADR immediately after the
            complaint has been accepted and before an investigation occurs. OASCR
            retains the authority to extend the early resolution period for good cause.

     (3)    OASCR has discretion to allow ADR for program complaints even after a
            complaint has been forwarded for an investigation. USDA customers and
            Agencies may request ADR for program complaints at any point before a
            FAD is rendered.

     (4)    Complaints resolved through ADR will be closed and all settlements
            reached during ADR will be reduced to writing.

     (5)    OASCR may conclude the ADR process at any time upon determining
            that further efforts are not likely to lead to resolution.

     (6)    OASCR will notify the USDA customer and the agency in writing upon
            concluding the ADR process. In the case of an accepted program
            complaint that could not be resolved through ADR, the notice will inform
            the complainant of the next step in the complaint process.

e.   Investigation

     OASCR will complete a Complaint Investigation after acceptance of the
     complaint.

                                       8
f.   Adjudication/FAD

     (1)   OASCR will complete a FAD upon completion of the Complaint
           Investigation.

     (2)   If OASCR concludes or the agency presents adequate documentation that
           a violation that existed at the onset of the investigation was corrected prior
           to the conclusion of the investigation, the FAD may state that a violation
           existed at the onset of the investigation, but was voluntarily corrected by
           the agency.

     (3)   The FAD will set forth either a “no finding” of discrimination or a
           “finding” of discrimination accompanied by an Order of Relief setting
           forth specific remedial actions including damages and other relief as
           appropriate and authorized by law.

     (4)   With the exception of complaints based on disability discrimination in
           programs conducted by USDA, all FADs are final.

g.   Closures

     (1)   OASCR will close a complaint at any stage in the process upon a
           determination of the ASCR or his/her designee that procedural grounds
           exist warranting administrative closure including the following:

           (a)    voluntary withdrawal;
           (b)    settlement or voluntary resolution;
           (c)    lack of jurisdiction;
           (d)    failure to state a claim;
           (e)    failure to pursue;
           (f)    failure to file timely;
           (g)    filing in court on the same or essentially similar claims;
           (h)    lack of any further remedies;
           (i)    any other authority provided in law;
           (j)    failure to seek remedy available under statute, regulation, or court
                  decision; and
           (k)    continuation of a pattern of complaints previously filed by
                  complainant or someone other than the complainant that have
                  already been found to be without merit by OASCR or a court of
                  competent jurisdiction; and/or
           (l)    alleges dissatisfaction with the processing of a previously filed
                  complaint.

     (2)   OASCR will notify the USDA customer and agency of its closure
           determination in writing.

h.   Monitoring and Oversight
                                     9
     Following the issuance of a FAD with a finding of discrimination, or the
     execution of a Settlement Agreement between the parties, OASCR will monitor
     and evaluate the agency’s corrective action to ensure an outcome that reflects
     compliance with the corrective action ordered in the FAD or agreed to in a
     Settlement Agreement.

i.   Notice of the Right to Appeal Decisions on Disability Complaints

     (1)    Complainants who have alleged discrimination based on disability have
            the right to appeal the disability portion only of the FAD to the ASCR.

     (2)    Complainants must file an appeal of a FAD based on disability within 90
            days of receipt of the “no finding” or “finding” of discrimination issued by
            OASCR as required by 7 C.F.R. § 15e.170(g). The agency may extend
            this time for good cause.

     (3)    Timely appeals shall be accepted and processed. Appeal instructions will
            be included in the FAD.

     (4)    OASCR will notify the complainant of the results of the appeal within the
            time limits specified in 7 C.F.R. § 15e.

j.   Non-Compliance with Orders of Relief and Settlement Agreements
     OASCR is responsible for monitoring implementation of orders of relief and
     Settlement Agreements and assuring compliance with their terms and conditions.

     (1)    The agency must timely comply with the corrective action requirements in
            the order of relief and implement all terms within a Settlement Agreement
            within the timeframes designated therein.

     (2)    If the complainant believes that an agency has failed to comply with the
            terms of an Order of Relief or Settlement Agreement, the complainant
            shall notify OASCR, in writing, of the alleged non-compliance within 30
            days of when the complainant knew or should have known of the alleged
            non-compliance.

     (3)    OASCR will gather and review compliance documentation from both the
            complainant and the agency, and will issue a decision outlining the
            findings.

     (4)    The decision will set forth a Finding of Non-Compliance or No Finding of
            Non-Compliance.

     (5)    If OASCR determines the agency has materially breached a Settlement
            Agreement or is in non-compliance with the order of relief and the breach
            or non-compliance is not attributable to acts or omissions of the
                                     10
                   complainant, the decision will provide remedial action that must be taken
                   to bring the agency into compliance or the decision may order that the
                   complaint be reinstated for further processing from the point processing
                   ceased.

            (6)    There are no appeal rights from OASCR’s decision.

     k.     Claims Involving the Equal Credit Opportunity Act of 1975 (ECOA)

            (1)    Complainants who allege discrimination in USDA lending programs on
                   the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex or marital status, or
                   age (provided the applicant has the capacity to contract) may have claims
                   under ECOA. ECOA claims must be filed in court within the period
                   established by statute. The time period for filing in court can be found in
                   Chapter 15, Section 1691e, paragraph (f) of the United States Code.
                   Under the current ECOA, a complainant must file a claim in court no more
                   than five years after the date the violation occurred.

            (2)    Filing a complaint with USDA does not extend the time complainants
                   have to file an ECOA claim in court. Complainants who do not file in
                   court within the time period established by statute run the risk of losing
                   the right to pursue a claim in court as determined by law.

            (3)    Before filing an ECOA claim in court, complainants do not need to wait
                   for a decision by USDA, obtain a notice of right to sue, or otherwise
                   exhaust any administrative process. If a complainant files an ECOA claim
                   in court, OASCR will close administrative discrimination complaints from
                   the complainant that involve the same or essentially the same claims or
                   issues.


8.   INSTRUCTIONAL MANUALS AND DIRECTIVES

     OASCR will prepare and disseminate within OASCR and to agency civil rights offices,
     official manuals on complaint processing in conducted programs. OASCR will issue
     bulletins and other instructional documents as necessary to implement the provisions of
     this regulation.




                                             11
                                   APPENDIX A

                                  AUTHORITIES

a.   Statutory

     (1)    Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.

     (2)    5 U.S.C. 301, Authority to Prescribe Departmental Regulations.

     (3)    Equal Credit Opportunity Act of 1974, Title VII of the Consumer
            Protection Act of 1974.

     (4)    Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968.

b.   Regulatory and Executive Orders

     (1)    7 C.F.R. Part 2, Subpart C, Section 2.25 - Delegations of Authority by the
            Secretary of Agriculture to the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights.

     (2)    7 C.F.R. Part 15d, Nondiscrimination in Programs and Activities
            Conducted by the United States Department of Agriculture.

     (3)    7 C.F.R. Part 15e, Enforcement of Nondiscrimination on the Basis of
            Handicap in Programs or Activities Conducted by the United States
            Department of Agriculture.

     (4)    12 C.F.R. Part 1002, Equal Credit Opportunity Regulation B.

     (5)    Executive Order 13166, Improving Access to Services for Persons with
            Limited English Proficiency, August 11, 2000.

c.   Departmental Regulations/Policies

     (1)    DR 4300-005, Agency Civil Rights Programs, dated January 14, 1998.

     (2)    DR 4300-003, Equal Opportunity Public Notification Policy, dated June 2,
            2015.

     (3)    DR 4300-006, Civil Rights Policy for the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
            dated June 30, 2000.

     (5)    DR 4710-001, Alternative Dispute Resolution, dated April 5, 2006.

     (6)    DR 4330-005, Prohibition against National Origin Discrimination
            Affecting Persons with Limited English Proficiency in Programs and
            Activities Conducted by USDA, dated June 4, 2013.
                                    A-1
