                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                 NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                         DR 4330-006
                                                                 DATE:
SUBJECT: Civil Rights Compliance Review                          August 26, 2022
                                                                 EXPIRATION DATE:
OPI: Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
                                                                 August 26, 2027



Section                                                                                     Page

1. Purpose                                                                                     1
2. Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                          1
3. Scope                                                                                       2
4. Policy                                                                                      2
5. Compliance Methodology                                                                      3
6. Timeframes for the Compliance Review Process                                                6
7. Types of Compliance Reviews                                                                 6
8. OASCR Compliance Review of Mission Areas, Agencies, and Staff Offices                       7
9. Enforcement of Compliance Requirements                                                      8
10. Final OASCR Decision                                                                       9
11. Instructional Manual                                                                      10
12. Roles and Responsibilities                                                                10
13. Inquiries                                                                                 12

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                     A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                    B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                     C-1



1. PURPOSE

   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of Agriculture
   (USDA) policies and procedures for conducting civil rights compliance reviews of all USDA
   federally conducted and federally assisted programs and employment.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

   a.     This DR supersedes Departmental Manual (DM) 4330-001, Procedures for Processing
          Discrimination Complaints and Conducting Civil Rights Compliance Reviews in USDA
          Conducted Programs and Activities, dated October 18, 2000.

   b.     This DR is effective immediately and remains in effect until it is superseded or expires.
  c.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their policies and
       procedures with this DR within 6 months of the publication date.


3. SCOPE

  This DR applies to all USDA personnel responsible for performing compliance reviews of
  federally conducted and federally assisted programs, and employment.


4. POLICY

  a.   Per Federal civil rights laws and USDA civil rights regulations and policies, USDA,
       Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, employees, and entities participating in or
       administering USDA programs are prohibited from discriminating based on race, color,
       national origin, religion, sex, disability, age, marital status, familial or parental status,
       income derived from a public assistance program, political beliefs, genetic information,
       or reprisal or retaliation for prior civil rights activity, in any program or activity
       conducted or funded by USDA (not all bases apply to all programs).

  b.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will ensure their programs receiving
       Federal financial assistance are in compliance with all applicable policies of non-
       discrimination.

  c.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will ensure their employment activities
       and federally conducted programs are in compliance with all applicable policies of non-
       discrimination.

  d.   Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, and the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil
       Rights (OASCR) will maintain a regular enforcement program that will:

       (1) Provide technical guidance and assistance to resolve civil rights problems and
           issues associated with USDA’s federally conducted and federally assisted programs
           and employment;

       (2) Monitor and evaluate whether Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices meet their
           obligations to ensure federally conducted and federally assisted programs, and
           employment activities, are administered according to applicable civil rights
           requirements; and

       (3) Conduct compliance reviews of federally conducted and federally assisted programs
           and employment activities guided by legal standards, policies, and requirements
           established in Federal statutes, regulations, Executive Orders, policies, and case law
           decisions on discrimination.

  e.   The Office of the Inspector General (OIG) has its own internal compliance review
       program but will coordinate with OASCR as necessary and appropriate.



                                                 2
5. COMPLIANCE METHODOLOGY

  Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, and OASCR will ensure all equal employment
  opportunity (EEO) and equal opportunity (EO) programs and activities are conducted,
  managed, and administered in a non-discriminatory manner. One of the major tools utilized
  to accomplish this task is the civil rights compliance review. These reviews are systematic,
  planned examinations conducted to assess and evaluate the policies, procedures, and
  practices to determine compliance with applicable civil rights statutes, regulations, standards,
  and policies. The primary goal is to obtain compliance with these requirements.

  a.   Criteria

       The decision to conduct a compliance review will be based on neutral criteria or
       evidence of a violations of civil rights authorities. Criteria to be considered in a civil
       rights compliance review include:

       (1) Compliance with civil rights obligations in strategic plans, annual work plans, plans
           of operations, etc.;

       (2) Noncompliance allegations or concerns raised by program applicants, participants,
           and stakeholders;

       (3) Geographic areas where civil rights allegations or concerns have been identified;

       (4) Civil rights violations alleged in complaints or identified during examination of
           complaints that could not be fully covered within the scope of the complaint
           examination process;

       (5) Civil rights compliance concerns or problems raised by community groups,
           advocates, congressional inquiries, and fact-finding examinations;

       (6) Civil rights compliance concerns identified by the Mission Area, agency, or staff
           office head or regional and State leadership officials;

       (7) Civil rights compliance concerns identified by other Federal, State, or local civil
           rights agencies;

       (8) Routine review cycle driven by the need to review all programs and activities on a
           regular schedule or in a specific geographic area where no or minimal compliance
           reviews have occurred; and

       (9) Required as a result of terms required in a settlement agreement.

  b.   Mandatory Elements

       At a minimum, the following areas will be covered in a compliance review:

       (1) Civil rights resources, i.e., staff, supplies, equipment, and budget;


                                                 3
(2) Civil Rights Training based on Federal, State, and Departmental civil rights laws,
    policies, and Executive Orders. Required civil rights training (based on their
    specific time frames and as applicable) will include the following training elements,
    but not be limited to:

    (a) Public notifications and outreach, i.e., USDA DR 4300-003, Equal
        Opportunity Public Notification Policy;

    (b) Data collection systems as required by the applicable civil rights authorities;

    (c) Complaints processed in equal opportunity and employment programs and
        activities; and

    (d) Trend analysis on complaint activity or allegations of noncompliance and
        program participation.

(3) Program availability and accessibility to Persons with Disabilities. Discrimination
    based on disability is prohibited in all services, programs, and activities provided to
    the public by Recipients of Federal financial assistance. A compliance review shall
    evaluate policies, practices and procedures to determine if any of their effects could
    discriminate against persons with disabilities. A compliance review also shall, at a
    minimum, ensure that:

    (a) USDA facilities are accessible to the public, and when they are not, ensure
        effective means and actions are in place to address these concerns and provide
        necessary services to those who cannot assess the facility;

    (b) Newly designed and constructed or altered facilities, and public
        accommodations are readily accessible to and usable by persons with
        disabilities;

    (c) Auxiliary aids and services are provided for those who may need special
        assistance if doing so does not fundamentally alter the nature of the program;

    (d) Assistance animals (service, therapy, and emotional support animals) are
        allowed, as appropriate, to accompany program participants into areas where
        animals are typically not allowed;

    (e) Accommodations are provided for persons with visual and other disabilities
        (such as large print maps, braille, or brochures;

    (f) Sign language interpreters are provided free of charge for widely attended
        meetings and events;

    (g) Websites, online application systems, social media and other electronic forms
        of communication are accessible to individuals with visual and other
        disabilities; and

(4) Signed assurance agreements (if applicable);
                                        4
     (5) Service to Limited English Proficiency (LEP), i.e., persons who do not speak
         English as their primary language or have a limited ability to read, write, speak, or
         understand English are LEP, and are entitled to language assistance with respect to
         a particular type of benefit, service, or encounter. Refer to DR 4330-005,
         Prohibition Against National Origin Discrimination Affecting Persons with Limited
         English Proficiency in Programs and Activities Conducted by USDA, or 7 CFR Part
         15 Subpart A, Nondiscrimination in Federally-Assisted Programs of the
         Department of Agriculture – Effectuation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964,
         for additional information and requirements; and

     (6) Program delivery and contracting opportunities.

c.   Methodology for Conducting Compliance Reviews

     (1) On-site Visits – A review or examination conducted in person at the regional, state,
         local, or sub-recipient level;

     (2) Desk Audit or Virtual Audit – The audit process follows the same steps outlined in
         an on-site visit except for it not being conducted at the physical location, site or
         entity; and

     (3) Surveys – Individual survey interviews will be used as a tool to provide feedback
         on employment or program awareness or work-related issues. The survey will be
         administered by the Mission Area, agency, staff office or OASCR to randomly
         selected employees or customers to acquire an assessment of “corporate culture.”

d.   Essential Steps in Compliance Reviews

     There are five essential steps in a compliance review, at a minimum:

     (1) Notification and Documentation Request which will include:

         (a) Notice to reviewee including date(s) of the compliance review and request for
             contacts;

         (b) Data and information necessary for review prior to the onsite; and

         (c) Date when requestor must receive the data and information.

     (2) Entrance Conference – A meeting conducted with the reviewee to discuss the
         purpose and methodology before the review commences. The meeting will be in
         person if onsite or may be conducted electronically using other methods (e.g.,
         telephone, video conference);

     (3) Onsite Visit, Desk or Virtual Audit – A review or examination conducted at the
         regional, state, local, or sub-recipient level;

     (4) Exit Conference – A meeting conducted at the conclusion of the review or
         examination to discuss observations and issues of non-compliance requiring
                                             5
           corrective action. The meeting will be in-person if onsite or may be conducted
           electronically using various methods (i.e., telephone, video conference); and

       (5) Review Report – A written report, letter, agreement, or form summarizing the
           findings and observations and whether the entity reviewed is in compliance with all
           applicable policies of non-discrimination in operation of its programs and activities.
           Findings will result in required corrective actions that assist in resolving the issue
           and restoring compliance.


6. TIMEFRAMES FOR THE COMPLIANCE REVIEW PROCESS

  a.   The Mission Area, agency, or staff office will issue a notice to the program or recipient
       up to 60 calendar days prior to the date that the compliance review activities will
       commence. The notice will advise the reviewee of the date(s) of the compliance review,
       the data and information necessary for review prior to the onsite review, and the date on
       which the requesting Mission Area, agency, or staff office must receive the data and
       information;

  b.   The Mission Area, agency, or staff office will conduct a review within 30 calendar days
       of the entrance meeting or conference of the entity reviewed (See Section 5c,
       Methodology for Conducting Compliance Reviews, of this DR). The exit meeting or
       conference will be conducted at the end of the review. Additional days may be required
       per Mission Area, agency, or staff office specific guidelines and instructions;

  c.   The Mission Area, agency, or staff office will notify the program or recipient in writing
       of the findings of the compliance review within 90 calendar days following the
       completion of the compliance review and receipt of all requested documents and
       information. Additional days may be required per Mission Area, agency, or staff office
       specific guidelines and instructions, or at the direction of the Mission Area, agency, or
       staff office Civil Rights Director; and

  d.   Within 30 calendar days following receipt of the review report, letter, agreement, or
       form, the program or recipient will provide a Corrective Action Plan outlining the
       actions it will undertake and the timeframes to remedy any areas of concern or findings
       of non-compliance. Additional days may be required for combined reviews per Mission
       Area, agency, or staff office specific guidelines and instructions, or at the direction of
       the Mission Area, agency, or staff office Civil Rights Director.


7. TYPES OF COMPLIANCE REVIEWS

  a.   Employment Compliance

       EEO Compliance Reviews will be conducted to ensure and determine:

       (1) The level of employee awareness of the EEO laws within their employment. The
           employee’s awareness should include policy, process, procedure, as well as


                                               6
           “comfort” levels associated with using EEO tools to file a complaint or assess an
           employee’s satisfaction with the existing conditions and training opportunities;

       (2) An analysis of the workforce with the Civilian Labor Force, such as utilizing the
           current U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) Management
           Directive (MD) 715, Equal Employment Opportunity data to determine parity
           within the various categories. This may include areas where high employment rates
           are achieved in traditionally under-represented categories, the organizational
           structure, recruitment and hiring, employee development, training and recognition;

       (3) Trends identified through an analysis of employment complaints filed over a period
           of 3 years or as applicable; and

       (4) Whether Federal government owned and leased buildings and facilities are
           accessible to employees with disabilities as established by the Architectural
           Barriers Act (ABA) of 1968. This includes but is not limited to: accessibility of
           entrance doors, entrance vestibules, interior doors, corridors, restrooms, telephones,
           text telephone, Teletypewriter (TTY), drinking fountains, visible and audible
           alarms, signage, wheelchair seating in assembly areas and dining facilities, service
           counters, and ramps or elevators where changes in level are necessary.

  b.   Federally Conducted and Assisted Program Compliance Reviews

       Compliance reviews of federally conducted and assisted programs will be conducted to
       ensure all the elements identified in Section 5b, Mandatory Elements, of this DR, are
       being carried out efficiently and effectively. In addition, the review will examine the
       process and procedures established to ensure activities are being carried out in a non-
       discriminatory manner.


8. OASCR COMPLIANCE REVIEW OF MISSION AREAS, AGENCIES, AND STAFF
   OFFICES

  OASCR is responsible for regularly and systematically monitoring and evaluating its
  policies, procedures and practices to ensure there is no unlawful discrimination and there is
  an equal opportunity to participate in agencies’ programs and activities.

  At its discretion, OASCR will conduct compliance reviews of Mission Areas, agencies, and
  staff offices in accordance with all sections identified above. OASCR may, at its discretion,
  conduct employment compliance reviews or compliance reviews of all the programs and
  activities administered by a USDA sub-component\. Over the course of a fiscal year,
  OASCR may conduct a combination of types of compliance reviews in the context of a
  compliance review schedule.

  a.   OASCR will be guided by the policies, legal standards and requirements that have been
       established in Federal statutes, Executive Orders, regulations, case law and non-
       discrimination.



                                               7
  b.   OASCR will ensure Findings of its compliance reviews will be provided to the director
       of the reviewed Mission Area, agency, or staff office no later than 90 calendar days after
       completion of review. A copy of the report will also be provided to the reviewed
       entity’s Civil Rights Director.


9. ENFORCEMENT OF COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS

  The Mission Area, agency, or staff office’s submission of referral of non-compliance, is
  reviewed by OASCR for completeness and efforts at securing voluntary compliance, and the
  Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights (ASCR) may:

  a.   Issue a notice of opportunity to the recipient or applicant to request a hearing per 7 CFR
       Part 15, Nondiscrimination and, if a hearing is requested, arrange for the designation of
       an administrative law judge to preside over any such hearing; or

  b.   Authorize actions per 7 CFR § 15.8(a), Procedures for Effecting Compliance which
       identifies steps to take if there appears to be a failure or threatened failure to comply
       including, but not limited to:

       (1) A referral to the Department of Justice (DOJ) with a recommendation that
           appropriate proceedings be brought to enforce any rights of the United States under
           any law of the United States, or any assurance or other contractual undertaking,
           with copies to the OGC as appropriate;

       (2) Consulting or seeking assistance from other Federal agencies; and

       (3) A referral back to the Mission Area, agency, or staff office with direction to engage
           in additional DR 4710-001, Alternative Dispute Resolution efforts.

  c.   Take Action to Terminate or Suspend Assistance

       (1) Any action to suspend or terminate assistance must be limited to a particular
           recipient or sub-recipient against whom the finding of non-compliance has been
           made and must be limited in its effect to the particular program, or part thereof, on
           which non-compliance has been found;

       (2) The Office of the General Counsel (OGC) will conduct a legal sufficiency review of
           the Report and Findings of Non-compliance and provide comments or
           recommendations to the OASCR for tracking or monitoring;

       (3) General conditions for termination or suspension of assistance by USDA must not
           become effective until all administrative responsibilities are met by:

           (a) Documenting the finding after an opportunity for a hearing, the recipient or
               sub-recipient has failed to comply with the requirements of this DR and other
               applicable policies and procedures;



                                                8
           (b) Ensuring the Secretary has approved the action per 7 CFR § 15.10(e), Decision
               by the Secretary; and

           (c) Ensuring 30 calendar days have passed since the Secretary has filed a written
               report of the circumstances and the grounds for such action with the committee
               of the House and committee of the Senate that have legislative jurisdiction over
               the program involved.

       (4) After final termination is approved by the Secretary, the Mission Area, agency, or
           staff office must prepare a letter to the appropriate officials for the termination of
           the financial assistance. OASCR must be notified if the recipient or sub-recipient
           reapplies for assistance and, upon agreement with OASCR, conduct a pre-approval
           onsite review.

  d.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices provide corrective action plans to address any
       non-compliance based on the non-compliance requirements above.

  e.   Areas of non-compliance in a Mission Area, agency, and staff office that are not brought
       into compliance status by the designated date are elevated to the OGC and the Secretary
       of Agriculture’s (Secretary) office for further actions.


10. FINAL OASCR DECISION

  When OASCR issues a non-compliance notice of findings to the Mission Area, agency, or
  staff office (final OASCR decision), the notice will cite the corrective actions the Mission
  Area, agency, or staff office must take to achieve compliance. The notice of findings will
  include information about the Mission Area, agency, or staff office’s rights and timelines for
  response.

  OASCR will monitor and evaluate efforts to remedy a non-compliance finding to ensure
  compliance is consistent with applicable civil rights and equal opportunity requirements and
  will conduct the following actions:

  a.   Refer the report of non-compliance to OGC. Upon completion of the OGC review, if
       applicable, OGC will return the report and notice of findings, with any comments or
       recommendations, to the OASCR for tracking or monitoring. The report will be issued
       to the Mission Area, agency, or staff office head.

  b.   Simultaneously send copies of the Non-Compliance Notice of Findings to:

       (1) The USDA General Counsel;

       (2) The appropriate Under or Assistant Secretary;

       (3) The Assistant Secretary for Administration; and

       (4) The Deputy Secretary.


                                               9
11. INSTRUCTIONAL MANUAL

  OASCR will prepare and disseminate within OASCR and to Mission Area, agency, and staff
  office civil rights offices manuals, bulletins, and other instructional documents as necessary
  to implement the provisions of this DR.


12. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Secretary will:

       (1) Provide leadership;

       (2) Set overall civil rights policy and ensure civil rights compliance and enforcement
           throughout the Department; and

       (3) Ensure the availability of resources adequate to support and carry out a broad range
           of civil rights compliance and enforcement activities throughout the Department.

  b.   The ASCR will:

       (1) Provide overall leadership, coordination, and direction for USDA civil rights
           compliance;

       (2) Issue Departmental directives as necessary to ensure the Department fully achieves
           its civil rights compliance obligations;

       (3) Ensure through training, dissemination of information, technical assistance, and
           other appropriate methods that recipients are apprised of their civil rights
           compliance responsibilities;

       (4) Ensure recipients actively support and adhere to Federal civil rights laws and
           USDA’s regulations and policies, including any findings, and decisions rendered by
           the Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices;

       (5) Systematically review, evaluate, and hold to a high accountability standard the civil
           rights compliance performance of agency heads and administrators;

       (6) Require Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices to provide an annual listing of
           proposed fiscal year compliance reviews or desk audits. This listing will be
           provided to OASCR no later than October 31st each fiscal year;

       (7) Select by November 30th of each fiscal year two or three Mission Areas, agencies,
           or staff offices’ compliance activity to monitor and oversee;

       (8) Conduct a Mission Area, agency, or staff office’s compliance review, desk audit or
           fact-finding review based on current events, issues identified through Civil Rights


                                              10
         Impact Analysis, Congressional reviews or items identified in Section 5a, Criteria,
         of this DR; and

     (9) Develop and implement a comprehensive civil rights strategic plan that
         encompasses the full scope of the Department’s civil rights compliance obligations
         and supplemented by an annual operating plan for compliance strategy
         accomplishments through Mission Area, agency, and staff office periodic
         compliance reviews, audits or fact-finding evaluations, and disseminating the plan
         throughout the Department.

c.   Under Secretaries and Agency Heads will:

     (1) Establish and maintain an effective, proactive civil rights compliance program per
         the policies, guidelines, and directives promulgated by OASCR;

     (2) Provide adequate and appropriately trained and qualified staff, and other resources
         as necessary to ensure efficient and effective accomplishment of the Department's
         civil rights obligations;

     (3) Timely collect and make available all data and information as necessary to enable
         an efficient and effective evaluation of the Department’s civil rights compliance
         programs, processes, and activities; and

     (4) Cooperate with and provide assistance as necessary in the examination of any
         compliance reviews, including ensuring access to information and the resolution of
         any issues of noncompliance.

d.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Civil Rights Directors will:

     (1) Ensure sufficient funding for conducting reviews;

     (2) Ensure sufficient staffing for conducting reviews;

     (3) Provide oversight on all compliance reviews;

     (4) Incorporate compliance review activities in Mission Area, agency, and staff office
         annual strategic plans;

     (5) Identify programmatic strengths or opportunities for improvement;

     (6) Timely implement corrective actions;

     (7) Prepare written reports for the Mission Area, agency, or staff office Head per
         applicable laws; and

     (8) Ensure that any of its recipients for which there is a noncompliance finding, timely
         and effectively implements all corrective action plans determined necessary to
         secure compliance with a Federal civil rights requirement.


                                            11
13. INQUIRIES

   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will direct questions and inquiries regarding
   this DR to the Center for Civil Rights Operations (CCRO) Compliance Division via email at
   CCROCompliance@usda.gov.


                                            -END-




                                              12
                                APPENDIX A

                    ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ABA         Architectural Barriers Act of 1968
ASCR        Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
ADA         Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
ADAAA       Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act of 2008
CCRO        Center for Civil Rights Operations
CFR         Code of Federal Regulations
DG          Departmental Guidebook
DM          Departmental Manual
DOJ         Department of Justice
DR          Departmental Regulation
EO          Equal Opportunity
EEO         Equal Employment Opportunity
EEOC        Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
LEP         Limited English Proficiency
MD          Management Directive
NFE         Non-Federal Entity
OASCR       Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
OGC         Office of the General Counsel
OIG         Office of the Inspector General
P.L.        Public Law
Secretary   Secretary of Agriculture
SNAP        Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
TTY         Teletypewriter
U.S.C.      United States Code
USDA        United States Department of Agriculture




                                     A-1
                                          APPENDIX B

                                          DEFINITIONS


Accessibility. When a person with a disability is afforded the opportunity to acquire the same
information, engage in the same interactions, and enjoy the same services and benefits of
employment as a person without a disability.

Accountability. The obligation of holding agency officials, managers, supervisors, and other
employees responsible for complying with the requirements contained in this DR. (Source:
USDA, Departmental Guidebook (DG) 0100-002, USDA Departmental Directives Definitions
Glossary)

Agency. Organizational units of the Department, other than staff offices, whose heads report to
officials within the Office of the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Under Secretaries, Assistant
Secretaries, and Assistant to the Secretary. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental
Directives System)

Agency Heads and Administrators. The administrator, chief, or director of an agency who is the
official named or designated to have primary responsibility for the management of the agency as
delegated under 7 CFR Part 2, Delegations of Authority by the Secretary of Agriculture and
General Officers of the Department. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

Applicant. A person or entity who requests or seeks USDA employment or program benefits and
services. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

Assistance Animal. An assistance animal is an animal that works, provides assistance, or
performs tasks for the benefit of a person with a disability, or that provides emotional support
that alleviates one or more identified effects of a person’s disability. An assistance animal is not
a pet. There are three types of assistance animals: service, therapy, and emotional support.

Basis. The ground(s) upon which an aggrieved person or complainant alleges that a USDA
official or employee has engaged in prohibited discriminatory behavior. (Source: USDA, DG
0100-002)

Beneficiary. A person or group of persons with an entitlement to receive or utilize the benefits,
services, resources, and information, or participate in activities and programs conducted or
funded in whole or in part by USDA. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

Calendar Days. The period of 24 consecutive hours commencing at 12:01 a.m. and concluding
at midnight, including holidays and weekends.

Complainant. Any person or group of persons who files with any USDA agency a complaint
that alleges discrimination in a program or activity conducted by any USDA agency. A
complainant must be the injured party. Accordingly, if any person or organization files a



                                                B-1
discrimination complaint on behalf of an injured party, the injured party must affirmatively state
his or her willingness to pursue the complaint or the case will be dismissed. (Source: USDA,
DG 0100-002)

Complaint. A written statement (except as provided below) that contains the complainant's name
and address and describes an Agency’s alleged discriminatory action in sufficient detail to
inform OASCR of the nature and date of an alleged civil rights violation. The statement must be
signed by the complainant(s) or someone authorized to sign on behalf of the complainant(s). The
complaint does not need to be written or signed if it is submitted in an alternate format to
accommodate the complaint filing needs of a person who has an LEP, a disability, or other
special need. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

Compliance. Adherence to laws, regulations, guidelines, and specifications relevant to its
business processes.

Compliance Program. A set of internal policies and procedures which ensures adherence to
Federal laws, rules, and regulations.

Compliance Review. A USDA systematically planned and regularly initiated investigation that
assesses and evaluates the civil rights and equal opportunity policies, procedures and practices of
a USDA agency or instrumentality to determine compliance with civil rights statutes,
regulations, standards, and policies. Compliance reviews will be initiated upon consideration of
several factors, including, authorization; evidence of existing violations; level and type of
complaints over time; issues arising from complaints that indicate the need for a more systematic
review; previous consent decrees and settlement agreements; and relation to implementation of
Departmental policies. They will be conducted per a written administrative plan containing
specific neutral criteria and other factors as identified by CR. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

Conducted Programs. Program services, benefits or resources delivered directly to the public by
USDA employees. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

Corrective Action Plan. Describes the actions to be taken to resolve noncompliance with Civil
Rights regulations, instructions, policies, and guidelines.

Departmental Regulation (DR). Promulgate Departmental policy; delegate authority; establish
responsibility; establish statutory or interagency committees; and/or prescribe high-level
procedures governing USDA activities and operations. DRs also may include selected material
of an administrative nature that is published in the Federal Register or the Code of Federal
Regulations. DRs must be reviewed and revised or reissued at least every 5 years to ensure they
remain aligned with current applicable statutory, regulatory, and/or policy requirements.
(Source: USDA, DR 0100-001)

Desk Audit. A process to evaluate the compliance of a Mission Area, agency, staff office or
USDA recipient’s civil rights and equal opportunity responsibilities per Federal civil rights law
and USDA civil rights regulations and policies. The desk audit is not conducted on-site or in
person, but can be conducted by telephone, video conferencing, Teams, virtually, etc., which



                                               B-2
allows the auditee to describe and provide illustrative examples of its process or procedures, i.e.,
electronically, by fax, email, or hardcopy.

Discrimination. Different treatment or denial of benefits, services, rights or privileges to a
person or persons because of their race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, marital status,
familial status, parental status, disability, political belief or affiliation or because all or a part of
an individual's income is derived from any public assistance program. (Source: USDA, DG
0100-002)

Federal Financial Assistance. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.40, Federal financial assistance)

    1. Federal financial assistance means assistance that a non-Federal entity (NFE) receives or
       administers in the form of:

        a.   Grants;

        b.   Cooperative agreements;

        c.   Non-cash contributions or donations of property (including donated surplus
             property);

        d.   Direct appropriations;

        e.   Food commodities; and

        f.   Other financial assistance (except assistance listed in paragraph (2) of this section).

    2. For 2 CFR § 200.203, Requirement to provide public notice of Federal financial
       assistance programs and Subpart F – Audit Requirements, Federal financial assistance
       also includes assistance that NFEs receive or administer in the form of:

        a.   Loans;

        b.   Loan Guarantees;

        c.   Interest subsidies; and

        d.   Insurance.

    3. Federal financial assistance does not include amounts received as reimbursement for
       services rendered to individuals as described in 2 CFR § 200.502, Basis for determining
       Federal awards expended, paragraphs (h) and (i).

Federally Assisted Programs and Activities. Programs and Activities of an entity that receives
Federal financial assistance. “Assistance” or “benefits” refers to the transfer of money, property,
services, or anything of value, the principal purpose of, which is to accomplish a public purpose



                                                   B-3
of support or stimulation authorized by Federal statute. Assistance includes, but is not limited,
grants, loans, loan guarantees, scholarships, mortgage loans, insurance, and other types of
financial assistance, including cooperative agreements; property, technical assistance,
counseling, statistical, and other expert information; and service activities of regulatory
Agencies. It does not include the provision of conventional public information services.
(Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

Field Office. All offices other than headquarters offices. Included are regional, State, area,
district, and local offices (including USDA Service Centers), whether their function is program
delivery, administrative or special purpose, e.g., technical support or research. (Source: USDA,
DG 0100-002)

Letter of Finding. A written notice to the recipient and signed by the Assistant Secretary for
Civil Rights (ASCR), USDA Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights (OASCR), that
officially advises of the findings of a complaint or compliance review investigation and, where
appropriate, identifies the actions the recipient must take to correct a violation or otherwise
secure compliance with one or more Federal civil rights requirements. (Source: Adapted from
USDA, DG 0100-002)

Mission Area. A group of agencies with related functions that report to the same Under or
Assistant Secretary. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-001)

Non-compliance Finding. When the facts disclosed during an investigation or compliance
review, or other information, indicate a failure to comply with regulatory provisions.

Recipient. A non-Federal entity that receives a federal award directly from a Federal awarding
agency to carry out an activity under a Federal program. The term recipient does not include sub
recipients. (Source: 2 CFR § 200.86, Recipient)

Secretary. Secretary of Agriculture. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)

Staff Office. Departmental administrative offices whose heads report to officials within the
Office of the Secretary. (Source: USDA, DR 0100-001)

Subrecipient. A non-Federal entity that receives a subaward from a pass-through entity to carry
out part of a Federal program; but does not include an individual that is a beneficiary of such
program.

Voluntary Resolution Agreement. A voluntary agreement which resolves a complaint or
compliance review issue wherein USDA or one of its agencies agrees to effect corrective or
remedial action before or after USDA's official determination. (Source: USDA, DG 0100-002)




                                               B-4
                                          APPENDIX C

                             AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Age Discrimination Act of 1975, as amended, 42 United States Code (U.S.C.) §§ 6101 et seq.

Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 621

Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq., Equal
Opportunity for Individuals with Disabilities

Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act of 2008 (ADAAA), Public Law (P.L.) 110-325,
September 25, 2008

Architectural Barriers Act of 1968 (ABA), 42 U.S.C. §§ 4151 et seq.

Basis for determining Federal awards expended, 2 CFR § 200.502

Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987, P.L. 100-259, March 22, 1988

Civil Rights Act of 1991, P.L. 102-166, November 21, 1991

Compliance Procedures, 28 CFR Part 35, Subpart F

Coordination of Enforcement of Nondiscrimination in Federally Assisted Programs, 28 CFR Part
42 Subpart F

Decisions and notices, 7 CFR § 15.10(e), Decision by the Secretary

Definitions, 28 CFR § 35.104

Delegations of Authority by the Secretary of Agriculture and General Officers of the
Department, 7 CFR Part 2

Delegations of Authority by the Secretary of Agriculture to the Assistant Secretary for Civil
Rights, 7 CFR § 2.25

Departmental Regulations, 5 U.S.C. § 301

Education Programs or Activities Receiving or Benefiting from Federal Financial Assistance,
revised, 7 CFR Part l5a

EEOC, EEO Management Directive 715, MD-715, Equal Employment Opportunity, October 1,
2003




                                               C-1
Equal Credit Opportunity, 15 U.S.C. §§ 1691-1691f

Equal Pay Act of 1963, P.L. 88-38, June 10, 1963, as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 206(d)

Executive Order 12250, Leadership and Coordination of Nondiscrimination Laws, November 2,
1980

Executive Order 13166, Improving Access to Services for Persons with Limited English
Proficiency, August 11, 2000

Federal Communications Commission, Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act web page

Federal financial assistance, 2 CFR § 200.40

Federal Sector Equal Employment Opportunity, 29 CFR Part 1614

Food and Nutrition Act of 2008, as amended, Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(SNAP), 7 U.S.C. §§ 2011 et seq.

Guidelines for the Enforcement of Title VI, Civil Rights Act of 1964, 28 CFR § 50.3

Implementation of Executive Order 12550, Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Handicap in
Federally Assisted Programs, 28 CFR Part 41

Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Age in Programs or Activities Receiving Federal Financial
Assistance, 45 CFR Part 90

Nondiscrimination, 7 CFR Part 15

Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Age in Programs or Activities Receiving Federal Financial
Assistance from the USDA, 7 CFR Part 15c

Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Disability in State and Local Government Services, 28 CFR
Part 35

Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Handicap in Programs or Activities Receiving Federal
Financial Assistance, 7 CFR Part 15b

Nondiscrimination in Federally Assisted Programs of the Department of Agriculture—
Effectuation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 7 CFR Part 15, Subpart A

Procedures for Complaints of Employment Discrimination Filed Against Recipients of Federal
Financial Assistance, 28 CFR Part 42, Subpart H
Procedures for Complaints of Employment Discrimination Filed Against Recipients of Federal
Financial Assistance, 29 CFR Part 1691




                                               C-2
Procedures for Coordinating the Investigation of Complaints or Charges of Employment
Discrimination Based on Disability Subject to the Americans with Disabilities Act and Section
504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 CFR Part 1640

Procedures for effecting compliance, 7 CFR § 15.8(a)

Recipient, 2 CFR § 200.86

Requirement to provide public notice of Federal financial assistance programs, 2 CFR §
200.203

Requirements for Participating State Agencies, 7 CFR Part 272

Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 791, Employment of
individuals with disabilities

Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 794, Nondiscrimination
under Federal grants and programs

Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, 29 U.S.C. § 794d, Electronic and
information technology

Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), 42 U.S.C. §§ 12131–12165

Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000d-1

Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e, Definitions

Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Act of 1988, 42
U.S.C. §§ 3601 et seq.

Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, 20 U.S.C. §§ 1681-1683, 1685-1688

USDA, DG 0100-002, USDA Departmental Directives Definitions Glossary, September 26,
2018

USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System, January 4, 2018

USDA, DR 4120-001, Annual Departmental Civil Rights Training, June 14, 2016

USDA, DR 4300-003, Equal Opportunity Public Notification Policy, October 17, 2019

USDA, DR 4300-007, Processing Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Complaints of
Discrimination, August 4, 2021




                                              C-3
USDA, DR 4330-002, Non-discrimination in Programs and Activities Receiving Federal
Financial Assistance from USDA, July 27, 2021

USDA, DR 4330-005, Prohibition Against National Origin Discrimination Affecting Persons
with Limited English Proficiency in Programs and Activities Conducted by USDA, June 4, 2013

USDA, DR 4710-001, Alternative Dispute Resolution, April 5, 2006




                                            C-4
