                         U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                               WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


  DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                    Number:
                                                             4300-004

  SUBJECT:                                                   DATE:
  Civil Rights Impact Analysis                               October 17, 2016

                                                             OPI: Office of Assistant
                                                             Secretary for Civil Rights



Section                                                                       Page

Purpose                                                                          1
Special Instructions/Cancellation                                                2
Scope                                                                            2
Policy                                                                           2
Definitions                                                                      2
Objectives                                                                       6
Actions Requiring CRIAs                                                          6
Roles and Responsibilities                                                       7
CRIA Analysis Elements                                                          11
Mitigation                                                                      16
Outreach Strategies                                                             17
Monitoring and Evaluation                                                       18
Conclusion                                                                      19
Retention of CRIA Records                                                       19
Expedited Clearance for Regulatory Action Only                                  19
Waivers                                                                         20
CRIA Technical Assistance Request                                               21

Appendix A Attachment A: Sample: Current and Proposed
           Organizational Changes                                               A-1
Appendix B Sample - CRIA Certification                                          B-1
Appendix C Authorities and References                                           C-1


1. PURPOSE

   a. This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the Civil Rights Impact Analysis (CRIA)
      policy and procedures for the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA or the
      Department) employment, federally conducted and federally assisted programs and


                                             1
      activities.

  b. The regulation also provides guidance to the agencies, Departmental Management (DM),
     National Appeals Division (NAD), Office of the Inspector General (OIG), and staff
     offices of the Department on how to prepare and meet all CRIA obligations as set forth in
     this regulation.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATION

  a. This regulation replaces DR 4300-004, Civil Rights Impact Analysis, dated May 30, 2003.

  b. Agencies must update their processes and procedures in accordance with this DR within
     120 calendar days of the effective date.


3. SCOPE

  This regulation applies to all USDA agencies, DM, staff offices, NAD and OIG.


4. POLICY

  a. It is USDA’s policy to treat customers and employees fairly, with dignity and respect,
     regardless of race, color, national origin, disability, sex, political beliefs, age, marital,
     family/parental status, religion, , reprisal, or because all or a part of an individual’s
     income is derived from any public assistance program.

  b. Essentially, agencies, DM, staff offices, NAD and OIG are required to analyze the civil
     rights impact(s) of policies, actions, or decisions that will affect the USDA workforce or
     its federally conducted or federally assisted programs and activities.


5. DEFINITIONS

  Within the context of this regulation, the following definitions apply:

  a. Agency. For purposes of this directive, agency is defined as a major program
     organizational unit of the Department with delegated authorities to deliver programs,
     activities, benefits, or services. The term “agency” does not include DM, OIG, NAD or
     staff offices.

  b. Agency Head. The Administrator, Chief or Director or an office or agency who is the
     official named or designated to have primary responsibility for the management of the
     Agency as delegated under 7 CFR 2, Delegations of Authority by the Secretary of
     Agriculture and General Officers of the Department.



                                                 2
c. Agency Head Assessment. The annual assessment of Agency Heads and applicable Staff
   Office Directors by the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights (OASCR),
   utilizing the Civil Rights Performance Plan and Accomplishment Report (the Plan), to
   evaluate and rate each Agency and applicable Staff Office for effectiveness and
   compliance with the Department’s civil rights policies and regulations. The Plan requires
   agencies and applicable staff offices to annually assess their civil rights activities and
   accomplishments and submit a report to OASCR to ensure civil rights accountability
   throughout USDA. The civil rights accomplishment rating issued by OASCR serves as a
   representative rating of the Agency Heads and applicable Staff Office Directors.

d. Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights (ASCR). The civil rights official for USDA with
   authority pursuant to 7 CFR 2.25 for the performance and oversight of civil rights
   functions within USDA, including the authority and discretion to delegate civil rights
   functions to Agency Heads and Offices.

e. Assisted Programs and Activities. Program services, benefits or resources delivered
   through a recipient of USDA funding to assist an ultimate beneficiary.

f. Civil Rights Director. An individual appointed by the Agency Head, who is responsible
   for the implementation of an equal employment program and for federally assisted and
   federally conducted programs, to promote equal employment opportunity, and to identify
   and eliminate discriminatory practices and policies. Civil Rights Directors report directly
   to their Agency Heads and for the purposes of this regulation, the Civil Rights Director
   will also serve as an EEO Director as set forth at 29 C.F.R. 1614.102(b)(4).

g. Civil Rights Impact. The consequences of policies, actions, and decisions which impact
   the civil rights and opportunities of protected groups or classes of persons who are USDA
   employees or program beneficiaries.

h. Civil Rights Impact Analysis (CRIA). An analytical process used to determine the scope,
   intensity, direction, duration, and significance of the effects of an Agency’s proposed
   employment and program policies, actions, and decisions. A CRIA identifies the effects
   of: (1) proposed employment actions; (2) eligibility criteria for USDA benefits; (3)
   methods of implementation, (4) underrepresentation within its programs; or (5) any other
   Agency-imposed requirements that may adversely and disproportionately impact
   employees or program beneficiaries based on their membership in a protected group.
   Proper follow-up actions based on CRIA findings can lessen, eliminate or substantially
   alleviate these adverse impacts on protected groups.

i. Civil Rights Implication. Information or data that suggest, or from which one may infer,
   that a policy, action, or decision will affect groups or classes of persons, or any given
   individual, positively or negatively.

j. Concurrence. OASCR approval of the proposed action, policy or decision that will affect
   the USDA workforce or its federally conducted or assisted programs or activities based
   on the requirements of current civil rights laws.



                                            3
k. Conducted Programs and Activities. Program services, benefits or resources delivered
   directly to the public by USDA.

l. Contingent Concurrence. OASCR concurrence dependent upon specific actions required
   to be taken by the agency, staff office, DM, NAD or OIG or the submission of additional
   information requested to complete the assessment as to whether a proposed action, policy
   or decision will affect the USDA workforce or its federally conducted or its assisted
   programs and activities.

m. Departmental Management. USDA’s central administrative management organization
   that provides support to policy officials of the Department and overall direction and
   coordination for the administrative programs and services of USDA under the direction
   and supervision of USDA’s Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA) with authority
   pursuant to 7 CFR 2.24.

n. Disparate Treatment. The less favorable treatment of a person or persons by reason of
   one or more prohibited bases when compared with/contrasted to another group(s) or
   class(es) of persons that is similarly situated.

o. Disparate Impact (Adverse Impact). Neutral employment or program policies, practices,
   actions, or decisions which are applied evenhandedly (are of “general applicability”), but
   have the effect of excluding or otherwise adversely affecting groups or classes of persons
   by reason of one or more prohibited bases.

p. Disproportionate Impact. A theory of liability which prohibits an employer or program
   from using a facially neutral employment practice that has a greater adverse impact on
   members of a protected class. A facially neutral employment practice or program that
   does not appear to be discriminatory on its face; rather it is discriminatory in its
   application or effect.

q. Eligibility Criteria. Summary criteria for participant selection based on requirements
   mandated by Congress or internal Agency recommendations and regulations.

r. Employee. An individual employed in any position within USDA. Contractors, interns,
   and volunteers may be included under this definition; however, specific criteria must be
   met in order for them to be classified an “employee” for EEO purposes.

s. Expedited Clearance. The process set forth in Section 15 of this regulation.

t. Group or Class. Multiples of similarly situated persons who may be distinguished by
   their common race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, sex,
   marital status, familial status, parental status, religion, genetics, political beliefs, or
   receipt of income from any public assistance program.

u. Methods of Implementation. The full range of practices, management prerogatives,



                                              4
   application criteria, participation requirements, processes, and procedures used by
   management to administer federally assisted or federally conducted programs and
   activities within USDA.

v. Non-concurrence. OASCR decision to not concur with a proposed action, policy or
   decision that will affect the USDA workforce or its federally conducted or assisted
   programs or activities based on the requirements as set forth in this regulation and current
   civil rights laws.

w. Policies, Actions, or Decisions. All those prerogatives exercised by USDA as set forth in
   Section 7 below.

x. Prohibited Bases. Discrimination that is prohibited in employment and program activities
   based on race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, genetic information, political
   beliefs, marital status, familial status, parental status, veteran status, religion, reprisal
   and/or resulting from all or a part of an individual’s income being derived from any
   public assistance program.

y. Protected Groups. Any person, group, or class of persons protected under Federal
   regulations and/or any Executive Orders from discrimination based on a prohibited basis.

z. Recipient. A person or group of persons with an entitlement to receive or enjoy the
   benefits, services, resources, or information from USDA, or to participate in activities
   and programs conducted or funded in whole or part by USDA.

aa. Reorganization. The planned elimination, addition, redistribution of functions or duties,
    or movement of employees in an organization or the movement of a function within a
    competitive area. For the purposes of this regulation, reorganizations also include office
    closures, relocations, abolishment, consolidations, reductions-in-force, Transfer of
    Functions, realignments, and reassignments.

bb. Staff Office. An administrative office with a specialized support function as defined by 7
    CFR 2.4. All staff offices, with the exception of NAD and OIG, report directly to the
    Secretary of Agriculture. NAD and OIG are in the Secretary’s reporting chain, but have
    independent authority and reporting responsibilities.

cc. Significant Regulatory Action. Proposed, interim, or final rules that are likely to result in
    a rule that may: (1) have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more; (2)
    create a serious inconsistency or otherwise interfere with an action taken or planned by
    another Agency; (3) materially alter the budgetary impact of entitlements, grants, user
    fees, or loan programs; or (4) raise novel legal or policy issues arising out of legal
    mandates.

dd. Transfer of Function. Occurs when a function will cease in one competitive area and
    move to another competitive area that does not perform that function at the time of the
    transfer or the movement of a competitive area in which the function is performed to a



                                              5
     different local commuting area.


6. OBJECTIVES

  The objectives of this regulation are to:

  a. Establish procedures for the review and analysis of policies, regulations, reorganizations,
     advisory committee establishments and renewals, or decisions whose implementation
     may have potential adverse impacts based on civil rights laws, regulations and/or
     USDA’s policy on nondiscrimination;

  b. Ensure that the issuance of policies, regulations, reorganizations, advisory committee
     establishments and renewals or decisions may not adversely and/or disproportionately
     impact employees and/or program beneficiaries and recipients because of their
     membership in a protected group;

  c. Utilize CRIAs as a management tool to assess the proposed action to determine the
     potential impacts on employees and/or program participants;

  d. Reinforce the requirement to collect demographic data in accordance with current federal
     civil rights laws and regulations and USDA DRs and policies;

  e. Require outreach strategies, as outlined in CRIA outreach plans, to be implemented and
     monitored to ensure that protected groups are informed of the benefits, requirements, etc.,
     of specific policies and/or regulations;

  f. Establish mitigation strategies to lesson any adverse impact; and

  g. Provide oversight and monitoring of the proposed action in order to measure the extent of
     any adverse impact(s) and the effectiveness of the mitigation strategy in lessening the
     impact and results of the outreach strategy.


7. ACTIONS REQUIRING CRIAS

  The following actions require the preparation of a CRIA and must be submitted to OASCR
  for determination of CRIA sufficiency and final clearance:

  a. Significant regulatory actions and notices to be published in the Federal Register and the
     Code of Federal Regulations;

  b. Charters and charter renewals for advisory committees, councils, or boards managed on
     behalf of the Department or Secretary;

  c. Departmental regulations, manuals, and notices that require Departmental approval;



                                              6
  d. Proposed reorganizations requiring Departmental approval as prescribed in DR 1010-001,
     Organization (see definition of reorganization for additional employment actions); and

  e. At the discretion of the ASCR, other policy, program, action, or activity, or the
     implementation which may have potentially adverse civil rights impacts.

  f. The following actions that do not meet the criteria in Section 7(a) above, require a CRIA
     to be conducted and implemented, but does not have to be submitted to OASCR for
     determination of CRIA sufficiency:

     (1) New and revised agency-specific instructions, procedures, manuals, and other
         guidance published in agency directives systems;

     (2) Advisory boards and committees that are established at the discretion of the agency
         and are not mandated by statute, rule, or USDA regulation;

     (3) Budget proposals;

     (4) Grants and contracts;

     (5) Organizational changes not requiring Departmental notification as prescribed in DR
         1010-001; and

     (6) National, regional, and local special projects affecting program beneficiaries.


8. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a. OASCR

     OASCR provides the overall leadership, coordination, direction, evaluation and clearance
     of USDA’s programs, activities and impact statements for civil rights concerns,
     including:

     (1) Consulting, advising, and providing technical assistance to agencies, DM, NAD, OIG,
         and staff offices;

     (2) Identifying civil rights implications and impacts of proposed policies, significant
         regulations, programs, advisory committees, and employment actions;

     (3) Approving proposed policies, significant regulations, programs, advisory committees,
         and employment actions by the designated time from the Office of Budget and
         Program Analysis (OBPA), the Office of Human Resources (OHRM), or the White
         House Liaison Office.




                                               7
   (4) Analyzing and evaluating program participation data and equal employment
       opportunity data, and make its analyses available to Agencies, DM, NAD, OIG, and
       Staff Offices;

   (5) Providing an assessment of an agency, DM, and applicable staff offices’ compliance
       with CRIAs and this regulation through the Agency Head assessment process;

   (6) Provide a Concurrence, Non-concurrence or Contingent Concurrence on the proposed
       action submitted by the agency, NAD, OIG, and staff office CRIA submissions based
       on the provisions of this regulation;

   (7) May issue a Non-concurrence if agencies have not met requirements of the
       Contingent Concurrence within 60 days of the requested deadline in the CRIA or the
       package has been received incomplete and an analysis cannot be completed in time
       for deadlines requested by OBPA, OHRM, or White House Liaison to be met;

   (8) If there is a non-concurrence, may view that as a factor when determining Final
       Agency Decision (FAD) pursuant to the Department’s Equal Employment
       Opportunity DR; and

   (9) Hold agencies, DM, NAD, OIG, and staff offices accountable for actions required as
       a result of a Contingent Concurrence or a Non-Concurrence.

b. Agencies

   All agencies must develop a CRIA when proposing policies, actions, or decisions that
   affect their workforce or their federally conducted or federally assisted programs and
   activities. Each Agency Head will take the following actions when developing CRIAs
   and implementing civil rights strategies related to regulations, reorganizations, and
   advisory committees:

   (1) Analyze the civil rights impact(s) of policies, actions, or decisions that affect their
       workforce or its federally conducted or federally assisted programs and activities;

   (2) Identify the effects of proposed employment actions, eligibility criteria for USDA
       benefits, methods of implementation, underrepresentation within its programs that
       may adversely and disproportionately impact its employees or program beneficiaries
       based on their membership in a protected group;

   (3) Involve subject matter experts from the appropriate disciplines (e.g., economists,
       statisticians, budget analysts, civil rights analysts, program management analysts,
       human resources analysts, etc.);

   (4) Comply with all components of a Contingent Concurrence in accordance with the
       terms and conditions of the contingent concurrence and the provisions of this
       regulation;



                                              8
(5) Consult with stakeholders, minority groups, disability organizations, educational
    institutions, and customers, as appropriate, to obtain input prior to decision-making;

(6) Analyze program participation data by race, ethnicity, sex, and disability to identify
    any adverse impacts (See Section 9, CRIA Analysis Elements for further
    information);

(7) Analyze impacts of proposed employment actions on protected groups by race, sex,
    national origin, disability, and age (40 and over). (See Section 9 (b) Reorganizations
    for further information);

(8) Identify and analyze the civil rights implications and impacts of eligibility criteria,
    methods of implementation, and other requirements associated with policies,
    regulations, programs, reorganizations, advisory committees and activities on
    employees, recipients, and beneficiaries;

(9) Develop mitigation and outreach strategies to eliminate, alleviate, or lessen such
    impacts (See Sections 10 and 11 for further information);

(10) Refer problematic aspects that cannot be resolved at the agency level to OASCR
    for review and guidance with supporting documentation on any potential civil rights
    implications or impacts;

(11) Hold supervisors and managers accountable through their performance review
    appraisal for:

   (a) ensuring that their CRIAs are implemented and effectively eliminate or mitigate
   any adverse impact on protected groups; and

   (b) carrying out all of the responsibilities as required in this regulation;

(12) Submit a CRIA to OASCR, including a Civil Rights Certification signed by the
    Civil Rights Director on the proposed policy, program, employment action or activity,
    for review with a determination of CRIA sufficiency;

(13) Obtain either a Concurrence or a Contingent Concurrence prior to implementing
    any proposed action; and

(14) Failure to comply with the requirements of a Contingent Concurrence will: (1)
    negatively impact a supervisor’s end of year civil rights performance element
    performance; and (2) the supervisor will be required to conduct another CRIA that
    complies with the requirements of this regulation.




                                          9
c. DM, Staff Offices, NAD, and OIG

   DM, staff offices, NAD, and OIG must, in collaboration with OASCR, develop a CRIA
   when proposing policies, actions, or decisions that affect their workforce and take the
   following actions when developing CRIAs and implementing civil rights strategies
   related to regulations, reorganizations, and advisory committees:

   (1) Analyze the civil rights impact(s) of policies, actions, or decisions that affect their
       workforce or its federally conducted or federally assisted programs and activities;

   (2) Identify the effects of proposed employment actions, eligibility criteria for USDA
       benefits, methods of implementation, underrepresentation within its programs that
       may adversely and disproportionately impact its employees or program beneficiaries
       based on their membership in a protected group;

   (3) Involve subject matter experts from the appropriate disciplines (e.g., economists,
       statisticians, budget analysts, human resources analysts, etc.);

   (4) Consult with stakeholders, minority groups, disability organizations, and customers,
       as appropriate, to obtain input prior to decision-making;

   (5) Analyze impacts of proposed employment actions on protected groups by race, sex,
       national origin, disability, and age (40 and over). (See Section 9 (b) Reorganizations
       for further information);

   (6) Identify and analyze the civil rights implications and impacts of proposed eligibility
       criteria, methods of implementation, and other requirements associated with policies,
       regulations, programs, reorganizations, advisory committees and activities on
       employees;

   (7) Develop mitigation and outreach strategies to eliminate, alleviate, or lessen such
       impacts (See Sections 10 and 11 for further information);

   (8) Refer problematic aspects that cannot be resolved at the Agency level to OASCR for
       review and guidance with supporting documentation on any potential civil rights
       implications or impacts;

   (9) Hold supervisors and managers accountable through their performance review
       appraisal for:

      (a) Ensuring that their CRIAs are implemented and effectively eliminate or mitigate
          any adverse impact on protected groups; and

      (b) Carrying out all of the responsibilities as required in this regulation; and

   (10)   Finalize the CRIA with OASCR and obtain certification for the CRIA from the



                                             10
         ASA or, if designated by the ASA, the Staff Office Administrator, or appropriate
         Agency Head for NAD and OIG on the proposed policy, employment action, or
         activity for review and a determination of CRIA sufficiency.


9. CRIA ANALYSIS ELEMENTS

  This section outlines the minimum elements necessary for preparing a CRIA on the
  following:

  a. Significant Rules, Non-Significant Rules, Notices, and Departmental Regulations

     (1) Background

         The Background narrative must:

         (a) Indicate whether the rule is proposed, interim or final;

         (b) Describe the objective and purpose of the rule;

         (c) Identify the beneficiaries and recipients;

         (d) Cite the authority(ies) for the rule which would include both programmatic and
             civil rights authorities;

         (e) List any changes proposed; and

         (f) Identify results, if any, from comments received from Federal Register
             notifications.

     (2) Analysis

         The analysis narrative must:

         (a) Identify the appropriate theory(ies) of discrimination that will be used to analyze
             the policy, significant regulation, program, or activity, i.e., disparate treatment,
             disparate impact;

         (b) Identify whether or not it contains any requirement related to eligibility, benefits,
             and/or services, that may have the purpose or effect of excluding, limiting, or
             otherwise disadvantaging any group or class of persons on one or more prohibited
             bases;

         (c) Describe the civil rights impacts to determine whether:

            1   They are likely to be beneficial; such as increased participation, additional



                                              11
           program benefits, less requirements for eligibility;

       2   They are likely to maintain the status quo; or

       3   They are likely to have an adverse impact;

   (d) Determine whether or not the civil rights impacts will adversely affect one or
       more groups or classes of persons, specifically:

       1   Whether or not the impacts will be disproportionate; and

       2   How the disproportionate impacts will be manifested;

   (e) Identify whether and the extent to which each group or class of persons may be
       potentially affected, positively or negatively;

   (f) Analyze the regulatory action’s objective, implementation, relevant numerical
       data, and information to determine if there are significant differences in potential
       civil rights impacts among groups or classes of persons;

   (g) Analyze current race, ethnicity, sex (RES), and if applicable disability data
       collection of program participants from various sources (i.e., U.S. Census, Census
       of Agriculture, agency internal databases, etc.,) to determine if implementation
       will result in underrepresentation or will disproportionately impact protected
       groups;

   (h) Determine whether action or implementation will have an adverse or
       disproportionate (impact ratios amongst impacted groups by RES impact(s) on
       protected groups;

   (i) Identify Tribal implications - any actions that may impose an adverse impact on
       Indian Tribal Governments that are not required by statute;

   (j) Identify positive impacts on protected groups;

   (k) Determine any barriers which exist that prevent the increase of minority, women,
       or persons with disabilities’ participation.

   (l) Identify civil rights monitoring and evaluation processes; and

   (m) Address all OASCR recommendations from prior CRIA response, if applicable
       (for interim and final rules).

(3) Mitigation

   Agencies, DM, NAD, OIG, and staff offices must develop and implement a



                                        12
      mitigation strategy that will eliminate, alleviate, or lessen any adverse impact(s) as a
      result of a policy, action or decision.

   (4) Outreach Strategy

      Agencies, DM, NAD, OIG, and staff offices must develop and implement an outreach
      strategy to ensure customers, who are members of protected groups, receive timely
      notification of any changes to a program or procedure per the regulatory action(s).
      (See Section 11)

b. Reorganizations

   (1) Background

      The Background narrative must include:

      (a) Proposed activity;

      (b) Reason for the proposed activity (budgetary constraints, functional changes, etc.,);

      (c) Effective date of proposed activity; and

      (d) Current and proposed organizational structure.

   (2) Analysis

      The following methods must be included when preparing an analysis of the proposed
      action(s):

      (a) Analyze how the implementation of the proposed action will or may impact
          employees (i.e., relocation, change in reporting structure, change in unit name,
          reassignment, loss of supervisory authority and change in any title, series, grade,
          duties).

      (b) Identify the:

          1   Total number of full-time equivalent (FTE) (including encumbered and
              vacant);

          2   Total number of FTEs impacted;

          3   Number of impacted encumbered FTEs; and

          4   Number of impacted vacant positions.

      (c) Utilize the prescribed OASCR chart (see Appendix A) to capture the specific



                                           13
       impacts on each employee by name and their current and proposed title (indicate
       if supervisory), series, grade, duty station, race, sex, national origin, disability,
       and age.

   (d) Summarize the number and percentage of impacted employees by race, sex,
       national origin, disability, and age (RSNODA) data.

   (e) Summarize the impacts on protected groups based on the RSNODA data.

   (f) Outline the criteria used to determine the action(s) (relocation, reassignment, loss
       of supervisory authority and change in any title, series, grade, duties) impacting
       each affected employee(s).

   (g) Identify any impacts to customer’s access to services (positive or negative):

       1   Address whether any disruption in service for the customer will occur;

       2   Identify if additional commuting will be required to obtain services; and

       3   Address if one protected group is impacted more than another.

(3) Mitigation

   Agencies, DM, NAD, OIG, and staff offices must develop and implement a
   mitigation strategy that will eliminate, alleviate, or lessen any adverse impact(s), i.e.,
   loss of supervisory authority, relocation, change in title, series, grade, as a result of
   the employment action(s).

   a. Mitigation must be tailored to the adverse or disproportionate impact(s). Type of
      mitigation should include:

       1   Training of employees with a change in title, series, grade and duties;

       2   Relocation expenses for employees required to move more than 50 miles;

       3   Detail opportunity for employees losing supervisory responsibilities;

       4   Timely communication (w/union, public, customers, employees);

       5   Involvement of employees in decision making process;

       6   Maintain reasonable accommodation(s) for persons with a disability;

       7   Provide assistance with new job search, resume writing, interviewing
           techniques and administrative time;




                                         14
          8   Allow telework and flextime schedules;

          9   Research shared office space with another USDA agency; and

          10 Cross training of employees, so they do not have to relocate.

   (4) Outreach Strategy

      Agencies, DM, NAD, OIG, and staff offices must develop and implement an outreach
      strategy to ensure customers who are members of protected groups receive timely
      notification of any proposed employment action(s) i.e., office closure. (See Section
      11)

b. Advisory Committees

   (1) Background

      The background narrative must include:

      (a) Name of authority that establishes Committee and Council;

      (b) Appointment term for each member;

      (c) Length of the Charter;

      (d) Summary of Committee’s function(s); and

      (e) Expiration date.

   (2) Analysis

      The following methods must be included when preparing an analysis of the proposed
      action(s):

      (a) Describe the civil rights impacts to determine whether:

          1   They are likely to be beneficial; such as increased participation, additional
              program benefits, less requirements for eligibility;

          2   They are likely to maintain the status quo; or

          3   They are likely to have an adverse impact such as an advisory committee that
              has no minority members.

      (b) Determine whether or not the civil rights impacts will adversely affect one or
          more groups or classes of persons, specifically:



                                           15
             1   Whether or not the impacts will be disproportionate; and

             2   How the disproportionate impacts will be manifested.

         (c) Identify the appropriate theory(ies) of discrimination that will be used to analyze
             the program, advisory committee, or activity, i.e., disparate treatment, disparate
             impact.

         (d) Identify whether or not it contains any requirement related to eligibility, benefits,
             and/or services, that may have the purpose or effect of excluding, limiting, or
             otherwise disadvantaging any group or class of persons on one or more prohibited
             bases.

         (e) Identify whether and the extent to which each group or class of persons may be
             potentially affected, positively or negatively.

         (f) Identify current and proposed memberships by race, sex, national origin and
             disability.

         (g) Identify projected vacancies based on current membership’s end of appointment.

         (h) Prepare a trend analysis of increase or decrease in the participation of protected
             groups based on past two-to-three-year membership data.

         (i) Determine any barriers which exist that prevent the increase of membership of
             protected groups.

     (3) Outreach Strategy

         Agencies, DM, NAD, OIG, and staff offices must develop and implement an outreach
         strategy to ensure applicants and nominees, who are members of protected groups,
         receive timely notification of any advisory committee vacancies. (See Section 11)


10. MITIGATION

  If an adverse or disproportionate impact is projected the following methods for lessening the
  adverse or disproportionate impact will be identified and implemented:

  a. Mitigation must be tailored to the adverse or disproportionate impact(s) found in the
     analysis. Examples of mitigation include:

     (1) Staggering implementation dates;

     (2) Delaying or establishing incremental cost increases to lesson financial burdens;


                                              16
     (3) Providing adequate time to meet the required timeframes and initial startup times;

     (4) Incorporating language that will address small businesses and socially disadvantaged
         beginning, and limited resource farmers and ranchers needs (i.e., set aside a
         percentage of program funding);

     (5) Giving priority funding projects that provide a benefit to various communities, which
         include urban and Indian Tribal communities; and

     (6) Addressing eligibility and criteria revisions that ultimately have a disproportionate
         impact.

  b. Providing guidance and technical assistance to customers to assist them with meeting the
     established requirements.

  c. Conducting a barrier analysis which includes:

     (1) Identifying any barriers preventing effective implementation and outreach;

     (2) Developing a strategy for eliminating those barriers; and

     (3) Identifying and selecting feasible strategies and actions for implementation that the
         Agency could utilize to offset adverse and disproportionate civil rights impacts (short
         term and/or long term).


11. OUTREACH STRATEGIES

  The CRIAs will contain an outreach plan that includes the following:

  a. Communicating with the following protected groups:

     (1) Minorities;

     (2) Women;

     (3) Persons with disabilities – Section 508 compliant electronic documents and
         alternative communication methods (ex., TDD, Braille, if applicable);

     (4) Persons with limited English proficiency (LEP) – translation of vital documents and
         oral interpretation services;

     (5) Veterans (if applicable); and

     (6) Indian Tribal Governments (if applicable).


                                              17
     b. Outlining methods the Agency will utilize to ensure the aforementioned protected
        groups are aware of the proposed actions by contacting affected organizations,
        institutions, and groups by the following means:

         (1) Face-to-face meetings;

         (2) Emails;

         (3) Postings, newspaper publications;

         (4) Telephonic, television and radio announcements; and

         (5) Website and other social media.

     c. Identify an outreach strategy that will eliminate, or alleviate, adverse and
        disproportionate civil rights impact for the affected groups or classes of persons. The
        outreach strategy should include the following:

  (1) Specific methods(s) by which the agency will monitor its outreach efforts to protected
      groups and organizations (See Section 12);

  (2) Lists of minority organizations, radio and television stations, community-based
      organizations, advocacy groups, disability organizations, colleges and universities, Indian
      Tribal Governments, tribal officials, other Federal agencies, and other entities the Agency
      will contact to ensure protected groups are aware of the benefits of the program;

  (3) Notices posted or advertised;

  (4) Methods of outreach conducted to individuals, organizations, schools, or universities;

  (5) Communication with individuals with disabilities, persons age 40 and above, and LEP
      customers, and what alternative methods were used to make the contacts, i.e., TTD,
      Braille; Spanish, etc.;

  (6) The outcome of the contacts, and method(s) used to monitor and evaluate contact; and

  (7) The Tribal Governments contacted and the date meetings were held to discuss the
      program or activity.


12. MONITORING AND EVALUATION

  Each agency, DM, NAD, OIG and staff office, in collaboration with its civil rights office,
  will monitor and evaluate the results of strategies and/or actions it implements to address
  adverse and disproportionate civil rights impacts of its programs and employment activities


                                               18
  as follows:

  a. Monitoring and evaluation responsibilities should be coordinated with or integrated into
     annual business plans, civil rights strategic plans, Affirmative Employment Program
     Plans, Civil Rights Implementation Plans, Outreach Plans, etc.;

  b. Supervisors and managers will be held accountable for implementing strategies and
     actions to eliminate, alleviate, or mitigate adverse and disproportionate civil rights
     impacts via annual performance plans;

  c. Monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of the outreach and mitigation strategies utilized;
     and

  d. Monitor complaints and compliance reviews resulting from the actions taken and institute
     any corrective actions necessary to resolve the issues raised.


13. CONCLUSION

  The CRIAs will contain a Conclusion section that will include the following:

  a. A summary statement indicating whether the proposed action, its objective, and/or
     implementation will have an adverse or disproportionate impact on protected groups; and

  b. A certification signed by the current Civil Rights Director or ASA (for DM and Staff
     Offices only) (See Appendix B for example CRIA Certification).


14. RETENTION OF CRIA RECORDS

  Agencies, DM, NAD, OIG and staff offices will retain all CRIA documents for a minimum
  of three years and make them available to OASCR, OGC, OIG, and other USDA agencies,
  DM and staff offices upon request, and third parties as prescribed by law.


15. EXPEDITED CLEARANCE FOR REGULATORY ACTIONS ONLY

  a. Agencies are required to complete CRIAs in accordance with Section 9. However,
     OASCR may agree to expedite the clearance of certain rules, notices, or other regulatory
     actions PRIOR TO SUBMISSION OF A CRIA if an Agency Head submits a final, draft
     or advance copy of the rule, notice, or other regulatory action, along with a written
     request. Such a request must include:

     (1) The purpose of the rule, notice, or proposed action;

     (2) Information on who will benefit from issuance of the rule, notice, or proposed action


                                              19
           and the manner in which they will benefit;

     (3) The reason or rationale justifying the request for expedited clearance;

     (4) The consequences of denial of a request to expedite the rule, notice, or proposed
         action; and

     (5) A proposed deadline for completing the CRIA.

  b. If the request for expedited clearance is approved, OASCR will either confirm the
     deadline submitted for completing the CRIA or negotiate a new one. It is likely that a
     request for expedited clearance will be approved if:

     (1) Expedited clearance will facilitate publication of a rule or notice that must be
         immediately implemented to protect the health and safety of the public or to prevent
         or mitigate catastrophic across-the-board economic harm to domestic producers; or

     (2) The rule or notice MUST be promulgated within 30 days or less by order of the
         President of the United States or the Secretary; and

     (3) The request for expedited clearance is timely received.

  c. A request for expedited clearance MAY NOT be approved if the rule, notice, or other
     regulatory action is:

     (1) Identified in an agency’s planned rulemaking work plan that is required by OBPA;

     (2) Scheduled to be published more than 30 days after the date of the request for
     expedited clearance; or

     (3)     Promulgated at the discretion of the Agency Head.

  d. In situations where OASCR agrees to expedite the clearance of a rule, notice, or other
     regulatory action, the agency must submit the CRIA in accordance with an agreed upon
     deadline. The agency will be held accountable for:

     (1)      Meeting the CRIA deadline agreed upon; and

     (2)    Implementing recommendations from OASCR designed to eliminate, alleviate, or
     mitigate potential adverse and disproportionate civil rights impacts.

16. WAIVERS (FOR REGULATIONS ONLY)

  a. An agency may request a waiver from the CRIA approval process if the subject matters,
     is being implemented in accordance with the requirements of a statute or treaty, and has
     no foreseeable adverse civil rights impacts. To request a waiver, an Agency Head must


                                              20
     submit the final, draft, or advance copy of the rule, notice, or other regulatory action,
     along with the written request that includes the following information:

     (1)     Purpose of the rule, notice, or other regulatory action;

     (2)    Information on who will benefit from issuance of the rule, notice, or other
     regulatory action and the manner in which they will benefit; and

     (3)     Justification for the waiver request.

  b. A waiver will be granted on a case-by-case basis, for:

     (1) FINAL rules previously reviewed and concurred on by OASCR as proposed or
         interim rules, if no substantive modifications or additions were made in the
         provisions;

     (2) Rules, notices, or other regulatory actions that deal with strictly scientific or
         administrative matters that CLEARLY have no civil rights implications; or

     (3) Rules, notices, or other regulatory actions that are outside the jurisdictional control of
         the program Agency issuing the rule, notice, or other regulatory action.


17. CRIA TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE REQUESTS

  a. Each agency, DM, NAD, OIG, and staff office will submit a written request for technical
     assistance to the OASCR’s Compliance Division 45 working days PRIOR TO
     INITIATING THE USDA CLEARANCE PROCESS for the following documents:

     (1) Reorganizations;

     (2) Advisory Committees; and

     (3) Significant regulatory actions.

  b. The document and the CRIA, as well as, any other supporting documentation, i.e., the
     final, draft or advance copy of the significant rule, notice(s), reorganization proposals,
     advisory committee renewals or establishments or other regulatory action, should:

     (1) Identify civil rights issues, implications, and impacts, for the proposed action;

     (2) Identify the determination made as to whether the proposed action will have an
         adverse or disproportionate impact on protected populations and reasons for the
         conclusion;

     (3) Identify Tribal implications or any actions that impose substantial direct compliance



                                               21
   costs on Indian Tribal Governments, and that is not required by statue (if applicable);

(4) Identify all mitigation that will be conducted to lessen any adverse impact on women,
    minorities, age 40 and over (where applicable) and/or persons with disabilities;

(5) Identify the race, sex, national origin, age (where applicable) and disability data of
    impacted population as required in Section 9 of this regulation;

(6) Establish effective outreach strategy for ensuring that women, minorities, persons age
    40 and over (where applicable) and/or persons with disabilities are aware of the
    proposed action in accordance with Section 11; and

(7) Ensure all Limited English Proficiency (LEP) activities will be conducted for the
    proposed action in accordance with USDA’s DR 4330-005, Prohibition Against
    National Origin Discrimination Affecting Persons with Limited English Proficiency
    in Programs and Activities Conducted by USDA and/or USDA’s 7 CFR 15, Guidance
    to Federal Financial Assistance Recipients Regarding the Title VI Prohibition
    Against National Origin Discrimination Affecting Persons with Limited English
    Proficiency.


                                      - END -




                                         22
                                   APPENDIX A

                                ATTACHMENT A
               Sample: Current and Proposed Organizational Changes


Name Current      Org.  Org.      Proposed   Status/          Sex Race Age Disability
     Position     Moved Moved     Position   Duty Station
     Title        From To         title      Current/proposed
     Grade/                       Grade/     Miles difference
     Series                       Series     between the
     (indicate if                            offices
     supervisory)




                                      A-1
                                          APPENDIX B

                                SAMPLE - CRIA Certification


Certification:

Office and Division or Location: XXXXXX

Proposed Action: XXXX

I certify I have reviewed and analyzed the appropriate documentation and determined
that:


       No major civil rights impact is likely to result if the proposed action is implemented.

       A major civil rights impact, as described below, is likely to result if the proposed
       action is implemented.



_________________________________                          ___________________________
Administrator                                              Date




                                              B-1
                                       APPENDIX C

                           AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


a. Statutory Authorities

   Age Discrimination Act of 1975, as amended

   Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, as amended

   Alternative Dispute Resolution Act of 1996, as amended

   Americans with Disabilities Amendments Act of 2008, as amended

   Government Organization and Employees: Departmental Regulations, 5 U.S.C. 301,
   January 3, 2012

   Equal Pay Act of 1963, as amended

   Food Stamp Improvements Act of 1994, P.L. 103-225, March 25, 1994

   Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008

   Notification and Federal Employee Antidiscrimination and Retaliation (No FEAR) Act of
   2002

   Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended

   Section 503 of the Vietnam Era Veterans Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974

   Section 307 of the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978, as amended

   Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. 2000d, as amended

   Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended

   Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972

b. Regulatory and Executive Orders

   Affirmative Employment Programs, 5 CFR 720

   Guidance to Federal Financial Assistance Recipients regarding the Title VII Prohibition
   Against National Origin Discrimination Affecting Persons with Limited English
   Proficiency, 7 CFR 15, November 28, 2014.

   Department of Justice, Guidelines for Coordination of Enforcement of Nondiscrimination
   in Federally Assisted Programs, 28 CFR 42.401 et seq.
                                          C-1
   Equal Credit Opportunity Act of 1977 (Regulation B), 12 CFR 202

   Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) Management Directive-110,
   Federal Sector Complaints Processing Manual, August 5, 2015

   EEOC Management Directive-715, EEO Reporting Requirements for Federal Agencies,
   October 1, 2003

   Equal Opportunity to Religious Organizations, 7 CFR 16

   Executive Order 13087, Further Amendment to Executive Order 11478, Equal
   Employment Opportunity in the Federal Government, May 28, 1998

   Executive Order 13145, To Prohibit Discrimination in Federal Employment Based on
   Genetic Information, February 8, 2000

   Executive Order 13152, Further Amendment to Executive Order 11478, Equal
   Employment Opportunity in the Federal Government, May 2000

   Executive Order 13166, Improving Access to Services for Persons with Limited English
   Proficiency (LEP), August 11, 2000

   Executive Order 13672, Further Amendment to Executive Order 11478, Equal
   Employment Opportunity in the Federal Government, and Executive Order 11246, Equal
   Employment Opportunity July 21, 2014

   Federal Sector Equal Employment Opportunity, 29 CFR 1614

c. Departmental Regulations and Guidance

   DM 4300-001, EEO Complaint Processing Procedures, July 20, 2001

   DR 1512-001, Regulatory Decision-making Requirements, March 14, 1997

   DR 4300-005, Agency Civil Rights Programs, January 14, 1998

   DR 4330-003, Nondiscrimination in USDA-Conducted Programs and Activities, October
   5, 2015

   DR 4330-005, Prohibition Against National Origin Discrimination Affecting Persons
   with Limited English Proficiency in Programs and Activities Conducted by USDA, June
   4, 2013

   Annual Civil Rights Policy Statement issued by the Secretary of Agriculture

   Any other published regulations, policies, staff instructions, or directives related to non-
   discrimination


                                            C-2
