                         U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                                  Number:
          DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                 4330-005
SUBJECT:
                                                            DATE:
Prohibition Against National Origin Discrimination          June 4, 2013
Affecting Persons with Limited English Proficiency in
Programs and Activities Conducted by USDA
                                                            OPI:
                                                            Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights


                                     TABLE OF CONTENTS

Section                                                                    Page

Purpose                                                                    1
Special Instructions/Cancellations                                         2
Scope                                                                      2
Policy                                                                     2
Authorities                                                                2
Abbreviations and Definitions                                              2
Organization and Assignment                                                4
Roles and Responsibilities                                                 6


1. PURPOSE

   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the policies and procedures for ensuring that
   persons with limited English proficiency (LEP) have meaningful access to programs and
   activities conducted by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) pursuant to Executive
   Order 13166, “Improving Access to Services for Persons with Limited English Proficiency.”
   (“The Executive Order.”)

   The Executive Order requires that each Federal agency shall prepare a plan to improve access
   to its federally conducted programs and activities by eligible LEP persons. Each plan shall be
   consistent with the standards set forth in the Department of Justice’s Policy Guidance
   Document entitled, “Enforcement of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964-National Origin
   Discrimination Against Persons With Limited English Proficiency” (“DOJ LEP Guidance”),
   reprinted at 65 FR 50123 (August 16, 2000). The DOJ LEP Guidance advises each Federal
   agency on the most appropriate steps agencies should take to ensure meaningful access by
   LEP individuals to information and services the agency provides.
2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATION

  a. Agency actions taken to implement policies and procedures required by this DR shall be
     developed in a manner that complies with the provisions of related Executive Orders,
     regulations, and other policy listed in Section 5.

  b. This DR does not intend to create new core services, but instead intends to eliminate or
     reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, LEP as a barrier to accessing existing
     information, programs and activities.

3. SCOPE

  This regulation applies to all programs and activities conducted in whole or in part by the
  USDA, its agencies and instrumentalities. (See definition in 6(b)(5) of “Federally conducted
  programs and activities.”)

4. POLICY

  USDA is committed to providing meaningful access to its programs and services to persons
  who, as a result of national origin, are limited in English proficiency.

  It is USDA policy to ensure no person is subject to prohibited discrimination in USDA
  conducted programs and activities based on national origin. Failure to provide meaningful
  access to LEP persons may be a violation of this policy.

5. AUTHORITIES

  a. Executive Order.

     Executive Order 13166, “Improving Access to Services for Persons with Limited English
     Proficiency,” 65 FR 50121-50122.

  b. Regulations.

     7 C.F.R. 15d, Nondiscrimination in Programs or Activities Conducted by the United
     States Department of Agriculture.

  c. Other.

     U.S. Department of Justice, Policy Guidance Document, “Enforcement of Title VI of the
     Civil Rights Act of 1964–National Origin Discrimination Against Persons With Limited
     English Proficiency” (65 FR 50123-50125).

6. ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS

  a. Abbreviations.
                                              2
   (1)   ASCR –Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights

   (2)   C.F.R. –Code of Federal Regulations

   (3)   DR –Departmental Regulation

   (4)   E.O. –Executive Order

   (5)   LEP –Limited English Proficiency

   (6)   OCPTCT –Office of Compliance, Policy, Training and Cultural Transformation

   (7)   USDA –United States Department of Agriculture

b. Definitions.

   (1)   Agency. A major program organizational unit of the Department with delegated
         authorities to deliver programs, activities, benefits, and services.

   (2)   Agency Heads. Departmental Under Secretaries, Deputy Under Secretaries,
         Directors, Chiefs, and Administrators within the Office of the Secretary who
         receive delegated authority under 7 C.F.R. Agency Heads report to and receive
         their delegated authorities from Under or Assistant Secretaries as prescribed in
         7 C.F.R. The term “agency” does not include Departmental Administration or
         Departmental Offices.

   (3)   Departmental Office. A Departmental administrative (non-program) office, the
         head of which is a general officer or reports to an official within the Office of the
         Secretary and receives delegated authority under 7 C.F.R.

   (4)   Federal Agency. Federal Agency is the Federal department, agency, commission,
         council, or instrumentality of the Government, or the primary organizational sub-
         unit (the administering office) that has direct operational responsibility for
         managing a program.

   (5)   Federally Conducted Programs and Activities. Program services, benefits,
         resources or information delivered directly to the public by USDA.

   (6)   Federally Assisted Programs and Activities. Programs and activities of an entity
         that receives Federal financial assistance.

   (7)   Federal Financial Assistance. Grants and loans of Federal funds; the grant or
         donation of Federal property and interests in property; the detail of Federal
         personnel; the sale and lease of, and the permission to use Federal property or any
         interest in such property or the furnishing or services without consideration, or at a
         consideration which is reduced for the purpose of assisting the recipient; and any
                                             3
           Federal agreement, arrangement, or other contract which has as one of its purposes
           the provision of assistance.

     (7)   Interpretation. The process by which the spoken word is used when transferring
           meaning between languages.

     (8)   Limited English Proficient (LEP) Persons. Persons who do not speak English as
           their primary language and have a limited ability to read, speak, write, or
           understand English are limited English proficient, or LEP.

     (9)   OCPTCT. This office is responsible for the supervision and oversight of four
           divisions, compliance, policy, training and cultural transformation. The oversight
           responsibilities include the management of all work products, collaboration with
           USDA agencies, quarterly and annual reports and liaison with other federal
           agencies.

     (10) Qualified Interpreter: An individual who is competent to provide interpretation
          services at a level of fluency, comprehension, impartiality and confidentiality
          appropriate to the specific nature, type, and purpose of the information at issue.

     (11) Secretary. The Secretary of Agriculture or any officer or employee of the
          Department whom the Secretary has heretofore delegated, or whom the Secretary
          may hereafter delegate, the authority to act in his stead under the regulations in this
          part.

     (12) Translation. The process of transferring ideas expressed in writing from one
          language to another language.

     (13) Vital Document. Paper or electronic written material that contains information that
          is critical for accessing a program or activity, or is required by law, such as consent
          forms, applications, and notices of rights.


7. ORGANIZATION AND ASSIGNMENT

  a. Agencies and Departmental Offices Covered.

     The Executive Order applies to all USDA agencies and Departmental offices.

  b. Requirement for an Agency or Departmental Office LEP Plan.

     Agencies and Departmental offices must develop a written LEP plan to provide a
     framework for the provision of timely and reasonable language assistance and for
     eliminating or reducing LEP as a barrier to accessing USDA programs and activities.

     Each LEP Plan will include the following elements:

                                               4
Element 1. Needs and capacity assessment

Each Agency or Departmental office will have in place mechanisms to assess, on a
regular and consistent basis, the LEP status and language assistance needs of current and
potential customers and contacts, as well as mechanisms to assess the agency or office's
capacity to meet these needs according to the elements of this plan. These mechanisms
should employ the four- factor analysis described in the DOJ LEP Guidance Document.
The four-factor analysis is a flexible and fact-dependent standard that is used to
determine the appropriate language assistance services to ensure an LEP individual has
meaningful access to that agency’s programs and activities. The four- factor analysis
considers:

(1) The number or proportion of LEP persons eligible to be served or likely to be
    encountered by the program;

(2) The frequency with which LEP individuals come in contact with the program;

(3) The nature and importance of the program, activity, or service provided by the
    program to people’s lives; and,

(4) The resources available to the program and costs.

Element 2. Oral language assistance services

Each Agency or Departmental office will arrange for the provision of oral language
assistance, including interpretation assistance by qualified interpreters, in response to the
needs of LEP customers, in both face-to face and telephone encounters.

Element 3. Written translations

Each Agency or Departmental office will produce vital documents, including website
information, in languages other than English where a significant number or percentage of
the customers served or eligible to be served has LEP. Given the disparate activities and
areas of focus within the Department, it will be incumbent upon each agency to
determine a threshold for its programs and activities, to determine what constitutes vital
documents, such as applications, and implement a translation strategy. These written
materials may include paper and electronic documents such as publications, notices,
correspondence, and signs. Because in some circumstances lack of awareness of the
existence of a particular program may effectively deny LEP individuals meaningful
access to that program, it is important for Agencies and Department offices to continually
survey and assess the needs of eligible service populations in order to determine whether
certain critical outreach materials should be translated into other languages.

Recognizing that translations can be resource and time intensive, Agencies and
Departmental offices are encouraged to seek stakeholder input in determining which
documents should be prioritized for translation. Agencies and Departmental offices are

                                          5
     also encouraged to pursue resource-sharing and cost-saving initiatives across the
     Department when translating documents.

     A quality control mechanism should be put in place for reviewing the content of
     translated documents for accuracy and with respect to style, technical word choice,
     phrasing, or reading level depending on the context or target audience.

     Element 4. Policies and procedures

     Each Agency or Departmental office will have in place specific written policies and
     procedures related to each of the plan elements and designated staff that will be
     responsible for implementing activities related to these policies. Given the disparate
     activities and areas of focus within the Department, it will be incumbent upon each
     agency to determine the threshold needed for its programs and activities and implement a
     translation strategy.

     Element 5. Notification of the availability of free language services

     Each Agency or Departmental office will proactively inform LEP customers of the
     availability of free language assistance services through both oral and written notice, in
     the primary languages spoken by a significant number of customers and potential
     customers.

     Element 6. Staff training

     Each Agency or Departmental office will train front- line and managerial staff on the
     policies and procedures of its language assistance activities.

     Element 7. Assessing accessibility and quality

     Each Agency or Departmental office will institute procedures to assess the accessibility
     and quality of language assistance services, including translation of vital documents,
     interpretation and contractual services for LEP customers. Based on the results of this
     assessment, the LEP Plan, Agency procedures and directives will be revised on an annual
     basis.

8. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a. The Secretary shall set the tone and direction, provide leadership, prescribe regulations,
     set overall LEP and civil rights policy, and ensure compliance and enforcement
     throughout the Department.

     The Secretary will:

     (1)   Accomplish his/her responsibilities directly and through the broad delegation of
           authority for LEP policy to the ASCR and other agencies, officers, and employees.

                                               6
b. The ASCR shall provide the oversight of all LEP policy functions within USDA.

   The ASCR will:

   (1)   Provide overall leadership, coordination and direction for the USDA LEP
         compliance program;

   (2)   Ensure that agencies and their instrumentalities actively support and adhere to
         requirements of the Executive Order and to 7 C.F.R. 15d, Nondiscrimination in
         Programs or Activities Conducted by the United States Department of Agriculture,
         which prohibits discrimination, including on the ground of national origin, by any
         agency, officer, or employee under any program or activity conducted by the United
         States Department of Agriculture.

   (3)   Provide training and disseminate information on best practices for LEP access to
         agencies;

   (4)   Provide technical assistance on LEP and national origin discrimination matters to
         Department's employees and managers so that USDA demonstrates and maintains
         the highest level of current technical competence, skills, knowledge, and abilities;

   (5)   Provide leadership and proactively promote meaningful access for LEP individuals
         at USDA, and provide guidance and oversight to USDA agencies and recipients;

   (6)   Serve as a clearinghouse for information dissemination and exchange with USDA
         agencies, governmental and non- governmental civil rights communities.

   (7)   Systematically review, evaluate, and hold to a high accountability standard the civil
         rights performance of agency heads and administrators;

   (8)   Ensure the investigation, adjudication, and resolution of program discrimination
         complaints, to include the full authority and sole responsibility for determining
         whether discrimination has occurred in USDA-conducted and assisted programs
         and activities, and ordering appropriate relief;

   (9)   Issue policies, directives, procedures, rules, and regulations as necessary to ensure
         that the Department fully achieves its LEP compliance and monitoring obligations;

   (10) Recommend disciplinary action as appropriate and where necessary to ensure
        agency LEP compliance with applicable laws, executive orders and regulations.


c. OCPTCT under the direction of the ASCR shall:

   (1)   Have the responsibility for the implementation and oversight of the requirements of
         E.O. 13166.

                                            7
   (2)   Represent USDA on the Federal Interagency LEP Working Group.

d. Agency and Departmental Office Heads shall:

   (1)   Ensure that an LEP Plan is developed and submitted to OCPT for each Agency and
         Departmental Office according to Section 7.b. of this DR within 180 days of the
         issuance of this DR.

   (2)   Submit a copy of the updated written plan annually to OCPT.

e. Agency and Departmental Office employees shall:

   (1)   Complete required LEP training in a timely manner.

   (2)   Adhere to LEP Plans to ensure that LEP persons are provided meaningful access to
         USDA conducted programs and activities.

   (3)   Refer to Final Guidance to Federal Financial Assistance Recipients Regarding the
         Title VI Prohibition against National Origin Discrimination Affecting Persons with
         Limited English Proficiency for policy and implementation by USDA Federally
         Assisted Programs on the ASCR website.

                                        -END-




                                           8
