                             U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                   WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


                                                                             NUMBER:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                      4360-001
SUBJECT:                                                DATE:
Communicating With Under-served Communities             January 14, 1998

                                                        OPI:   Office of Outreach




1 PURPOSE

To establish Departmental policy to ensure that educational and technical assistance
services and communications materials are available to all customers in languages
appropriate to the community being served, and that USDA offices use appropriate media
outlets to distribute information to under-served communities.

2 REPONSIBILITIES

              a Communicating USDA Programs. Agency heads shall develop and
              implement communications plans that include an outreach component.
              Agency heads shall adequately fund these plans to meet all civil rights
              obligations pertaining to developing publications and documents in
              alternative formats (i.e., Braille, large print, cassette, open or closed
              captioning), and in languages other than English, as deemed appropriate
              for the agency mission.

              When developing a communication strategy for the program or service
              area, the plan must include media outreach to under-served customers
              such as women, racial and ethnic minorities, and persons with disabilities.
              Plans should also include providing information in other languages, public
              service announcements in publications, and outreach to radio and TV
              stations serving persons in other languages,

              b Employee Training. Managers and supervisors shall ensure that all
              employees are aware of policies, practices, and procedures guaranteeing
              effective communication to all customers and others, and that each
              employee holding a "public contact position" is aware of USDA's civil
              rights obligation and commitment to ensuring equal opportunity to access
              information and services. Managers and supervisors are responsible for
              effectively implementing this requirement and will be held accountable in
              their performance standards for their actions.
DR 4360-001                                                                     January 14, 1998




3 CROSS REFERENCE

Further information on communicating with persons with disabilities may be found in the
Department's section 504 Handbook.

4 INTERAGENCY COOPERATION

To reach limited resource customers and under-served communities, wherever possible,
agencies shall collaborate and cooperate in producing information items and when
conducting communication activities.

5 NON-TRADITIONAL OUTREACH

To reach limited resource customers and under-served communities more effectively,
agency heads will ensure that communications plans include informal communication
outlets such as community leaders, schools, and associations.

6 AIDS AND SERVICES

Agencies shall provide appropriate auxiliary aids or services to people with impaired
sensory, manual, or speaking skills, where reasonably necessary, such that agencies
assure that these persons have an equal opportunity to benefit from the agency's services.

It is USDA's intent to meet all such reasonable requests for aids and services. Alternative
formats include, but are not limited to, the provision of information in the language of the
community being served; formats such as Braille, large print, and cassette tape; use of a
sign language interpreter; use of a language translator; room seating arrangements to
accommodate lip-reading, visual impairments, and other special needs; verbal
descriptions of flipcharts, transparencies, and so forth, for people who have visual
impairments; and sites that are fully accessible to people with disabilities.



7 USE OF THE INTERNET AND ELECTRONIC TECHNOLOGIES

All national publications shall be accessible on the Internet or available in other forms of
electronic technology. At a minimum, agencies are required to post a notice on their
homepage which:

               a States the availability of the publication in other electronic formats (i.e.,
               ASCII);

               b States the availability of the publication in alternative formats (i.e.,
               Braille, large print, cassette, and/or other languages); and;



                                              2
DR 4360-001                                                             January 14, 1998


              c Provides ordering information for those requesting documents, which
              includes an agency mailing address, facsimile, Telecommunications
              Device for the Deaf, and voice telephone number.




                                          3
