                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


                                                                             Number:
  DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                    4360-002
SUBJECT:                                                    DATE:
Coordination of Requests for USDA Support for Outreach      August 8, 2001
Related Activities
                                                            OPI: Office of Outreach




   1 PURPOSE

       This regulation sets policies and procedures on how
       agencies should handle requests from non-Federal
       entities, including persons, for USDA financial or
       equivalent in-kind support for the non-federal
       entities to conduct outreach activities, which are
       related to the USDA mission and programs.

   2 POLICY

       This regulation establishes a department wide policy
       for the Office of Outreach to coordinate all requests
       from non-Federal entities for USDA financial or
       equivalent in-kind support to conduct activities
       involving outreach that would further the USDA mission
       and programs.

   3 BACKGROUND

       Many USDA agencies support outreach activities
       conducted by various non-Federal entities. This
       support typically has been financial or in-kind in
       nature. Determination of what entities receive
       support mainly has been accomplished through random
       requests from such entities to individual USDA
       agencies. USDA is establishing a definitive control
       point where these requests are reviewed to foster
       consistency and fair treatment within the Department
       of Agriculture.

       The Secretary delegated to the Assistant Secretary for
       Administration the authority to coordinate and oversee
       agency outreach activities. The Assistant Secretary
       for Administration redelegated this authority to the
       Director, Office of Outreach. Within this authority
       is the responsibility to serve as the control point
       for coordinating requests from non-Federal entities
       for USDA financial or equivalent in-kind support for
       outreach activities related to USDA agency missions
       and programs. The Office of Outreach role will be
DR 4360-002                                August 8, 2001

    strictly one of coordination and oversight. Each
    agency retains full responsibility for determining
    whether the agency has the necessary statutory
    authority and available appropriations to support any
    outreach activities. This regulation does not provide
    authority to fund any outreach activities.
    Additionally, any agreements to provide USDA financial
    support will be between the agency providing the
    funding and the non-Federal entity. The Office of
    Outreach will be a party to any agreement only if the
    Office of Outreach is providing support from its own
    resources.


  4 AUTHORITIES

    7 CFR 2.24(a)(4), 2.90.


  5 RESPONSIBILITIES

    A The Office of Outreach is the official point of
    contact for submission of requests by non-Federal
    entities for USDA financial or equivalent in-kind
    support of outreach related activities. The Office of
    Outreach will establish a procedure for the submission
    of such requests. At a minimum, this procedure will
    require that each request include the name, address,
    and a detailed breakdown of the purposes for which
    funds are requested (e.g., speakers, handouts).

    B Agencies are to direct non-Federal entities to
    refer requests for support for outreach related
    activities to the Office of Outreach as the USDA point
    of contact.

    C The Office of Outreach will review each request and
    will forward the requests, as appropriate, along
    with comments, to the USDA agencies whose programs and
    missions relate to the proposed outreach activities.
    The Office of Outreach comments will address, but are
    not limited to, whether any of the proposed purposes
    raise concerns regarding proper agency use of
    appropriated funds.

    d Within ten (10) working days from receipt, each
    agency will review the requests and associated
    comments and respond to the Office of Outreach with
    the decisions on the amounts, if any, and for what
    purposes, to provide funding. Agency review should
    address whether an agency has an interest in providing
    funding or in-kind support and if so, whether it has
    the requisite statutory authority and available
    appropriations.


                              2
DR 4360-002                                August 8, 2001




    e Once the Office of Outreach receives responses from
    all agencies involved, the Office of Outreach will
    send a response informing the requestor whether USDA
    has an interest in providing any funding, or
    equivalent in-kind support, and if so, in what
    amounts, for what purposes, from what agencies, and
    the contact persons in those agencies. The Office of
    Outreach will respond to the requestor within thirty
    (30) working days from the receipt of a complete
    request.

    f An agency listed in the Office of Outreach response
    as being interested in providing financial or
    equivalent in-kind support may proceed to enter into
    an agreement with the non-Federal entity in accordance
    with the agency’s authorities and procedures.




                           END




                            3
