                                U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                       WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


                                                                                  Number:
                       DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION
                                                                                  4370-002
 SUBJECT:                                                         DATE:
 Providing a Receipt for Service or Denial of Service by the      November 28, 2011
 Farm Service Agency, the Natural Resources Conservation
                                                                  OPI:
 Service, the Rural Business Service, the Rural Housing           Departmental Management
 Service, and the Rural Utilities Service.


1.     PURPOSE

       This Departmental Regulation (DR) implements section 14003 of the Food, Conservation
       and Energy Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. §2279-1(e), “section 14003"). This DR establishes the
       procedures and policy for the Farm Service Agency, the Natural Resources Conservation
       Service, the Rural Business Service, the Rural Housing Service, and the Rural Utilities
       Service to issue a receipt, upon request, for each benefit or service sought by any
       inquirer, applicant, or customer, and to note the action taken or recommended to be taken.

2.     SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATION

       This DR cancels and supersedes any instruction, procedure, or policy issued by the Farm
       Service Agency, the Natural Resources Conservation Service, the Rural Business
       Service, the Rural Housing Service, and the Rural Utilities Service on Receipt for
       Service.

3.     POLICY

       a.     All Agencies listed above shall provide a receipt for service or denial of service
              upon request by any inquirer, applicant, or customer, denoting the date, place,
              subject of the request or inquiry, and the action taken, not taken, or recommended
              by such Agency. All Agencies shall use form AD-2088 as such a receipt.

       b.     This DR provides the format and procedures that each Agency listed above will
              follow in complying with section 14003 and this DR.

4.     BACKGROUND

       Following the enactment of the 2008 Farm Bill, the Farm Service Agency, the Natural
       Resources Conservation Service, the Rural Business Service, the Rural Housing Service,
       and the Rural Utilities Service released, at various times, interim guidance to state
       offices, area offices, and service centers on how to comply with section 14003. Such
       guidance is superseded by this DR. Each Agency is required to issue new guidance in
       compliance with this DR.
5.   ABBREVIATIONS/DEFINITIONS

     Within the context of this DR, the following definitions apply:

     a.     Agency. A major program organizational unit of the Department of Agriculture
            (“USDA”) with delegated authorities to deliver rural development, agricultural or
            food programs, activities, benefits, and services, i.e. the Farm Service Agency
            (“FSA”), the Natural Resources Conservation Service (“NRCS”), the Rural
            Business Service, the Rural Housing Service, and the Rural Utilities Service
            (collectively, “the Rural Development Mission Area” or “RD”).

     b.     Applicant. A person or legal entity who has submitted an application for benefits
            or services provided by an Agency, whether such application is complete or
            incomplete.

     c.     Benefit. Any Federal financial assistance or support provided by an Agency to
            the public.

     d.     Customer. A person or legal entity that has requested or received any benefits or
            services provided by an Agency.

     e.     Date of the Request. The calendar day, month, and year on which an inquirer,
            applicant, or customer asks for a benefit or service from an Agency.

     f.     Inquirer. A person or legal entity who requests information about any benefit or
            service provided by an Agency.

     g.     Landowner. A person or legal entity who is in legal possession of real property.

     h.     Legal entity. A corporation, partnership, joint operation, cooperative, limited
            liability corporation, trust, or association doing business.

     i.     Person. An individual, natural person. Person does not include a legal entity.

     j.     Producer. A person or legal entity engaged in the production of agriculture.

     k.     Place. The address of the inquirer, applicant, or customer requesting a Receipt for
            Service, or the address of the area to which the benefit or service sought would be
            applied.

     l.     Receipt. The Department of Agriculture’s form, AD 2088, a document showing
            compliance by the Agency with this DR and section 14003.

     m.     Service. Any program, practice, or procedure provided to the public, including
            technical assistance, by an Agency.



                                              2
6.   PROCEDURES

     a.     Each Agency shall instruct its field employees by providing guidance about how
            to comply with the Receipt for Service provision of the 2008 Farm Bill (section
            14003 of the Food, Conservation and Energy Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. §2279-1(e)).
            Such guidance shall be consistent with this DR. Each Agency shall require that
            when any inquirer, applicant, or customer who seeks information about or
            requests any benefit or service provided by the Agency, upon request, he or she
            shall be given a receipt (form AD-2088) by such Agency denoting the date, place,
            subject of the request or inquiry, and the action taken, not taken, or recommended
            by such Agency. Such a receipt shall be provided on the same date the inquiry or
            request is made or received in person; in the case of inquiries or requests made by
            FAX, email, or mail, including if such FAX, email, or mail is received during
            non-business hours, the receipt shall be provided the next business day.

     b.     The Office of Advocacy and Outreach shall maintain a toll-free telephone number
            to allow any inquirer, applicant, or customer to report failure to comply with this
            policy. Agencies shall display an informational poster in offices that provide the
            toll-free number.

7.   RESPONSIBILITIES

     Each Agency shall instruct its field staff on the Receipt for Service procedures reflected
     in this DR and the use of form AD-2088 within 30 days of the issuance of this DR.

     Failure to comply with the instructions in this DR could result in disciplinary action.

                                            -END-




                                              3
