 

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

 

DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION ee

 

 

 

4430-2
SUBJECT: DATE:
June 14, 1993
Wellness Programs OPI: Office of Finance and Management
Safety and Health Management Division

 

 

 

 

1 PURPOSE

This regulation provides guidance to agencies in the
design and delivery of wellness programs to Department

of

Agriculture (USDA) employees.

2 CANCELLATION

Thi
443

s regulation supersedes Departmental Regulation
0-2, dated April 18, 1991.

3 AUTHORITIES

a

DISTRIBUTION 44

5 U.S.C., Section 7901 and Federal Personnel Manual
(FPM) Chapter 792 authorize agencies to establish
health service programs.

41 CFR Part 101-5, Subpart 101-5.3, establishes
General Services Administration (GSA) policy on and
provides guidelines for the installation of physical
fitness facilities.

FPM Letter 792-15 clarifies the scope of occupational
health programs to include establishing physical
fitness programs and granting Federal agencies
broader discretionary authority on the use of
appropriated funds to start or enhance exercise and
fitness facilities.

FPM Letter 792-20 clarifies the scope of health
service programs to include smoking cessation
programs for the prevention of smoking-related
illness and disease.

FPM Letter 792-23 provides agencies with guidance
relative to the use of official time, excused
absences, and work scheduling accommodations for
employees to participate in health and fitness
activities.

 

DR 4430-2

June 14, 1993

f Federal Employees’ Compensation Act (FECA) Bulletin
87-9 provides agencies with guidance relative to
worker’s compensation claims and physical fitness
activities.

POLICY

It is USDA policy to promote wellness programs that
improve employee health, morale, and productivity.
Programs should identify goals and objectives for the
workplace. They should target key lifestyle traits that
employees can change to improve their overall health.
Programs should provide equal opportunities for all
employees regardless of age, sex, or grade level, and
should include provisions for employees with
disabilities.

SCOPE

Wellness, as used in this directive, includes the
following health-related activities:

a Physical fitness;
b Nutrition and weight management; and

c Health promotion and educational activities such as
stress management, control of hypertension, smoking
cessation, cholesterol control, and health risk
assessments.

RESPONSIBILITIES

a Director, Office of Finance and Management (OFM).

The Director has overall responsibility for wellness
programs and support of special emphasis programs
(e.g. health fairs, federal fitness activities, etc.)
that are consistent with this directive.

b Chief, Safety and Health Management Division, (OFM).
The Chief provides consultation to agencies when

planning wellness programs and develops guidelines
and procedures, as necessary, to support and evaluate
agency wellness programs.

c Agency Officials. Agency officials should encourage
development of and participation in wellness programs
by employees at all organizational levels and ensure
an equal opportunity for all employees to
participate.

 

June 14, 1993 DR 4430-2

7 USE OF OFFICIAL TIME, EXCUSED ABSENCES, AND WORK
SCHEDULING ACCOMMODATIONS FOR WELLNESS ACTIVITIES

a Agencies may use official time for employees
to participate in physical activities in order
to help them meet job related medical
standards or physical requirements.

b Agencies are encouraged to grant short periods of
excused absences for employees to participate in
officially authorized special or one-time educational
or awareness programs, such as Federal Fitness Day
activities, a medical fitness screening procedure as
part of joining a fitness program, or an agency-
sponsored health fair. Such programs would not be
regular and recurring and would not continue over an
extended or indefinite period.

c Agencies are encouraged to facilitate employee
participation in health and fitness activities that
take place over extended or indefinite periods, such
as use of fitness centers, running, aerobic classes,
etc., through use of non-duty time. Non-duty time
includes lunch periods, as well as before and after
working hours. Agencies are encouraged to
accommodate to the extent possible employee requests
for flexible work schedules and annual leave in order
to participate in health and fitness activities.

8 USE OF APPROPRIATED FUNDS FOR WELLNESS PROGRAMS

Agencies may use appropriated funds to establish fitness
facilities (renovating space, purchasing equipment,
staffing the facility) or to educate and counsel
employees (teaching smoking cessation and nutritional/
weight management classes, conducting health risk
assessments and health screening).

9 LIABILITY

Employees may file workers’ compensation claims with the
Department of Labor if injured while participating in-an
agency-sponsored physical fitness program. Injuries and
occupational diseases arising from participation in an
agency-sponsored physical fitness program are
compensable under the Federal Employees Compensation
Act, 5 U.S.C. 8108, et seq. .

 

DR 4430-2

10

11

June 14, 1993

WELLNESS PROGRAM DELIVERY OPTIONS

Agencies may decide to manage their wellness program in-
house with the assistance of volunteers or salaried
health care personnel. Such personnel should possess
the appropriate knowledge, skills, and ability to
conduct health and fitness programs. Other options
which may prove more cost-effective include:

a Participate in a Cooperative Administrative Support
Unit (CASU). CASUs provide common services on a
reimbursable basis in multi-tenant buildings. The
services can extend to Federal agencies housed in
nearby buildings. Some CASU sites provide health
services and physical fitness facilities;

b Participate in an arrangement where multi-tenant
buildings do not have CASUs. Tenant agencies should
consider joint agreements to develop a wellness
program. The lead agency may arrange a reimbursable
agreement with the participating agencies;

c Utilize services of an employee association. Many
locations have established employee associations.
These associations may provide recreational
opportunities and other employee benefits. Agencies
should consider using these associations to provide
wellness program activities; and

a Contract with a private vendor. Agencies may
contract for services to provide wellness program
activities. Such services may include group
memberships in a health and fitness facility.
Membership must be by agency name not by individual
employee name.

INCENTIVE PROGRAMS

Group and individual incentives to recognize employee
achievements are important to a successful wellness
program FPM 451 Subchapter 7 and Personnel Bulletin
No. 451-24 provide guidance in the use of non-monetary
awards when cash awards are not appropriate. The
Federal Fitkit provides examples of successful incentive
programs. The Office of Personnel Management (OPM)
recognizes Federal Health/Fitness programs through the
"Director’s Award for Outstanding Health/Fitness
Programs." OPM announces this annual event in February
or March each year.

June 14, 1993

DR 4430-2

12 RESOURCES

a

President’s Council on Physical Fitness and Sports
(PCPFS) - Provides consultation and advice on
establishing physical fitness programs.

President’s Council on Physical Fitness and Sports
701 Pennsylvania Ave., N.W.

Suite 250

Washington, D.C. 20004

Telephone: 202-272-3427

The Federal Interagency Health/Fitness Council -
Meets quarterly in Washington, D.C., to exchange
information on fitness and wellness programs.
Membership is open to those involved in Federal
health and wellness programs. For additional
information contact the PCPFS (address and phone
number listed at 12a).

The Federal Employee Occupational Health (FEOH)
Program, U.S. Public Health Service - Provides
consultation and technical assistance, on a
reimbursable basis, to Federal managers interested in
establishing, operating, or evaluating wellness
programs. Contact the nearest FEOH office or the
national office.

U.S. Public Health Service

Division of Occupational Health and
Beneficiary Health Services

5600 Fishers Lane, Room 7-36

Rockville, Maryland 20857

Telephone: 301-443-2257

Employee Health Services Branch, Office of Personnel
Management - Provides assistance to agencies in
developing fitness programs, employee assistance
programs and other health-related programs.

U.S. Office of Personnel Management
Employee Health Services Branch
1900 E. Street, N.W., Room 7412
Washington, D.C. 20415

Telephone: 202-606-1269

