                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                 NUMBER:
     DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                     DR 4400-005
                                                                 DATE:
 SUBJECT: Radiation Safety Program                               October 19, 2021
                                                                 EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of Homeland Security
                                                                 October 21, 2026



Section                                                                                   Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                    1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                         1
3.   Scope                                                                                      2
4.   Policy                                                                                     2
5.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                                 2
6.   Inquiries                                                                                  5

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                    A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                   B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                    C-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes requirements for the United States
          Department of Agriculture (USDA) Radiation Safety Program (RSP).

     b.   It is the policy of USDA to comply with Federal requirements to establish, implement,
          and support the radiation safety program policy and procedures to continually manage
          risk to USDA information resources (e.g., information, information systems, and
          information services).


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     a.   This DR updates and replaces DR 4400-005, Radiation Safety Program, dated October
          16, 1995.

     b.   This policy is effective immediately when published and will remain in effect until
          superseded or expired.
  c.   All USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align processes, procedures,
       and any applicable policies with this DR within 6 months of the publication date, and
       will review and update them as needed annually afterwards.


3. SCOPE

  This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, Federal employees, and
  any category of non-Federal employee who performs duties in partnership with or on behalf
  of USDA, such as a consultant, contractor, advisor, volunteer, student, or intern.


4. POLICY

  a.   USDA will protect its employees, the public, and the environment from hazards
       associated with USDA’s use of ionizing radiation sources, referred to after this as
       radiation sources.

  b.   USDA will comply with all applicable Federal, state, and local laws and regulations
       governing the use of using radiation sources.

  c.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will:

       (1) Develop, document, and disseminate processes and procedures to facilitate the
           implementation of this DR;

       (2) Review this DR and related processes and procedures at least annually, updating
           them as needed. If updated, disseminate them to personnel involved in the
           acquisition process;

       (3) Designate a senior management official to manage the implementation of this DR
           and related procedures; and

       (4) Develop, document, and implement remediation action for violations of this DR.


5. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Secretary of Agriculture has delegated authority for implementation of the USDA
       RSP to the Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA) per 7 Code of Federal
       Regulations (CFR) § 2.24.

  b.   The ASA will:

       (1) Advise the Secretary of Agriculture and USDA Mission Area, agency, and staff
           officials on the oversight and implementation of the RSP, and in planning,



                                               2
         developing, and implementing policies, programs, and systems for the safe
         acquisition, use, and disposal of radiation sources as they affect the safety and
         health of USDA employees;

     (2) Ensure that the USDA Radiation Safety Officer (RSO) has authority to immediately
         stop any activity involving the use of radiation sources, when justified, to maintain
         radiation safety;

     (3) Appoint the Director of the Office of Homeland Security (OHS), a senior leader
         with Departmental Administration, to serve as the Departmental representative to
         the Radiation Safety Committee (RSC), an internal oversight committee comprised
         of USDA Mission Area, agencies, and staff offices that possess radiation sources;

     (4) Appoint other individuals to serve on the RSC, as needed, to ensure effective
         operation; and

     (5) Ensure USDA Mission Area, agency, and staff offices compliance with all
         applicable Federal, state, and local laws and regulations, and USDA RSP
         requirements.

c.   The Director, Office of Homeland Security, will:

     (1) Advise the ASA and USDA Mission Area, agency, and staff officials on the
         oversight and implementation of the RSP, and in planning, developing, and
         implementing policies, programs and systems for the safe acquisition, use, and
         disposal of radiation sources as they affect the safety and health of USDA
         employees;

     (2) Establish the Radiation Safety Division (RSD) within OHS and ensure its effective
         operation and implementation of the RSP; and

     (3) Appoint the RSD Division Chief as the USDA RSO.

d.   The Heads of Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices in which radiation sources are
     used will:

     (1) Ensure Mission Area, agency, and staff office employees comply with all applicable
         Federal, state, and local laws and regulations, and USDA RSP requirements;

     (2) Recognize the RSO’s authority to immediately stop any Mission Area, agency, or
         staff office activity involving the use of radiation sources, when justified, to
         maintain radiation safety;

     (3) Establish Mission Area, agency, and staff office policy, guidance, and procedures
         for implementing the RSP;




                                             3
     (4) Ensure that Mission Area, agency, and staff office employees who use radiation
         sources are trained in RSP and their Mission Area, agency, or staff office radiation
         safety policies and procedures;

     (5) Ensure that managers of locations where radiation sources are used designate an
         employee to serve as the Location Radiation Protection Officer (LRPO) to support
         the RSP; and

     (6) Nominate qualified individuals to serve as members of the RSC.

e.   The RSC will:

     (1) Establish RSP policies and procedures that ensure compliance with all applicable
         Federal, state, and local laws and regulations governing the use of radiation sources;

     (2) Evaluate the implementation and effectiveness of the RSP;

     (3) Provide guidance to RSD operations, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff office
         policies and programs, and RSP implementation at locations where radiation
         sources are used by USDA employees; and

     (4) Provide advice and assistance to the ASA, OHS Director, Mission Areas, agencies,
         staff office heads, and staff officials on matters pertaining to radiation safety.

f.   The Division Chief, OHS RSD, will:

     (1) Serve as the USDA RSO and provide advice and assistance on matters pertaining to
         radiation safety to USDA employees who use radiation sources;

     (2) Assess and evaluate RSP implementation and compliance at USDA locations where
         radiation sources are used through reviews of radiation safety information,
         discussions with USDA employees, and onsite inspections;

     (3) Review and maintain radiation safety records and other information submitted by
         USDA employees or developed by the RSD to ensure compliance with RSP policy
         and procedures and all applicable Federal, state, and local laws and regulations
         governing the use of radiation sources;

     (4) Immediately stop any activity involving the use of radiation sources, when justified,
         to maintain radiation safety;

     (5) Identify and recommend to the OHS Director and RSC adequate levels of staffing
         and resources needed for the RSD to implement the RSP;

     (6) Manage the operations of the RSD; and




                                             4
       (7) Provide advice and assistance to the ASA, Mission Areas, agencies, staff office
           heads, and staff officials on matters pertaining to radiation safety.

  g.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office LRPOs will:

       (1) Provide advice and assistance to USDA employees on matters pertaining to
           radiation safety;

       (2) Coordinate local radiation safety program activities, such as waste disposal and
           training; and

       (3) Assist the OHS RSD as needed.

  h.   Mission Areas, Agencies, Staff Office Management, and Supervisory personnel will:

       (1) Ensure that the employees they supervise comply with the RSP and Mission Area,
           agency, or staff office rules and regulations for the safe use of radiation sources;
           and

       (2) Report accidents, known exposures, and environmental releases to the RSO to
           identify causes and determine corrective actions to prevent recurrence.

  i.   USDA employees will:

       (1) Use radiation sources in a safe manner that protects themselves, other USDA
           employees, the public, and the environment from exposure to unacceptable levels of
           radiation; and

       (2) Comply with the requirements of the USDA RSP and their Mission Area, agency,
           or staff office radiation safety program.


6. INQUIRIES

  Direct all inquiries regarding this DR to the Office of Homeland Security, Radiation Safety
  Division, George Washington Carver Center, 5601 Sunnyside Avenue, MS 5510, Beltsville,
  MD 20705; telephone number 301-504-2440.


                                            -END-




                                               5
                           APPENDIX A

               ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ASA    Assistant Secretary for Administration
CFR    Code of Federal Regulations
DR     Departmental Regulation
LRPO   Location Radiation Protection Officer
NRC    Nuclear Regulatory Commission
OHS    Office of Homeland Security
RSD    Radiation Safety Division (OHS Component)
RSC    Radiation Safety Committee
RSO    Radiation Safety Officer
RSP    Radiation Safety Program
USDA   United States Department of Agriculture




                                A-1
                                          APPENDIX B

                                         DEFINITIONS


Ionizing Radiation. A form of radiation, which includes alpha particles, beta particles, gamma
rays, x-rays, neutrons, high-speed electrons, high-speed protons, and other particles capable of
producing ions. Radiation, as used in this document, does not include non-ionizing radiation,
such as lasers, radio, and microwaves, or visible, infrared, or ultraviolet light.

Radiation Emitting Equipment. Equipment designed to emit ionizing radiation when energized
(such as x-ray equipment).

Radiation Source. A radioactive material or byproduct that is specifically manufactured or
obtained for the purpose of using the emitted radiation. Such sources are commonly used in
teletherapy or industrial radiography; in various types of industrial gauges, irradiators, and
gamma knives; and as power sources for batteries (such as those used in spacecraft). These
sources usually consist of known quantity of radioactive material, which is encased in a
manmade capsule, sealed between layers of nonradioactive material, or firmly bonded to a
nonradioactive substrate to prevent radiation leakage. Other radiation sources include devices
such as accelerators and x-ray generators.

Radioactive Material. Matter that spontaneously emits ionizing radiation from the nucleus of its
atoms.




                                               B-1
                                        APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


7 CFR § 2.24, Assistant Secretary for Administration

7 CFR § 2.95, Director, Office of Homeland Security

10 CFR Part 19, Notices, Instructions, and Reports to Workers: Inspection and Investigations

10 CFR Part 20, Standards for Protection Against Radiation

10 CFR Part 30, Rules of General Applicability to Domestic Licensing of Byproduct Material

10 CFR Part 31, General Domestic Licenses for Byproduct Material

10 CFR Part 37, Physical Protection of Category 1 and Category 2 Quantities of Radioactive
Material

49 CFR Subtitle B, Chapter 1, Subchapter C, Hazardous Materials Regulations, Parts 171-177

49 CFR Subtitle B, Chapter 1, Subchapter C, Hazardous Materials Regulations, Part 178

Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), NRC Regulations Title 10, Code of Federal
Regulations website

USDA, DR 0100-001, Departmental Directives System, January 4, 2018

USDA, DR 4410-004, Safety Management Program, August 3, 2015




                                             C-1
