                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                   WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


                                                                           Number:
                                                                           4400-006
  DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION
SUBJECT:                                                  DATE:
                                                          July 28, 2009
           USDA Smoking Policy
                                                          OPI: Office of Procurement &
                                                          Property Management, PMD

1. PURPOSE

   This regulation sets forth the smoking policy for the Department of Agriculture
   (USDA). Environmental tobacco smoke, also termed second-hand smoke, is
   classified as a known human carcinogen by the Environmental Protection Agency.
   In order to protect USDA employees, contractors, and visitors from the health hazards
   of environmental tobacco smoke, this regulation prohibits smoking inside all USDA
   facilities and motor vehicles.


2. POLICY

   It is USDA’s policy that smoking at USDA facilities is prohibited unless permissible
   in areas that meet the conditions stipulated under SECTION 5b of this regulation, and
   have been specifically designated as smoking areas by authorization of the head of
   the facility’s lead agency. This regulation is effective immediately, in compliance
   with 41 CFR, Part 102-74 and FMR Bulletin 2009-B1, Protecting Federal Employees
   and the Public from Exposure to Tobacco Smoke in the Federal Workplace. Any
   exceptions must be published in writing, approved by the head of the facility’s lead
   agency and provide for the protection of nonsmokers from exposure to environmental
   tobacco smoke. Changes in conditions of employment for bargaining unit employees
   must be implemented pursuant to 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATION

   This regulation is a revision of DR 4400-6, and cancels DR 4400-6, USDA Smoking
   Policy, dated December 16, 1996.


4. BACKGROUND

   On August 9, 1997, President Clinton signed Executive Order (EO) 13058, entitled
   Protecting Federal Employees and the Public from Exposure to Tobacco Smoke in the
   Federal Workplace. On October 20, 1997, the General Services Administration
DR 4400-006                                                                           July 28, 2009


   (GSA) issued GSA Bulletin FPMR D-245, Protecting Federal Employees and the
   Public from Exposure to Tobacco Smoke in the Federal Workplace. In accordance
   with the requirements of EO 13058, the GSA Bulletin FPMR D-245 prohibited the
   smoking of tobacco products in all interior space owned, rented or leased by the
   executive branch, except in specially equipped designated smoking areas, outdoor
   areas in front of air intake ducts and certain other residential and non-federal
   occupied space. The bulletin also required the heads of executive agencies to
   evaluate the need to restrict smoking in courtyards and near doorways.

   Studies conducted since the issuance of GSA Bulletin FPMR D-245 have concluded
   that cigarette smoking is the number one preventable cause of morbidity and
   premature mortality worldwide. Studies also have shown that the harmful effects of
   smoking are not confined solely to the smoker, but extend to co-workers and
   members of the general public that are exposed to secondhand smoke as well.

   E.O. 13058 encourages the heads of executive agencies to evaluate the need to further
   restrict smoking at doorways and in courtyards and authorizes the agency heads to
   restrict smoking in these areas in light of this evaluation. On
   December 22, 2008, GSA issued FMR Bulletin 2009-B1, which replaces GSA
   Bulletin FPMR D-245. The new bulletin requires executive agencies to prohibit the
   smoking of tobacco products in all interior space owned, rented or leased by the
   executive branch of the Federal Government, and in any outdoor areas under
   executive branch control in front of air intake ducts. In addition, smoking is
   prohibited in courtyards and within 25 feet of doorways and air intake ducts on
   outdoor space under the jurisdiction, custody or control of GSA.


5. SCOPE

   a. Areas Affected. This policy applies to:

       (1) All buildings and facilities (or portions thereof, including garages) owned,
           leased, or occupied by USDA nationwide and everyone who enters such
           USDA buildings and facilities including, but not limited to, USDA
           employees, contractor employees, and visitors; and

       (2) All USDA owned, commercially leased or GSA motor vehicles and
           everyone who occupies such USDA vehicles including, but not limited to,
           USDA employees, contractor employees, and visitors.

   b. Areas Exempted. The smoking prohibition does not extend to:

       (1) Outside areas except as required for fire safety, and as defined under Section
           8h designated as smoking areas. The designation of such an area as an
           Outside Smoking Area is further subject to the conditions specified under




                                            2
July 28, 2009                                                                             DR 4400-006


                Section 7b below and the fulfillment of all applicable safety regulations and
                requirements.

        (2) Space in buildings used as personal quarters.


6. AUTHORITY

    This regulation is issued in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 301; 5 U.S.C. 7901; 29 U.S.C.
    668; EO 13058; 41 CFR 102-74.315; and FMR Bulletin B-3.


7. PROCEDURES

    a. Inside USDA Facilities. All interior space in USDA facilities shall be smoke free,
       including garages attached to facilities.

    b. Outside Smoking Areas. Outside smoking areas will be designated when
       possible, in locations which are reasonably accessible to workers outside of
       interior parking areas, garages, courtyards or patio areas under the custody,
       control and jurisdiction of USDA. Outside smoking areas must be located a
       minimum of 25 feet away from entrances to enclosed areas, common points of
       ingress and egress to USDA facilities, windows, and all types of HVAC air
       handling and circulation systems, fulfill all applicable safety requirements, and
       provide proper ventilation as defined under Section 8f.

    c. Receptacles. Appropriate ash and filter receptacles will be provided and
       maintained at all established smoking areas. Additional receptacles may be placed
       at entrances not designated as smoking areas. Such receptacles should display a
       sign containing the no smoking symbol.

    d. Multi-tenant Buildings. Multi-tenant buildings shall be smoke free within the
       confines of the assigned space over which USDA agencies have exclusive
       custody and control including corridors, rest rooms, cafeterias, stairways, and
       other public space on floors or within blocks of space assigned to USDA
       agencies.

    e. Motor Vehicles. Smoking is prohibited in USDA owned and GSA or
       commercially leased vehicles, which are leased for more than 60 days and are
       within the custody and control of USDA.

    f. State or Local Government Ordinance vs. USDA Policy Control.
       USDA leased space located in a privately owned building is subject to state and
       local government smoking restrictions, if the restrictions are more stringent than
       the USDA policy.




                                                3
DR 4400-006                                                                             July 28, 2009


8. DEFINITIONS

   a. Smoking. The carrying or inhaling of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other
      lighted tobacco product.

   b. USDA facility. Federally owned, leased, or occupied buildings and space in
      buildings under the custody and/or control of USDA including GSA-leased space
      occupied by USDA.

   c. GSA-Leased Space. Space in privately owned buildings, which is leased through
      GSA for use by USDA.

   d. Labor/management agreements. Union and bargaining unit representation for
      USDA employees. Where there is an exclusive representative for the employees,
      USDA shall meet its obligations under 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71.

   e. Motor Vehicles. All types of motorized government-owned or leased vehicles
      assigned to USDA including, but not limited to, automobiles, ships, and aircraft.

   f. Proper Ventilation. An outside area (as defined in 8h below) that provides no
      direct air intake into a building through means that include but are not limited to
      doors, windows and all types of HVAC air handling and circulation systems. A
      USDA employee or contractor who is an expert in a relevant technical field and is
      familiar with the building's ventilation system shall determine whether an area
      meets the conditions to be suitable for designation as a smoking area. Final
      designation of a smoking area remains subject to the approval of the head of the
      lead agency at the respective USDA facility.

   g. Personal Quarters. Housing provided by the USDA for the exclusive use as the
      employee's residence.

   h. Outside. Open areas located a minimum of 25 feet away from entrances to
      enclosed areas, common points of ingress and egress to USDA facilities,
      windows, and all types of HVAC air handling and circulation systems.

   i. Multi-tenant. Buildings or facilities that are not solely occupied by, or under the
      sole custody or control of, USDA.

   j. Agency-approved. Smoking cessation programs specifically authorized by the
      employee's agency.


9. ABBREVIATIONS

   a. AGPMR - Agriculture Property Management Regulations




                                            4
July 28, 2009                                                                             DR 4400-006


    b. CFR - Code of Federal Regulations

    c. DR- Departmental Regulation

    d. EO - Executive Order

    e. FMR - Federal Management Regulation

    f. FPMR - Federal Property Management Regulations

    g. FPI - Federal Prison Industries, Inc.

    h. GSA - General Services Administration

    i. HVAC - Heating, Ventilation, & Air Conditioning

    j. U.S.C. - United States Code

    k. USDA - United States Department of Agriculture

    l. WASC - Washington Area Service Center


10. RESPONSIBILITIES

    a. Under and Assistant Secretaries will support and ensure compliance with the
       USDA smoking policy as outlined in this regulation and implement this policy at
       facilities and in motor vehicles under their control.

    b. Agency Administrators and Staff Office Heads will support and ensure
       compliance with the USDA smoking policy as outlined in this regulation and
       implement this policy at facilities and in motor vehicles under their control as
       directed by their Mission Area or Staff Office Head. The lead agency at each
       USDA facility is authorized to select outside locations for smoking.

        Agency Heads are responsible for ensuring that property owners/managers or
        appropriate GSA representatives are consulted, as required, prior to
        implementation of this directive. They shall ensure that all employees receive
        advance notice of policy changes, and changes in the designations and locations
        of outside smoking areas. Agency Heads are also responsible for implementing
        an effective plan to provide smoking areas where possible, and to provide
        employees with smoking cessation materials or smoking-cessation program(s) as
        described in SECTION 11 below.




                                               5
DR 4400-006                                                                          July 28, 2009


   c. USDA Employees shall abide by the requirements of this regulation. Employees
      may pursue available training, educational, and counseling services for smoking
      cessation.

   d. Contractors and Visitors shall abide by this regulation.

   e. The Washington Area Service Center will oversee smoking areas within the DC
      Complex. Questions or comments related to the implementation of this regulation
      in the DC Complex may be directed to (202) 720-6858.


11. SMOKING CESSATION PROGRAMS

   USDA supports agency use of available funds to implement smoking cessation
   programs and provide related materials as follows:

   a. Agencies may use available funds for education, training, and counseling related
      to smoking cessation programs.

   b. Agencies should develop program guidelines that specify what the agency will
      fund and the number of times employees can attend USDA sponsored smoking
      cessation programs. Agencies may survey employees on an annual basis to assess
      the need for smoking cessation materials or programs. Employee participation in
      educational, counseling, or cessation programs related to smoking is strictly
      voluntary. However, employees should participate in agency surveys to help
      assess agency need for smoking cessation materials or programs.

   c. When agency-approved smoking cessation programs are scheduled during duty
      hours, agencies may provide employees with short periods of excused absence to
      participate in such programs. (Such programs should not be recurring and should
      not continue over an extended or indefinite period.) Agencies may contact
      organizations such as the American Cancer Society and its Employee Assistance
      Program or may use existing programs from local area sources for the employees.


12. ENFORCEMENT

   The success of the USDA Smoking Policy will depend upon the thoughtfulness,
   consideration, and cooperation of both smokers and as well as nonsmokers.

   a. Supervisors have the responsibility to enforce this policy for employees under
      their supervision, following established administrative procedures; including, but
      not limited to, cautions, counseling, and disciplinary actions, as appropriate.
      Supervisors will take direct action when personally observing violations, and will
      follow-up, as necessary, on reports by others. The agency’s Employee Relations
      unit will provide assistance to employees and supervisors upon request.


                                            6
July 28, 2009                                                                            DR 4400-006


    b. Employees or anyone observing violations of this policy should report the
       situation to the offender’s supervisor when practical to do so. When the
       supervisor is not readily identifiable, violations should be reported to the security
       office, or to any security officer or facility manager. Persons reporting violations
       of this directive shall not be subject to retribution or reprisal.

    c. Security Officers or Facility Managers may enforce the smoking policy where it is
       impractical for a supervisor to exercise authority, such as in common areas.
       Refusal to comply with a security officer’s order may result in removal from the
       premises and/or notification of the offender’s supervisor for appropriate
       administrative action.


13. SIGNS

    Suitable signs announcing a "Smoke Free Environment" shall be placed on or near
    entrance doors of all USDA facilities and motor vehicles subject to this regulation.
    Signs should be procured and installed in cooperation with the GSA Buildings
    Manager in buildings managed by GSA. It should not be necessary to display a sign
    in every room of each building.

    In accordance with the Federal Acquisition Regulation, Part 8, the mandatory source
    of supply for the purchase of the required signage is UNICOR, Federal Prison
    Industries, Inc. (FPI). Prior approval from FPI is required before using any other
    source of supply. Information for the process on ordering the signs can be accessed
    from the following website: www.unicor.gov or call (800) 827-3168.



                                      - END -




                                             7
