                              U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                 Washington, D.C. 20250


        DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                            NUMBER:
                                                                           4430-005


SUBJECT:                                       DATE: December 17, 2014

Workers’ Compensation Program: Return to
Work                                           OPI: Office of Procurement and Property
                                               Management



   Section                                                                          Page

   1. Purpose                                                                       1
   2. Coverage                                                                      2
   3. Background                                                                    2
   4. References                                                                    3
   5. Definitions                                                                   3
   6. Return to Work Efforts                                                        7
   7. Responsibilities                                                              9
   8. Scope                                                                         15
   9. Change in Geographical Location                                               15
   10. Payment of Relocation Expenses                                               15
   11. Reemployment                                                                 16
   12. Program Evaluation                                                           16


   1. PURPOSE

      This directive sets forth the Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) policy for returning
      injured workers (IWs) to suitable work following an on-the-job injury or illness. The
      USDA Workers’ Compensation (WC) Return to Work (RTW) Program is a Department-
      wide mitigation strategy to facilitate the corporate responsibility of returning these
      employees to suitable work within their employing Agency or in another USDA Agency
      that is able to offer placement opportunities. It standardizes the RTW approach across
      USDA Mission Areas, Agencies and Staff Offices. The RTW Program encompasses
      both temporary light duty assignments and permanent position changes or
      accommodations. An effective USDA Return-to-Work program sustains organizational
      productivity across USDA as it:
  a. Reduces lost work time;

  b. Reduces Department of Labor, Office of Workers’ Compensation Program
     (DOL/OWCP) chargeback costs to agencies; and

  c. Provides employees injured in the course of performing official duties the dignity of
     performing appropriate work when determined able to do so by the attending
     physician. Such work could be in either the employing agency or another USDA
     Agency or staff office.


2. COVERAGE

  The provisions of this directive cover all employees (bargaining and non-bargaining),
  former employees and certain volunteers and collaborators on Federal appointments who
  become/became injured in the course of performing work on behalf of USDA.


3. BACKGROUND

  The DOL/OWCP allows employee compensation for lost wages and medical expenses
  resulting from workplace injuries. Most employees return to work after the injury and
  often within one year of being injured. A goal of the WC Program is to have employees
  return to work as soon as they are “medically able.” It is critical for USDA management
  officials and Human Resources Directors to work together to provide placement
  opportunities that would not otherwise be readily available for placement of employees.

  In addition, the President’s implementation of the Protecting Our Workers’ and Ensuring
  Reemployment (POWER) Initiative directs Federal agencies to establish goals and track
  performance in eight major workers’ compensation areas:

  a. Lowering total injury and illness case rates;

  b. Lowering lost-time injury and illness rates;

  c. Analyzing lost time injury and illness data;

  d. Increasing the timely filing of workers’ compensation claims;

  e. Increasing the timely filing of wage-loss claims;

  f. Reducing lost production day rates;




                                           2
  g. Speeding an employee’s return to work in cases of serious injury or illness; and

  h. Ensuring compliance with the regulatory requirement to establish a method for
     electronic submission of Forms CA-1, CA-2, and CA-7.

  The USDA RTW Program will facilitate the process of re-employing employees and
  former employees who are participating in the Workers’ Compensation Program and
  cannot perform the full scope of their official duties due to an accepted work-related
  injury. Employees may be re-employed to their former position with accommodation or
  another appropriate position in USDA as allowed by law and in accordance with medical
  restrictions issued by a confirmed treating physician.


4. REFERENCES

  This directive must be used in conjunction with the authorities listed below, and with
  applicable collective bargaining agreements:

  a. 5 U.S.C. Chapter 81 (Sections 8101-8152), Compensation for Work Injuries;

  b. 20 CFR parts 1 and 10, Federal Employees’ Compensation Act (FECA);

  c. Division of Federal Employees' Compensation (DFEC) Procedure Manual Claims
     (FECA Part 2) Chapter 2-0814, Job Offers and Return to Work;

  d. 5 CFR 339.205, Medical Qualifications Determinations;

  e. 5 CFR 353, Restoration to Duty from Uniformed Service or Compensable
     Disability;

  f. 5 USC Section 8102a, Death Gratuity Injuries Incurred in Connection with Service
     with an Armed Force;

  g. www.dol.gov/owcp/dfec- this website contains laws, regulatory material and other
     resources pertaining to the DOL/OWCP Federal Employees Compensation Act
     (FECA); and

  h. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act.


5. DEFINITIONS




                                           3
a. ACS Medical Bill Processing Portal: The portal was designed to complement the
   OWCP Medical Bill Processing System that currently administers the Federal
   Employee Compensation Act (FECA), Division of Energy Employees Occupational
   Illness Compensation (DEEOIC), and Division of Coal Mine Workers' Compensation
   (DCMWC) programs for the DOL. This website provides continuous internet access
   to OWCP information, programs and services.

b. Bargaining Unit: A group of employees represented by a union in collective
   bargaining.

c. Career Appointment: Competitive service permanent appointment given to an
   employee who has completed 3 substantially continuous, creditable years of Federal
   service.

d. Career-Conditional Appointment: Competitive service permanent appointment given
   to an employee who has not completed 3 substantially continuous, creditable years of
   Federal service and must serve a one year probationary period during the first year of
   the initial appointment.

e. Career Transition Assistance Plan (CTAP): The Career Transition Assistance
   Program (CTAP) is designed to improve a current Federal employee’s chances of
   finding a new job within their agency through selection priority.

f. Chargeback: Mechanism by which costs for work-related injuries and deaths are
   assigned to employing agencies through the DOL, Office of Workers’ Compensation
   Program. Payments are made from the Employees’ Compensation Fund.

g. Claimant Query System (CQS): A web based bill processing portal where injured
   workers can access their individual case specific information regarding their federal
   workers’ compensation claim case file status. The CQS also provides specific
   information on medical billings, reimbursement requests, and eligibility and
   authorization inquiries.

h. Competitive Service: All civilian positions in the Federal Government that are not
   specifically excepted from the civil service laws by or pursuant to statute, by the
   President, or by the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) under Rule VI, and that
   are not in the Senior Executive Service.

i. Continuation of Pay (COP): Continuation of an employee’s salary for up to 45
   calendar days of wage loss due to disability and/or medical treatment following a
   traumatic injury.




                                        4
j. Department of Labor (DOL): A Federal Department charged with preparing the
   America's work force for new and better jobs in the 21st Century work force, and
   ensuring the adequacy of America's work places. The Department enforces Federal
   statutes which cover a wide variety of workplace activities to include protecting
   workers' wages, health, safety, employment, and pension rights; promoting equal
   employment opportunity; and administering job training, unemployment insurance,
   and workers' compensation programs.

k. DOL District Office: DOL regional office claims examiners that conduct operations
   of OWCP, and maintains claimant records.

l. DOL/Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs: Adjudicates new claims for
   benefits, manages ongoing cases, and pays medical expenses and compensation
   benefits to injured workers and survivors.

m. Disability: The incapacity, because of an employment injury/illness, to perform the
   duties an employee was performing at the time of the injury/illness.

n. Excepted Service: Appointments that are made without regard to competitive
   requirements of the civil service rules and regulations and that are not covered by the
   Senior Executive service. Excepted service positions have been accepted from the
   requirements of the competitive service by law, Executive Order, or OPM regulation.
   (5 U.S.C. 2103 and 5 CFR part 213).

o. Federal Employees Compensation Act (FECA): Provides workers' compensation
   coverage to Federal United States civilian workers including wage replacement,
   medical and vocational rehabilitation benefits for work-related injury and
   occupational disease. The FECA also provides for payment of benefits to dependents
   if a work-related injury or disease causes an employee’s death.

p. Injured Worker (IW): An employee who is injured in the performance of official
   duties, either by a traumatic injury or occupational disease or illness.

q. Leave Buy Back: Process in which a workers’ compensation claimant with an
   approved claim can re-purchase personal leave used for absence from duty due to the
   work-related injury, and in which the leave may be restored back to the employee’s
   Time and Attendance record. This procedure includes the employee paying either 25
   percent or 33 1/3 percent of the cost to repurchase the leave, and the employing
   agency paying either 75 percent or 66 2/3 percent, respectively, depending on
   whether the injured employee has a dependent(s).




                                         5
r. Medical Documentation: Medical information pertaining to an employee’s work
   related injury which addresses current medical limitations of the employee as it
   relates to the performance of duty for the purpose of determining appropriate duties
   and placement for the employee upon returning to work.

s. Nurse Intervention: A service provided by DOL/OWCP that provides for Registered
   Nurses (RNs) under contract to call or meet with employees, physicians and agency
   representatives to ensure that proper medical care is being provided and to assist
   employees in returning to work.

t. Occupational Disease: Condition produced in the work environment over a period
   longer than one workday or shift, resulting from systemic infection; repeated stress or
   strain; exposure to toxins, poisons, or fumes; or other continuing conditions of the
   work environment.

u. Office of Workers’ Compensation Program (OWCP): The Federal agency within the
   DOL having the authority to approve or deny Federal civilian employees WC claims
   for work-related injuries or illnesses

v. OWCP Claimant: An employee who has become injured or ill while performing
   his/her official duties and has submitted OWCP forms to the DOL District Office.

w. Return to Work (RTW): Process where claimants are returned to work after a period
   of recuperation away from the job. Claimants can be returned to work in part-time or
   light duty positions, their position prior to the injury/illness, or a new position
   depending upon several criteria (availability of positions, injury status, medical
   limitations, etc.)

x. Senior Executive Service: Positions that are classified above GS-15 of the General
   Schedule or in level IV or V or the Executive Schedule or equivalent positions, which
   are not required to be filled by an appointment by the President by and with the
   advice and consent of the Senate, and in which employees direct, monitor and
   manage the work of an organizational unit or exercise other executive functions.

y. Special Hiring Authority: Schedule A Appointing Authority is an excepted authority
   that agencies can use to hire persons with disabilities under 5 CFR 213.3102(u).
   Schedule A allows for non-competitive placement and re-employment of
   injured/disabled temporary or term employees who do not currently have competitive
   status.

z. Temporary Appointment: An appointment made for a limited period of time and with
   a specific not-to-exceed date determined by the authority under which the
   appointment is made.



                                        6
aa. Temporary Employees: Employees (seasonal, students, etc.) that are covered by
    OWCP on the same basis as permanent employees.

bb. Temporary Light Duty: A temporary work status an employee may be eligible for if
    the employee produces sufficient medical documentation, until Maximum Medical
    Improvement has been reached.

cc. Tenure: The period of time an employee may reasonably expect to serve under his or
    her current appointment. Tenure is governed by the type of appointment under which
    an employee is currently serving, without regard to whether the employee has
    competitive status or whether the employee's appointment is to a competitive service
    position or an excepted service position.

dd. Term Appointment: Appointment to a position that is scheduled to last more than one
    year but may not last more than four years.

ee. Third Party Claims: Claims involving injuries/death when a party from a non-
    Government entity appears to be responsible. For example, an employee traveling in
    a Government authorized motor vehicle is struck by a private citizen or entity.

ff. Traumatic Injury: A wound or other condition of the body caused by external force,
    including stress or strain. The injury is identifiable as to time and place of occurrence
    and member or function of the body affected. It must be caused by a specific event or
    incident or series of events or incidents within a single day or work shift.

gg. WC Case Manager: USDA Agency employees with the responsibility of assisting in
    WC program administration by providing advice and counsel to employees on WC
    matters.

hh. WC Representatives: USDA Agency field employees assigned the collateral duty
    function to assist in WC program administration by providing advice and counsel to
    employees on WC matters.

ii. Work Schedule: The time basis on which an employee is scheduled to work. A work
    schedule may be full-time, full-time seasonal, part-time, part-time seasonal, part-time
    job sharer, part-time seasonal job sharer, intermittent, or intermittent seasonal.

jj. Work Tolerance Limitation: Medical documentation listing an employee’s
    permanent/temporary work limitations/restrictions.

kk. WC Program Manager: The designated employee within the Agency responsible for
    the development, implementation, and evaluation of a comprehensive WC program.



                                          7
6. RETURN TO WORK EFFORTS

  NOTE: Bringing a claimant back to work takes precedence over hiring any new
  employee, unless otherwise provided by law.

  The highest priority in Workers’ Compensation cases is to ensure that the injured worker
  receives the medical care and treatment they need so that he/she recovers and can return
  to work. Every Agency Head should ensure that his/her organization makes every
  reasonable accommodation to return an injured or disabled employee to productivity,
  including modifying a current position/position description (PD) when possible to fit the
  abilities and physical restrictions of a claimant.

  WC staff and supervisors work jointly to locate alternative assignments for possible
  placement of injured workers, or to restructure positions, based on medical restrictions
  provided. This includes the use of modified duty to return the injured employee to work
  as early as medically possible. They should provide a written recommendation on the
  placement which will include the position title, series, grade, PD, and qualifications
  assessment. If a light duty position is available, the Compensation Specialist should send
  a letter to the treating physician stating that USDA will modify the employee’s position,
  or another position, for light duty based on the specific limits imposed by the employee’s
  injury. The correspondence will include a copy of the PD and specify duties, physical
  requirements of the duties, and environmental conditions.

  An informal temporary assignment or job offer may be made over the telephone but must
  be followed up with a formal, written offer that includes the PD. The job offer should
  state status, location, hours, all modification and accommodations offered, such as
  disabled parking place near the building, elevator, voice-activated computer software,
  amplified telephone, flexible work schedule, or other job-related accommodations, as
  appropriate and documented in the medical restrictions for the claimant.

  NOTE: The injured worker may still require additional time off once they return to the
  temporary assignment for additional medical visits related to the accepted injury and
  condition.

  The tenure of the position offered must match the tenure of the employee at the time of
  injury (i.e., a permanent employee must receive a permanent job offer). Term and
  temporary employees should still be offered positions even if the original appointment is
  expired. The length of the position offered should match the time remaining on original
  appointment at the time of injury but the offer must be for at least 90 days. The tenure
  and time must be stated in the job offer letter. After an assignment or position has been
  offered to a claimant, supervisors will keep the position offered open until the employee



                                          8
reports for work, or until OWCP has issued a final decision on suitability. Detailed
guidance is available in (DFEC) Procedure Manual Claims (FECA Part 2) Chapter 2-
0814, Job Offers and Return to Work at
http://www.dol.gov/owcp/dfec/regs/compliance/DFECfolio/FECA-
PT2/group3.htm#20814.

Agencies do have special Non-Competitive Hiring Authorities, Schedule A, for
employees with disabilities. Schedule A is a hiring authority that Federal agencies may
use to hire qualified individuals with documented disabilities (Schedule A letter required)
into positions non-competitively without going through the often lengthy traditional
hiring process. If you have a temporary or term employee that has become disabled due
to their accepted injury/condition and cannot return to their previous position, you are
strongly encouraged to use Special Hiring authorities for alternative placements.

The Employer’s Responsibilities are also outlined in 20 CFR Part 10-Claims for
Compensation under the Federal Employees’ Compensation Act, As Amended, Subpart
F. Return to Work—Employer's Responsibilities. Section § 10.505 states that the
employer must take the following actions:

Upon authorizing medical care, the employer should advise the employee in writing as
soon as possible of his or her obligation to return to work under § 10.210 and as defined
in this subpart. The term “return to work” is not limited to returning to work at the
employee's normal worksite or usual position, but may include returning to work at other
locations and in other positions.

In general, the employer should make all reasonable efforts to place the employee in his
or her former or an equivalent position, in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 8151(b)(2), if the
employee has fully recovered after one year.

a. Where the employer has specific alternative positions available for partially disabled
   employees, the employer will discuss alternative positions with the employee prior to
   placement. The employer will then advise the employee in writing of the specific
   duties and physical requirements of those positions.

b. Where the employer has no specific alternative positions available for an employee
   who can perform restricted or limited duties, the employer should advise the
   employee of any accommodations the agency can make to accommodate the
   employee's limitations due to the injury.




                                         9
     According to Section § 10.507 the employer should make an offer of suitable work as
     follows. Where the attending physician or OWCP notifies the employer in writing that
     the employee is partially disabled (that is, the employee can perform some work but not
     return to the position held at date of injury), the employer should act as follows:


     c. If the Agency can provide alternative employment to a partially disabled employee
        who cannot perform his/her date of injury position, it will make an offer of light duty
        to the injured worker (this may also be identified as limited duty) and provide a copy
        to the OWCP.

     d. The employer may make a job offer verbally as long as it provides the job offer to the
        employee in writing within two business days of the verbal job offer.

     e. When an offer of employment is made, any such offer must be in writing and include
        the following information:

        (1) A description of the duties to be performed;

        (2) The specific physical requirements of the position and any special demands of the
            workload or unusual working conditions;

        (3) The organizational and geographical location of the job;

        NOTE: Employees under special retirement systems, such as Fire Fighters and Law
        Enforcement Officers should first be offered positions that maintain their current
        retirement options.

        (4) The date on which the job will first be available;

        (5) The claimant's work schedule (including telework);

        (6) Pay rate (salary) information; and

        (7) The date by which a response to the job offer is required.


7.   RESPONSIBILITES

     Note: One employee may be accountable for more than one of the responsibilities
     identified in this section.




                                              10
a. Office of Procurement and Property Management (OPPM) Director is responsible for:

   (1) Establishing USDA’s workers’ compensation and return-to-work policies;

   (2) Providing technical assistance and advice on complex issues that arise, such as:

        (a)   Medical determinations of fitness for duty, and physical standards for job
              tasks;

        (b)   Investigation of potentially fraudulent claims; and

        (c)   Reemployment and rehabilitation of claimants.

   (3) Monitoring agency and staff office compliance with Departmental policy;

   (4) Providing Agencies and staff offices with access to the automated cost and claim
       information necessary to manage their programs;

   (5) Reviewing and analyzing data received electronically from the DOL;

   (6) Coordinating reviews of agency programs as necessary or as requested; and

   (7) Reporting to the DOL and other entities, as required.

b. Agency and/or Staff Office Heads are responsible for:

   (1) Delegating appropriate authority to managers, supervisors, and other
       management officials, as required, to implement and operate the requirements of
       this Directive in a manner consistent with effective operations and sound
       management practices;

   (2) Administering a USDA WC RTW program in accordance with law and
       applicable regulations consistent with this directive and USDA’s policy. Agency
       programs must be designed to reduce workers’ compensation costs and minimize
       time lost due to work-related injuries and illnesses by:

        (a)   Establishing an Agency/Mission Area-wide RTW program to offer IWs
              suitable jobs and return them to work as soon as possible;

        (b)   Establishing a USDA-wide RTW process to offer IWs suitable jobs and
              return them to work outside of the employing Agency when the
              employing Agency is unable to find a suitable placement.



                                        11
       (c)   Establishing accountability by implementing strategies to reduce program
             cost charges to the lowest possible organizational level.

       (d)   Agency Human Resources Offices shall exhaust OHRM’s repository list
             containing eligible USDA return –to-work employees prior to recruiting.

c. Mission Area or Agency Human Resources Directors and/or Staff Office Heads are
   responsible for:

   (1) Administering the USDA-wide RTW process to offer injured workers
       suitable jobs, consider retraining options based on employee needs and agency
       requirements and return them to work outside of the employing Agency when the
       employing Agency is unable to find a suitable placement. This will require
       cross-collaboration between USDA Mission Areas, Agencies, and Staff Offices
       to facilitate placements.

   (2) Designating a WC Program Manager. This position may be either full-time or a
       collateral-duty, as appropriate for the size of the program. If the WC program is
       not under the purview of the HR Director, the senior Agency representative will
       be responsible for designating a program manager;

   (3) Retaining program management responsibility within the agency even if case
       management is outsourced.

   (4) Providing assistance for managers and supervisors in the execution of their
       program responsibilities;

   (5) Conducting analyses or participating in program evaluations using established
       program assessment tools to ascertain whether programs comply with established
       principles, policies, procedures, and determining the need for improvement,
       training, or guidance;

   (6) Taking adequate measures to protect the privacy of IWs;

   (7) Providing requested reports and documentation of program activities to support
       USDA and DOL accountability program reviews and/or audits;




                                       12
   (8) Requirement for OHRM to develop a repository of WC claimant vacated
       positions requiring backfill prior to other forms of recruitment. In other words,
       injury positions should be refilled with an employee that is medically cleared to
       return to work.

d. The Workers’ Compensation (WC) staff will:

   (1) Review all IW files to identify current and former employees who may be able to
       return to work in either a temporary light duty or permanent assignment
       situation. WC will base their review on the most current medical documentation
       available and may work with DOL/OWCP, the Reasonable Accommodation
       Program Manager, and/or Employee Relations Branch to request and assess new,
       updated medical information regarding the limitations and abilities of the injured
       individual.

   (2) Coordinate with the servicing DOL/OWCP office regarding the value, cost, and
       extent of vocational rehabilitation necessary to retrain and re-employ injured
       workers for whom no work is available for which they can use their current
       skills/abilities.

   (3) Monitor rehabilitation efforts and progress; re-training and re-employment with
       available resources.

   (4) Coordinate with Mission Area Human Resources Directors to determine
       placement opportunities if none are available in the employing Agency.

   (5) Establish job information networks and ensure outreach efforts for position
       vacancies giving consideration to disabled claimants as a pool of potential
       candidates.

   (6) Assist management with official light duty offers to current IWs that comply
       with FECA requirements. Advise the employee in writing of:

       (a)   Light duty availability, its organizational/geographical location and
             expected duration;

       (b)   All duties of the proposed position;




                                       13
       (c)   The specific physical limitations communicated by the employee’s
             attending physician and used to determine appropriate duties for returning
             to work;

       (d)   The employee’s responsibility to work within prescribed medical
             limitations;

       (e)   The employee’s responsibility to use universal tools, processes and
             procedures and instructions for access (e.g., pharmaceuticals contract,
             rehabilitation services, etc.).

   (7) Assess the adequacy of efforts to place eligible employees in light duty
       assignments on a case-by-case basis.

   (8) Periodically evaluate the effectiveness of and recommend changes/enhancements
       to the Return-to-Work program.

   (9) Staff will notify the Injured Worker of their benefits rights under the FECA.

e. The Injured Workers (IWs) will:

   (1) Inform management of any and all medical conditions resulting from a work-
       related injury that adversely affects his/her ability to perform the full scope of
       officially assigned duties.

   (2) Attend all scheduled medical appointments. Furnish authorized personnel
       required medical documentation, clearly documenting medical limitations that
       may require accommodation, the type and duration of any accommodations and
       the employees’ ability to perform a temporary light duty or permanent
       assignment.

   (3) For an injury that is expected to be of temporary duration, accept a suitable light
       duty assignment as a temporary accommodation, if offered, or DOL/OWCP
       benefits may be terminated.

   (4) Work within the prescribed medical limitations imposed.




                                        14
   (5) Comply with all applicable safety and health rules and regulations in order to
       prevent injuries and illness.

   (6) Ensure unsafe and/or unhealthful working conditions are reported to their
       immediate supervisor as soon as possible.

   (7) Report work-related injuries and illnesses to their immediate supervisor as soon
       as possible.

   (8) Submit or ensure that someone acting on the employee’s behalf submits the
       necessary reporting information promptly.

   (9) Comply promptly with requests from their supervisor, the appropriate WC
       program manager, and/or Human Resources for status updates or medical
       reports; and return to work as soon as the medical condition permits, even into a
       part-time, limited-duty, or light-duty work assignment or arrangement.

   (10) Advise the supervisor immediately of any change in the medical condition
        impacting the ability to perform the full scope of duties to which officially
        assigned, and provide medical documentation to substantiate any changes in the
        medical condition and/or approval to return to the full range of duties.

   (11) Seek or accept suitable employment.

   (12) Resume regular Federal employment, if capable.

f. The Supervisor will:

   (1) Receive and acknowledge requests for light duty.

   (2) In consultation with the injured worker, Human Resources Office (HRO) and the
       WC staff, determine the availability of light duty and continually monitor
       potential assignments that may meet the needs of the injured worker and the
       employing agencies as needed.

   (3) Respond to WC inquiries regarding the availability of and options for light duty.
       Make every effort to safely and appropriately accommodate an IW’s temporary
       medical limitations provided by the treating physician.




                                       15
             (4) Require the employee to submit current medical documentation to the Agency
                 Compensation Specialist for use by the agency to identify an assignment or
                 position that appears to meet the abilities and/or limitations of the employee.

             (5) Require that an employee assigned light duty submit medical documentation at
                 designated intervals to support the need for continued light duty or to modify the
                 assignment consistent with changes in physical limitations.

             (6) Refer the employee to the appropriate Human Resources staff regarding benefits,
                 when necessary.

             (7) Follow up on an employee’s request for light duty assignment to ascertain if light
                 duty becomes available after an initial determination of unavailability.

             (8) Document efforts to utilize a partially disabled employee and submit this
                 documentation to the WC staff to ensure that supervisor fulfills obligations under
                 this policy. Provide injured worker with a copy of documentation.

             (9) Initiate appropriate requests for personnel action, as needed.

             (10) Implementation of DOL’s and the agency’s determination of claimant’s ability to
                  return to work.


     8.   SCOPE

          This policy addresses returning an IW to suitable employment after having been on
          DOL/OWCP disability compensation either in their employing Agency or another USDA
          office.

          NOTE: Job offers will be prepared and extended to IWs for Limited or Modified duty as
          soon as restrictions are provided; even if the IW is still within the COP Period. Upon an
          IW’s return to full-duty (whether it is during the COP period or after having been in a
          light/limited duty position where a job offer was extended and accepted), it is the WC
          Case Manager’s responsibility to notify DOL/OWCP of the IW’s return to work. A
          doctor’s release indicating the IW is capable of returning to work is not considered
          sufficient evidence of an IW having actually returned to work.


9.        CHANGE IN GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION

          If an IW has relocated to a new geographical location, the WC Case Manager is
          responsible for making a good faith effort to place the IW in the new geographical


                                                 16
      location before pursuing gainful employment with the originating location where the
      injury first occurred.


10.   PAYMENT OF RELOCATION EXPENSES

      DOL/OWCP's regulations (20 CFR § 10.508) provide that an IWs who relocates to
      accept a suitable job offer after termination from the agency rolls may receive
      payment or reimbursement of moving expenses from the DOL/OWCP compensation
      fund. This regulation further states that Federal Travel Regulations pertaining to
      permanent change of station (PCS) moves are to be used as a guideline in
      determining whether expenses claimed are reasonable and necessary. Reference
      DOL (also refer to Federal Travel Regulation (FTR) Chapter 302, Subpart B).


11.   REEMPLOYMENT

      Return to duty of IWs is a corporate responsibility. A successful enterprise WC RTW
      Program is dependent upon full coordination and cooperation between the injured worker
      and USDA Agencies and Mission Areas. It is the responsibility of management officials
      and MAHRDs to work together to facilitate final placement decisions for these
      employees.

      An employee who fully recovers from a compensable injury within one year from the
      date of eligibility for compensation began (or from the time compensable disability recurs
      if the recurrence begins after the employee resumes regular full-time employment with
      the United States), is entitled to be returned immediately and unconditionally to his or her
      former position or an equivalent one. Although these restoration rights are department
      wide, the employee's basic entitlement is to the former position or equivalent in the local
      commuting area the employee left. If a suitable vacancy does not exist, the employee is
      entitled to displace an employee occupying a continuing position under temporary
      appointment or tenure group III. If there is no such position in the local commuting area,
      the agency must offer the employee a position (as described above) in another location.
      This paragraph also applies when an IW accepts a lower-grade position in lieu of
      separation and subsequently fully recovers. A fully recovered employee is expected to
      return to work immediately upon the cessation of compensation.

      REEMPLOYMENT PRIORITY LIST (RPL)

      In accordance with 5 CFR 330.201(a), RPL assists current and former competitive
      service employees who will be or were separated by RIF under 5 CFR 351, or who have
      recovered from a compensable work related injury after more than one year, as required
      by 5 CFR 353. In filling vacancies, mission areas, agencies and staff offices must give



                                              17
      USDA’s RPL registrants placement priority for most competitive service position
      (limited to competitive service employees in tenure groups I (career) and II (career-
      conditional) in accordance with 5 CFR 330.203 and §330.204 respectively) before hiring
      an individual outside the USDA workforce.

      General Provisions

      Servicing HROs are responsible for ensuring that USDA employees separated by RIF or
      those who are fully recovered from a compensable injury after more than one year
      receive non-competitive reemployment priority consideration for vacant positions for
      which he/she is qualified. The reemployment priority consideration requires careful
      review of the basic qualifications of the RPL eligible, followed by contact to determine
      interest and availability. Eligibility for RPL is limited to competitive service employees
      in tenure groups I (career) and II (career-conditional) in accordance with 5 CFR 330.203
      and §330.204 respectively. HRO staffs are expected to interpret and apply OPM’s
      qualification standards, minimum educational requirements and selective placement
      factors (including any minimum education and established selective placement factors) to
      place basically qualified RPL eligibles in vacant positions when possible.

      Mission Area human resources offices need to determine when to check the RPL for any
      permanent or temporary vacancy. For example, in conducting external and internal
      recruitment, they may want to consider RPL eligibles at one of the following stages of the
      process:

      a. Prior to announcing the vacancy or requesting a certificate issued by OPM or a
         delegated examining unit.
      b. Prior to referring a certificate of eligibles or prior to making an offer of employment.

      Additional guidance will be provided to employees who are fully recovered after one
      year; employees who are physically disqualified employees and partially recovered
      employees. http://www.dm.usda.gov/employ/policy-employment/rpl.htm


12.   PROGRAM EVALUATION

      OPPM is responsible for conducting reviews of Agency programs as necessary or as
      requested. Agency and Mission Area management officials and Human Resources
      Directors are responsible for conducting regular internal program reviews, as well as
      developing and implementing internal controls to ensure proper program management
      and compliance.




                                              18
-END-




 19
