                                 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                        WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


                                                                                   Number:
     DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                       4430-792-2
SUBJECT:                                                          DATE:
Drug-Free Workplace Program                                               April 14, 2011
                                                                  OPI:
                                                                  Office of Human Resources
                                                                  Management


Section                                                  Page
1       Purpose                                            1
2       Special Instructions                               1
3       Policy                                             2
4       Definitions                                        2
5       Authorities                                        7
6       Responsibilities                                   8
7       Program Administration                             15
8       Inquiries                                          20

Appendix A    Position Titles Designated For Random       A-1
              Testing
Appendix B    Drug Test Results Monthly Report            B-1
Appendix C    Reasonable Suspicion Testing-USDA Plan      C-1
              Plan for a Drug Free Workplace
Appendix D    Drugs For Which Individuals Are Tested      D-1
Appendix E    Mandatory Guidelines for Federal            E-1
              Workplace Drug Testing Programs
Appendix F    Test Procedures In General                  F-1

1.     PURPOSE

       This regulation establishes the policy and procedures for managing the Drug-Free Federal
       Workplace Program (DFWP) and the Transportation Workplace Drug and Alcohol
       Testing Program within the Department of Agriculture (USDA).

2.     SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

       a. This regulation supersedes Departmental Regulation (DR) 4430-792-2 dated
          August 25, 2003.

       b. The principle changes to DR 4430-792-2 are as follows:

              (1) All employees are subject to drug testing, when, based upon circumstances,
DR 4430-792-2                                                             April 14, 2011


                  are involved in Safety-Related Incidents.

             (2) Added time limit for completion of drug and alcohol tests for post-accident or
                 Safety-Related Incidents.

             (3) Added max time for Follow-Up testing of employees in DOT Testing
                 Designated Positions (TDPs).

             (4) Changed position nomenclature to reflect current terminology and changed
                 responsibilities to reflect current duties.

             (5) Clarified requirements for reasonable suspicion, and accident, un-safe
                 practice testing.

             (6) Added Executive Order 12356 on National Security Information as an
                 authority for the program.

             (7) Changed applicant (pre-employment/pre-assignment) testing
                 requirement to include all TDPs.

             (8) Deleted Technical Review Panel as these functions are handled by the
                 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration of the
                 Department of Health and Human Services.

3.    POLICY

      USDA supports the goal of a drug and alcohol-free Federal workplace. In light of its
      responsibility to protect the agricultural economy, the nation’s food supply, and the
      natural resources of this country, USDA has a compelling obligation to eliminate illegal
      drug use from its workplace. It is essential that the development and implementation of
      policies affecting the production, harvesting, sale, marketing, research and use of
      agricultural commodities and natural resources under the auspices of USDA be
      established in a drug-free environment. In addition, the safe operation of USDA large
      and passenger carrying vehicles mandates that those entrusted with that responsibility are
      not impaired by alcohol or any illegal substance. The USDA Employee Assistance
      Program (EAP) is a vital part of this effort.

4.    DEFINITIONS

      a.     Agency Drug Testing Liaison (ADTL). The person appointed by the Agency
             Head to serve as the liaison with the Agency Head, DFWP Manager and the
             supervisors and employees of their agency on the Drug-Free Workplace Program.

      b.     Alcohol Use. The consumption of any beverage, mixture, or preparation
             (including any medication) containing alcohol.



                                              2
April 14, 2011
                                                                             DR 4430-792-2
       c.        Applicant. Any individual tentatively selected for employment with USDA in an
                 Executive Order (EO) testing designated position (TDP) as listed in Appendix A,
                 or a position requiring a commercial driver’s license (CDL). Also, any individual
                 within USDA tentatively selected for movement into an EO TDP as listed in
                 Appendix A, or a position requiring a CDL, who has not been subject to random
                 testing immediately prior to the selection.

       d.        Commercial Driver’s License (CDL). A permit issued by the appropriate State to
                 operate a commercial motor vehicle.

       e.        Commercial Motor Vehicle. A motor vehicle or combination of motor vehicles
                 used in commerce to transport passengers or property if the motor vehicle:

                 (1)    Has a gross combination weight of 26,001 or more pounds inclusive of a
                        towed unit with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds;

                 (2)    Has a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds;

                 (3)    Is designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver; and

                 (4)    Is of any size and is used in the transportation of hazardous materials
                        requiring placards.

       f.        Employee Assistance Program (EAP). EAP means the USDA confidential
                 counseling program that offers assessment, short-term counseling, and referral
                 services to employees for a wide range of drug, alcohol, and mental health
                 problems, and monitors the progress of employees while in treatment.

       g.        Employee Assistance Program Coordinator. Employee Assistance Program
                 Coordinator means the individual designated by USDA agencies to be responsible
                 for implementing and operating the EAP within their agency.

       h.        Department of Transportation Testing Designated Position (DOT TDP). A
                 position designated for random drug and alcohol testing because a CDL is
                 required to perform the duties of the position.

       i.        Executive Order Testing Designated Position (EO TDP). A Sensitive Position
                 designated by the Secretary of Agriculture as:

                 (1)    Special-Sensitive, Critical-Sensitive, or Noncritical-Sensitive under
                        chapter 731 of the Federal Personnel Manual or designated as sensitive in
                        accordance with Executive Order No. 10450, as amended;

                 (2)    Employees granted access to classified information or who may be granted
                        access to classified information pursuant to a determination of



                                                  3
DR 4430-792-2                                                             April 14, 2011


                   trustworthiness by the Secretary of Agriculture under Section 4 of
                   Executive Order No. 12356;

            (3)    Individuals serving under Presidential appointments;

            (4)    Law enforcement as defined in 5 U.S.C. Section 8331 (20) and 8401
                   (17); or

            (5)    Other positions that the Secretary of Agriculture determines involves
                   law enforcement, national security, the protection of life and property,
                   public health or safety, or other functions requiring a high degree of trust
                   and confidence.

      j.    Illegal Drug. A controlled substance included in Schedule I or II, as defined by
            section 802(6) of Title 21 of the United States Code, the possession of which is
            unlawful under chapter 13 of that Title. The term ―illegal drugs‖ does not mean
            the use of a controlled substance pursuant to a valid prescription or other uses
            authorized by law. The following drugs or categories of drugs constitute the basis
            of the USDA drug testing program, and will be tested for in each sample:

            (1)    Marijuana;

            (2)    Cocaine;

            (3)    Opiates (Codeine, Morphine & 6-Monoacetylmorphine);

            (4)    Amphetamines (Methamphetamine, Methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA)
                   & Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA)); and

            (5)    Phencyclidine (PCP).

            When conducting reasonable suspicion, accident or unsafe practice testing, a
            Federal agency may test an employee for any drug identified in Schedule I or II of
            the Controlled Substances Act. If the Agency wants to test for any other drug on
            a routine basis for applicant, random, voluntary and follow-up testing, advance
            written approval from the Secretary, Department of Health and Human Services
            (HHS) is required.

            Federal agency drug testing programs shall have validity tests performed on urine
            specimens as, provided in section 2.4(g) of the Mandatory Guidelines and
            Proposed Revisions to Mandatory Guidelines for Federal Workplace Drug
            Testing Programs (April 13, 2004).

      k.    Management Official. An employee required or authorized by the USDA to
            formulate, determine, or influence USDA policies as per 5 U.S.C. Section
            7103(a)(11).

                                             4
April 14, 2011
                                                                              DR 4430-792-2


       l.        Medical Review Officer (MRO). A licensed physician with appropriate medical
                 training in substance abuse disorders to evaluate and interpret all positive test
                 results received from the drug testing laboratory together with an individual’s
                 medical history and any other relevant biomedical information.

       m.        Random Drug Testing. A system of drug testing imposed without individualized
                 suspicion that a particular individual is using illegal drugs. Random testing may
                 either be:

                 (1)    Uniform unannounced testing of employees occupying Testing Designated
                        Positions in a specified area, organizational element or position; or

                 (2)    A statistically random sampling of a percentage of such employees based
                        on a neutral criterion, such as social security numbers.

       n.        Reasonable Suspicion Testing. Reasonable suspicion testing may be required of
                 any employee in a position which is designated for random testing when there is a
                 reasonable suspicion that the employee uses illegal drugs whether on or off duty.
                 Reasonable suspicion testing may also be required of any employee in any
                 position when there is a reasonable suspicion of on-duty use or on-duty
                 impairment. Testing may be based upon, among other things:

                 (1)    Observable phenomena, such as direct observation of drug use or
                        possession and/or the physical symptom(s) of being under the influence of
                        a drug;

                 (2)    A pattern of abnormal conduct or erratic behavior;

                 (3)    Arrest or conviction for a drug-related offense, or the identification of an
                        employee as the focus of a criminal investigation into illegal drug
                        possession, use, or trafficking;

                 (4)    Information provided either by reliable and credible sources or
                        independently corroborated; or

                 (5)    Newly discovered evidence that the employee has tampered with a
                        previous drug test.

                 Although reasonable suspicion testing does not require certainty, mere ―hunches‖
                 are not sufficient to meet this standard.

       o.        Safe Harbor. Under Executive Order 12564, the USDA is required to initiate
                 action to discipline any employee found to use illegal drugs in every
                 circumstance. A fundamental purpose of the USDA’s Drug Free Workplace Plan
                 is to assist employees who themselves are seeking treatment for drug use. For

                                                  5
DR 4430-792-2                                                             April 14, 2011


            this reason, the USDA will not initiate disciplinary action against any employee
            who meets all three of the following conditions:

            (1)    Voluntarily identifies him/herself as a user of illegal drugs prior to being
                   identified through other means;

            (2)    Obtains counseling or rehabilitation through an EAP; and

            (3)    Thereafter refrains from using illegal drugs.

            An employee who admits to illegal drug use after being notified that he/she is
            scheduled for a drug test or just after a sample is collected, or who is found to use
            illegal drugs on the basis of other appropriate evidence, e.g., evidence obtained
            from a criminal conviction, reasonable suspicion and/or accident unsafe practice,
            is not eligible for ―safe harbor.‖

      p.    Substance Abuse Professional (SAP). A licensed physician (medical doctor or
            doctor of osteopathy), or a licensed or certified psychologist, social worker,
            employee assistance professional, or addictions counselor (certified by the
            National Association of Alcoholism and Drug Abuse Counselors Certification
            Commission) with knowledge of and clinical experience in the diagnosis and
            treatment of alcohol and controlled substance-related disorders. They make
            recommendations concerning education, treatment, follow-up testing, and
            aftercare.

      q.    Supervisor. An employee having authority to hire, direct, assign, promote,
            reward, transfer, furlough, layoff, recall, suspend, discipline, or remove other
            employees, to adjust their grievances, or to effectively recommend such action, if
            the exercise of the authority is not merely routine or clerical in nature, but
            requires the consistent exercise of independent judgment.

      r.    Testing Designated Positions (TDPs). An employment position within USDA
            which has been designated for random testing. These positions are characterized
            by critical safety or security responsibilities as related to the mission of USDA.
            The job functions associated with these positions directly and immediately relate
            to public health and safety, the protection of life and property, law enforcement,
            or national security.

      s.    Verified Positive Test Result. A drug test result reported by an HHS-certified
            laboratory when a specimen contains a drug or drug metabolite equal to or greater
            than the cutoff concentration and reviewed and verified by the MRO in
            accordance with this plan and the Mandatory Guidelines for Federal Workplace
            Drug Testing Programs. This can include adulterated and substituted results.
            Also, an alcohol breath test result of 0.04 or greater administered by a Breath
            Alcohol Technician (BAT).



                                              6
April 14, 2011
                                                                            DR 4430-792-2
       t.        Validity Testing. The testing of every specimen for creatinine concentration,
                 (specific gravity if creatinine is less than 20 mg/dl), pH, and for oxidizing
                 adulterants. This testing is done to insure the sample was produced by the
                 metabolic process of the human body and to insure that no other outside
                 contaminants were added to the specimen to try and defeat the drug test.

5.     AUTHORITIES

       a.        7 CFR Part 2, Delegations of Authority by the Assistant Secretary for
                 Administration;

       b.        Executive Order 12564, dated September 15, 1986, Drug-Free Federal
                 Workplace;

       c.        Executive Order 10450, dated April 27, 1953, Security Requirements for
                 Government Employees, as amended;

       d.        Executive Order 12356, dated April 2, 1982, National Security Information;

       e.        Section 503 of the supplemental Appropriations Act of 1987, P.L. 100-71, 101
                 Stat. 391, 468-471, codified at 5 U.S.C. Section 7301 note (1987);

       f.        Mandatory Guidelines for Federal Workplace Drug Testing Programs, which
                 includes Scientific and Technical Requirements and Certification of Laboratories
                 Engaged in Urine Drug Testing, 53 FR 11970 (1988) as revised in 59 FR 29908
                 (1994), as revised in 69 FR 19644 (2004) and as revised in 73 FR 71858 (2008);

       g.        The Privacy Act of 1974 (5 U.S.C. Section 552a), prescribing requirements
                 governing the maintenance of records by agencies pertaining to the individuals
                 and access to these records by the individual(s) to whom they pertain;

       h.        Civil Service Reform Act of 1978, Pub. L. 95-454;

       i.        Section 503 of the supplemental Appropriations Act of 1987, P.L. 100-71, 101
                 Stat. 391, 468-471, codified at 5 U.S.C. Section 7301 note (1987);

       j.        Public Law 102-143, the Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing Act of 1991;

       k.        Department of Transportation 49 CFR Part 40 – Procedures for Transportation
                 Workplace Drug and Alcohol Testing August 1, 2001, and June 25, 2008;

       l.        7 CFR Part 1, Subpart G, implementing the Privacy Act of 1974 within the
                 USDA;

       m.        Federal Employees Substance Abuse Education and Treatment Act of 1986, P.L.,
                 99-570;

                                                  7
DR 4430-792-2                                                            April 14, 2011



      n.     Sections 523 and 527 of the Public Health Service Act and implementing
             regulations at 42 CFR Part 2, Confidentially of Alcohol and Drug-Abuse Patient
             Treatment Records;

      o.     Department of Transportation 49 CFR Part 382 – Controlled Substances and
             Alcohol Use and Testing August 17, 2001;

      p.     USDA Plan for a Drug Free Workplace as revised; and

      q.     DR-4430-792-1, USDA Employee Assistant Program.

      Guidance – Sections c, d and e of Paragraph 6 of the USDA Departmental Regulation,
      Safety Management Program DR 4410-004 dated November 18, 2005.

6.    RESPONSIBILITIES

      a.     The Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA) will:

             Advise the Secretary of Agriculture, Mission Areas/Agency Heads, and
             Staff Office Directors regarding DFWP policies and procedures, and
             provide program oversight.

             (1)    Ensure USDA Plan for a Drug Free Workplace is efficiently and
                    effectively accomplished in accordance with the Executive Order and
                    all other applicable laws and regulations;

             (2)    Develop policies and procedures to enable the efficient and swift
                    implementation of the Plan for a Drug Free Workplace at headquarters
                    and field locations, taking into account the unique geographical,
                    personnel, budgetary and other relevant factors of the field offices;

             (3)    Contract for drug testing services or ride other federal agency drug
                    testing contracts ensuring that contractors chosen to perform the drug
                    testing services are HHS accredited and that all contracts conform to the
                    technical specifications of the HHS guidelines as referenced in Section
                    5.f;

             (4)    Establish, by contract or with USDA employees as deemed appropriate,
                    the function and specific responsibilities of the MRO as required by the
                    HHS guidelines contained in Section 5.f. and the position of the USDA
                    DFWP Manager;

             (5)    Approve agency requests for additional applicant testing under Section XI
                    of this Plan; and



                                             8
April 14, 2011
                                                                              DR 4430-792-2
                 (6)    Review and issue decisions on TDP appeals.


       b.        The Director, Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM) will:

                 Advise the ASA in planning, developing and implementing policies and
                 procedures regarding the DFWP.

       c.        The Employee Relations Officer, OHRM will:

                 (1)    Direct, administer and manage the implementation of this program in
                        accordance with applicable laws, regulations, and guidelines through the
                        DFWP Manager;

                 (2)    Decide upon requests from Agency Heads to exempt positions from
                        testing on the basis of hardship due to remote location, unavailability of
                        onsite testing personnel, or the lack of an appropriate site for the test to be
                        administered (this authority can be delegated to the DFWP Manager at the
                        discretion of the Employee Relations Officer, OHRM).

                 (3)    Coordinate with, and report to HHS on drug testing activities and/or
                        findings that may affect the reliability or accuracy of drug testing results;

                 (4)    Respond to agency requests to temporarily defer personnel from testing
                        under this program. This authority can be delegated to the USDA Drug
                        Free Workplace Program Manager to insure continuity in day-to-day
                        operations at the discretion of the Employee Relations Officer, OHRM;

                 (5)    Receive positive EO TDP random and applicant tests from DFWP
                        Manager;

                 (6)    Periodically review agency actions taken against employees who are
                        found with a positive test under this program; and

                 (7)    Initiate action under Section 7(f) of this Regulation in cases where the
                        authority to take action rests with the Director, Office of Human
                        Resources Management of the Office of the Assistant Secretary for
                        Administration, Office of the Secretary.

       d.        The USDA Drug Free Workplace Program (DFWP) Manager will:

                 (1)    Administer and manage the implementation of this program in accordance
                        with applicable laws, regulations and guidelines; serve as the principal
                        contact with all internal and external organizations on the DFWP, and
                        arrange for all drug and alcohol testing required by this program;



                                                   9
DR 4430-792-2                                                             April 14, 2011


            (2)    Ensure that all current employees in positions that are reclassified as TDP
                   and are then subject to random testing receive individual notices as
                   described in Section VII(B) of this USDA Plan for a Drug Free
                   Workplace. All TDP positions that are advertised to be filled will state
                   that the position is subject to random drug testing and a pre-employment
                   test will be required of the applicant selected for the position.

            (3)    Conduct laboratory inspections, as appropriate, and document all results of
                   laboratory inspections conducted;

            (4)    Coordinate with and report through the Employee Relations Officer and
                   Deputy Director OHRM to the ASA on DWFP Manager Activities and
                   findings that may affect the reliability or accuracy of laboratory results;

            (5)    Assure that the Drug-Free Workplace Program is publicized throughout
                   the Department, that drug program educational materials are disseminated,
                   and that training and education regarding drug use and rehabilitation are
                   provided to supervisors and employees;

            (6)    Coordinate with the Agency Drug Testing Liaisons in field offices
                   wherever possible to conserve resources and to efficiently and speedily
                   accomplish reliable and accurate testing objectives;

            (7)    Upon receipt of a verified positive test result from the Medical Review
                   Officer (MRO), assure that agencies have an EAP available, and that
                   employees are referred to the program. Notify the Chief, Personnel
                   Security Branch of those employees with a positive test who have a
                   security clearance (the DFWP manager has access to USDA Security
                   Entry Tracking System to verify personnel with security clearance);

            (8)    Report verified positive Executive Order (EO) TDP random or applicant
                   test results to Employee Relations Officer, OHRM and to the appropriate
                   Mission Area/Agency Personnel Officer through the ADTL for action
                   consistent with HHS and DFWP plan guidelines;

            (9)    Report verified positive Department of Transportation (DOT) TDP test
                   results to the appropriate Mission Area/Agency Personnel Officer through
                   the ADTL for action consistent with DOT regulations;

            (10)   Provide training to newly identified Agency Drug Testing Liaison
                   (ADTL) on the USDA Plan for a Drug Free Workplace and procedures for
                   accessing the drug testing collection contractor’s website for requesting
                   and tracking drug tests on their employees. Also, provide on-going
                   guidance and updates on programmatic changes from HHS and serve as a
                   resource for the ADTLs;



                                             10
April 14, 2011
                                                                              DR 4430-792-2
                 (11)   Inform and consult with appropriate supervisory and management
                        personnel on appropriate actions regarding employees with positive drug
                        test results;

                 (12)   Monitor and assist the ADTL in coordination with the collection
                        contractor to exhaust all possibilities for collection to include; establishing
                        new sites as close as possible to the employee to be tested and/or provide a
                        collector to travel to the employee’s location to conduct an on-site
                        collection;

                 (13)   Report monthly to the Employee Relations Officer, OHRM the status of
                        all requested drug tests. Respond to all reporting requirements and report
                        on a regular basis to the ASA on all Drug-Free Workplace Program
                        activities; and

                 (14)   As the EAP Manager, manage the delivery of the EAP for drug related
                        issues as defined in the USDA Plan for a Drug Free Workplace.

       e.        Agency Heads will:

                 (1)    Designate in writing to the Employee Relations Officer (OHRM) an
                        Employee Assistance Program Coordinator and an Agency Drug Testing
                        Liaison (ADTL) to coordinate the agency EAP and DFWP with the
                        Agency Head, Employee Relations Branch, OHRM, the DFWP Manager,
                        EAP personnel, agency supervisors and employees;

                 (2)    Require employees to present themselves for testing when scheduled, and
                        ensure that employees subject to random testing receive notification of
                        scheduled testing in a timely manner;

                 (3)    Ensure that agency employee relations officers consult with appropriate
                        supervisory and management officials on proposed actions, and with EAP
                        personnel on referrals regarding employees with positive test results;

                 (4)    Publicize the DFWP through distribution of educational materials and
                        other means, and provide training and education regarding drug use and
                        rehabilitation to supervisors and employees;

                 (5)    Implement an effective EAP in accordance with applicable laws,
                        regulations and guidelines;

                 (6)    Recommend additions, deletions, or changes to this program, or to the
                        positions designated for testing; and

                 (7)    Recommend exempting positions from drug testing on the basis of
                        hardship due to remote location, unavailability of onsite testing, or the

                                                  11
DR 4430-792-2                                                            April 14, 2011


                   lack of an appropriate site for the test to be administered, to the Employee
                   Relations Officer, OHRM and the DFWP Manager after coordination with
                   the collection contractor to exhaust all possibilities for collection to
                   include; establishing new sites as close as possible to the employee to be
                   tested and/or provide a collector to travel to the employee’s location to
                   conduct an on-site collection;

            (8)    Ensure that supervisory training and employee education is delivered
                   within their agency in accordance with the USDA Plan for a Drug Free
                   Workplace Sections IV and V; and

            (9)    Make recommendations for additional applicant testing (if any) within
                   their agency to the ASA, as outlined in the USDA Plan for a Drug Free
                   Workplace Sections Section XI.

      f.    Employee Assistance Program Coordinator will:

            (1)    Implement and operate the EAP within their agency according to
                   DR 4430-792-1 Employee Assistance Program and the USDA Plan for a
                   Drug Free Workplace as related to drug and alcohol issues. Ensure that
                   EAP is available to all employees, and ensure that supervisors and
                   employees know how to access the program;

            (2)    Coordinate with the Department EAP Manager (DFWP Manager), the
                   Employee Relations Officer, union representatives, and supervisors, as
                   appropriate on drug testing issues;

            (3)    Work with the Department EAP Manager (DFWP Manager) to provide
                   educational materials and training on illegal drugs in the workplace to
                   managers, supervisors, and employees;

            (4)    Advise supervisors of employees with performance and/or personnel
                   problems that may be related to illegal drug use in the services available
                   through the EAP; and

            (5)    Monitor the progress of referred employees during and after the
                   rehabilitation period, and provide feedback to supervisors in accordance
                   with 42 CFR Part 2, Confidentiality of Alcohol and Drug Abuse Patient
                   Records.

      g.    Employee Assistance Counselors will:

            (1)    Serve as the initial point of contact for employees who ask or are referred
                   for counseling;

            (2)    Be familiar with all applicable law and regulations, including drug

                                            12
April 14, 2011
                                                                             DR 4430-792-2
                        treatment and rehabilitation insurance coverage available to employees
                        through the Federal Employee Health Benefits Program;

                 (3)    Meet the qualifications as described in the agency EAP contract and be
                        trained in counseling employees in the occupational setting, and in
                        identifying drug use;

                 (4)    Document and sign the treatment plan prescribed for all employees
                        referred for treatment, after obtaining the employee’s signature on this
                        document; and

                 (5)    In making referrals, consider the—

                        (a)     Nature and severity of the problem;

                        (b)     Location of the treatment;

                        (c)     Cost of the treatment;

                        (d)     Intensity of the treatment environment;

                        (e)     Availability of inpatient/outpatient care;

                        (f)    Other special needs, such as transportation and child care; and

                        (g)     The preferences of the employee.


       h.        Agency Drug Testing Liaisons will:

                 (1)    Arrange for employees to present themselves for drug testing when so
                        instructed by the DFWP Manager or Agency Head;

                 (2)    Ensure that notices are delivered to employees subject to random testing;

                 (3)    As assigned by the Agency Head, provide staff support in the
                        responsibilities of the Agency Head covered in Section 6e of this
                        Regulation including, but not limited to, distribution of educational
                        materials and providing training and education on drug use and
                        rehabilitation;

                 (4)    Assist the DFWP Manager with the coordination of all drug testing duties
                        within their Agency;

                 (5)   Coordinate with the collection contractor to exhaust all possibilities for
                       collection to include; establishing new sites as close as possible to the

                                                  13
DR 4430-792-2                                                             April 14, 2011


                   employee to be tested and/or provide a collector to travel to the
                   employee’s location to conduct an on-site collection; and

            (6)    Provide monthly report of drug testing activities to the Agency
                   Head and the DFWP manager. See example at Appendix B.

      i.    Medical Review Officer (MRO) will:

            (1)    Receive all laboratory test results;

            (2)    Assure that an individual testing positive is afforded an opportunity to
                   justify the test result in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, and
                   guidelines; and

            (3)    Consistent with confidentiality requirements, refer all test results to the
                   USDA DFWP Manager and for verified positive test results, a positive
                   drug test result form indicating that the positive result has been verified,
                   together with all relevant documentation and a summary of findings; and

            (4)    Report test results of individuals subject to applicant testing to the DFWP
                   Manager who will insure notification to the appropriate personnel official.

      j.    Mission Area/Agency Personnel Officers will:

            (1)   Make determinations regarding EO and DOT reasonable suspicion and
                  accident/unsafe practice testing in cases involving employees in their
                  jurisdiction. This authority may be re-delegated to personnel
                  officers or management officials one organizational level below
                  the agency personnel officer;

            (2)   Consistent with the USDA Plan for a Drug Free Workplace,
                  receive all verified positive test results from the DFWP Manager through
                  the Agency Drug Testing Liaison;

            (3)   Take appropriate action regarding any security clearance on those
                  employees with verified non-negative (positive, adulterated or
                  substituted) results; and

            (4)    Inform and consult with appropriate supervisory and management
                   personnel on appropriate actions including disciplinary and/or
                   adverse actions as outlined in Section 7.f. of this regulation regarding
                   employees with verified non-negative (positive, adulterated or substituted)
                   results.

      k.    Department and Agency Training Officers will:



                                             14
April 14, 2011
                                                                              DR 4430-792-2
                 Ensure that supervisory training and employee education is delivered within their
                 areas of responsibility in accordance with Sections 7b and 7c of this regulation.

       l.        Supervisors will:

                 Be trained to recognize and address illegal drug use by employees, and will be
                 provided information regarding referral of employees to the EAP, procedures and
                 requirements for drug testing, and behavioral patterns that give rise to a
                 reasonable suspicion that an employee may be using illegal drugs. Working with
                 personnel specialists as appropriate, first line supervisors will:

                 (1)    Be trained on illegal drug use in the workplace;

                 (2)    Initiate procedures for a reasonable suspicion test in accordance with
                        Appendix C of this Regulation (Section X of the USDA Plan for a Drug
                        Free Workplace) after first making appropriate factual observations,
                        documenting those observations and obtaining appropriate concurrence.
                        However, failure of supervisors to receive training on reasonable suspicion
                        testing procedures shall not invalidate otherwise proper reasonable
                        suspicion testing;

                 (3)    Refer employees to the EAP for counseling and rehabilitation, upon a
                        finding of illegal drug use;

                 (4)    Initiate appropriate disciplinary action upon receiving a finding of illegal
                        drug use by a subordinate;

                 (5)    Assist higher-level supervisors, personnel official, and the EAP Counselor
                         in evaluating employee performance, conduct, and or personal problems
                        that may be related to illegal drug use; and

                 (6)    A higher-level supervisor shall review and concur, in advance, with all
                        tests ordered on the basis of a reasonable suspicion in accordance with
                        Section 7(d)(4).

7.     PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION

       a.        Employee Assistance Program (EAP)

                 EAP’s provide educational materials to supervisors and employees on drug use
                 issues and assist supervisors in confronting employees who have performance
                 and/or conduct problems. EAP counselors and substance abuse professionals
                 (SAP) provide confidential assessment, short-term counseling, and referral
                 services to employees with substance abuse problems. The counselor assists
                 employees in treatment and will work with them during the rehabilitation period
                 to track their progress and encourage successful completion of the program.

                                                  15
DR 4430-792-2                                                             April 14, 2011



      b.    Supervisory Training

            Since supervisors have a key role in establishing and monitoring a drug-free
            workplace, USDA will provide training to assist supervisors and managers in
            recognizing and addressing illegal drug use by agency employees.

            Each USDA agency, with the assistance of the DFWP (EAP) Manager as
            necessary, will be responsible for implementing supervisory training designed to
            ensure that all supervisors are fully informed of the USDA Drug-Free Workplace
            Plan. Training will be provided as soon as possible after a person assumes
            supervisory responsibility. A variety of training delivery methods such as formal
            training sessions, teleconferences, and self-instruction through Internet training
            programs (AgLearn: Search for drug testing in the catalog), video tapes, audio
            tapes, and written materials may be used. Training courses should be based on
            the forty (40) goals and learning objectives developed as a part of the USDA
            Generic Training Project and should also include:

            (1)    Departmental policy relating to drug use and EAP;

            (2)    The prevalence of various employee problems with respect to drugs
                   and alcohol;

            (3)    The EAP approach to handling problems including the supervisor’s
                   role and relationship to the EAP;

            (4)    How to recognize employees with possible problems;

            (5)    The roles of the medical staff, supervisors, personnel and EAP
                   personnel;

            (6)    How to document employee performance or behavior;

            (7)    Skills in confronting employees with possible problems;

            (8)    Agency procedures for referring employees to the EAP;

            (9)    Disciplinary action, and removals from sensitive positions as
                   required by Section 5(c) of the Executive Order;

            (10)   How to arrange for details from sensitive positions;

            (11)   Reintegration of employees into the workforce; and

            (12)   Written materials which the supervisor can use at the work site.



                                            16
April 14, 2011
                                                                             DR 4430-792-2
       c.        Employee Education

                 Agency training programs, with assistance from EAP, as necessary, will offer on-
                 going drug education to all USDA employees. Drug education presented to
                 employees will be based upon the goals and learning objectives developed for this
                 area as part of the USDA Generic Training Project. Employees are to receive
                 ongoing drug education programs to include:

                 (1)    The types and effects of drugs;

                 (2)    The symptoms of drug use, and the effects on performance and conduct;

                 (3)    The relationship of the EAP to the drug testing program; and

                 (4)    Other treatment, rehabilitation, and confidentiality issues.

                 Agency training officers and EAP personnel can make this information available
                 through various educational activities such as distribution of written materials;
                 videotapes, DVD’s and Internet Training programs (AgLearn: Search for drug
                 testing in the catalog), lunchtime employee forums; employee drug awareness
                 days; and formal training sessions.

       d.        Substance Abuse Testing

                 The USDA DFWP program provides for drug testing of employees as described
                 below. In addition, DOT regulations also mandate alcohol testing for employees
                 required to have a commercial driver’s license (CDL).

                 (1)    Random Unannounced Drug Testing. Employees occupying EO and DOT
                        TDPs;

                 (2)    Random Unannounced Alcohol Testing. Employees occupying DOT
                        TDPs;

                 (3)    Applicant Drug Testing. Applicant tests are required for all EO and all
                        DOT TDPs. If the result is a verified positive, a final offer of employment
                        will not be extended to any outside applicant and such applicant may not
                        re-apply to USDA for a period of six months. For applicants who are
                        currently employed by USDA, satisfactory completion of a rehabilitation
                        program and a minimum of 6 months waiting period from the date of the
                        reported verified positive result is required before they can re-apply.

                 (4)    Employees Suspected of Using Illegal Drugs or Alcohol.

                        (a)     Employees in EO TDP’s. Drug testing may be required of any
                                employee in a position which is designated for random testing

                                                  17
DR 4430-792-2                                                           April 14, 2011


                         when there is a reasonable suspicion that the employee uses illegal
                         drugs whether on or off duty.

                  (b)    Employees not in EO TDP’s. Reasonable suspicion testing may
                         also be required of any employee in any position when there is a
                         reasonable suspicion of on-duty use or on-duty impairment.

                  (c)    Employees in DOT TDP’s. Reasonable suspicion alcohol and/or
                         drug testing may be required of an employee required to have a
                         CDL. The decision to test must be based on direct observation of
                         specific, contemporaneous articulable observations concerning the
                         appearance, behavior, speech, or body odors of the employee. The
                         required observations must be made by a supervisor who is trained
                         in detecting the signs and symptoms of possible alcohol/drug use.

            (5)   Employees Involved in Safety-Related Incidents.

                  (a)    All Employees. Employees may be subject to testing when, based
                         upon the circumstances of an accident, their actions are reasonably
                         suspected of having caused or contributed to an accident that
                         results in a death or personal injury requiring immediate
                         hospitalization, or results in damage to government or private
                         property estimated to be in excess of $10,000.

                  (b)    Employees in DOT TDP’s. After an accident involving a
                         Commercial Motor Vehicle (CMV) the surviving driver will be
                         tested for alcohol and controlled substances if the accident
                         involved the loss of human life, or if the driver receives a citation
                         under State or local law for a moving traffic violation arising from
                         the accident.

                  Certain drugs stay in a person’s system for a limited time. Therefore, all
                  tests must be completed within 32 hours of the accident. If this is not
                  done, documentation as to why the test was not accomplished must be
                  provided to the Agency Head and the DFWP Manager. For alcohol
                  testing the test must be completed within 2 hours. If this is not done,
                  documentation as to why the test was not accomplished must be provided
                  to the Agency Head and the DFWP Manager. If the alcohol test is still not
                  completed within 8 hours, the agency shall cease trying to administer the
                  test and provide documentation as to why it was not completed.

                  If an employee is suspected of having caused or contributed to an accident
                  meeting the above criteria, the appropriate supervisor will present the facts
                  and circumstances leading to and supporting this suspicion to the Mission
                  Area Personnel Officer or delegated Personnel Officer (or equivalent
                  administrator) for approval. Once approval has been obtained and

                                           18
April 14, 2011
                                                                              DR 4430-792-2
                        arrangements made for testing, the supervisor will prepare a written report
                        detailing the facts and circumstances that warranted the testing.


                 (6)    Executive Order Voluntary Testing. Employees not in an EO TDP may
                        volunteer for drug testing. The voluntary program allows individual to
                        demonstrate their commitment to the goal of a drug-free workplace and set
                        an example for other employees by being subject to all the rules,
                        regulations, and requirements of those employees in an EO TDP.

                 (7)    Return to Duty and follow-up testing.

                        (a)    Employees in EO TDP’s. Employees may be returned to duty after
                               completion of rehabilitation through an EAP. Employees will be
                               subject to follow-up testing for two years after they complete a
                               counseling or rehabilitation program. During this period, the
                               employee will be tested at least three times. Such testing is distinct
                               from testing which may be imposed as a component of the EAP.

                        (b)    Employees in DOT TDP’s. A driver found to have engaged in
                               prohibited conduct will be subject to return-to-duty testing and
                               then follow-up testing consisting of at least six tests in the first 12
                               months following the driver’s return to duty. The SAP for each
                               employee may require a greater number of tests and may also
                               require follow-up testing for the 48 months following the first 12
                               month period. The return-to-duty and follow-up tests will be
                               observed collections.

       e.        Referral and Counseling

                 (1)    Employees in EO TDP’s. Employees found to use drugs illegally will be
                        referred to an EAP. An employee who occupies a TDP may not be
                        allowed to remain on duty in that position until successful completion of
                        rehabilitation through an EAP.

                 (2)    Employees in DOT TDP’s. Employees, who engage in prohibited alcohol
                        conduct and/or have a verified positive drug result, must be immediately
                        removed from their safety-sensitive functions. Employees cannot return to
                        safety-sensitive duties until they have been evaluated by a substance abuse
                        professional (SAP), have complied with any treatment recommendations,
                        and have a negative result on a return-to-duty alcohol or drug test (based
                        on the substance originally reported as positive).

                 (3)    Employees not in TDP’s. Employees not in a TDP found to use drugs
                        illegally will be referred to an EAP.



                                                 19
DR 4430-792-2                                                            April 14, 2011


      f.    Disciplinary or Adverse Action. Agency officials must refer employees to the
            EAP and also initiate disciplinary or adverse action upon the first finding of
            illegal drug use and/or prohibited alcohol conduct. The severity of the
            disciplinary or adverse action is dependent on the circumstances of each case and
            is consistent with the EO, DOT regulations, Department Personnel Manual
            Chapter 751, and the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978.

            Such disciplinary or adverse action may include any of the following measures
            but some disciplinary or adverse action must be initiated:

            (1)    Reprimanding the employee in writing;

            (2)    Placing the employee in enforced leave status;

            (3)    Suspending the employee without pay;

            (4)    Reducing the employee in grade or rate of pay; and

            (5)    Removing the employee from service.

            Agency officials must initiate action to remove employees from the Federal
            Service when employees:

            (1)    Refuse to obtain counseling or rehabilitation through the EAP;

            (2)    Fail to refrain from illegal drug use and/or prohibited alcohol conduct after
                   a first finding;

            (3)    Refuse testing when so required;

            (4)    Attempt to alter or substitute specimens; or

            (5)    Distribute or sell illegal drugs.

8.    INQUIRIES

      Direct all inquiries to the Office of Human Resources Management, Drug Free
      Workplace Program, Room 302W, The Whitten Building, Washington, DC 20250;
      telephone number 202-720-9010. A copy of the complete Plan for a Drug Free
      Workplace approved by the Department of Health and Human Services is
      available on the Web at: http://www.usda.gov/da/shmd/dfwp.htm.

                                                END




                                              20
April 14, 2011
                                                                           DR 4430-792-2
                                         APPENDIX A


              POSITION TITLES DESIGNATED FOR RANDOM TESTING

1. Agency Heads

Incumbents serve as the top cadre of management personnel of USDA in both career and non-
career positions. They manage and supervise agencies of the Department, participate at the
highest levels in policy formulation and direction, and make extremely complex and sensitive
decisions requiring a high degree of public trust and confidence.

Drug usage could result in actions and decisions which could lead to a failure to implement laws
and program delivery which could negatively impact the protection of life and property or public
health and safety or lead to the waste of public funds. This could lead to a loss of trust and
confidence in USDA and the American Government by the public and foreign governments.

2. Aircraft Mechanic

(GS-1670, WG-8852 or any other occupational series in which the incumbent may perform the
duties described below)

Incumbents are involved in the overhaul, installation, maintenance, modification, test, and/or
repair of aircraft systems, electronic equipment, instrumentation, flight control, and survival
equipment. These duties require keen sensory perception and neuromuscular coordination.
Incumbents must exercise sound judgment to ensure aircraft safety and operation.

Drug usage could result in loss of life, injury or destruction of property. For example, if an
aircraft mechanic failed to properly conduct pre-flight inspections, mechanical failure could
result and cause a crash endangering the pilot, passengers, and other personnel on the ground and
in the surrounding airspace.

3. Aircraft Operator

(AD-404, GS-486, GS-2181, GM-2150 or any other occupational series in which the incumbent
may perform the duties described below)

Incumbents are required to operate aircraft used in agricultural programs for such purposes as
crop spraying, fire fighting, insect control, animal damage control, and aerial surveillance and
photography. Aircraft operators make critical judgments which are substantially more
demanding than what would be required of operators of aircraft carrying only passengers. Flying
in agricultural situations usually requires operating in and out of less developed airfields, over
rural and mountainous terrain, and at low altitudes necessitating acute awareness and
instantaneous decision making.




                                               A-1
DR 4430-792-2                                                                   April 14, 2011


Drug usage produces diminished mental and neuromuscular coordination which could lead to the
inability to properly operate the aircraft. Inability to properly operate aircraft could in turn result
in the loss of life and damage to, or destruction of property. Drug usage could endanger the
aircraft operator, as well as all other passengers and pilots in the airspace and personnel on the
ground.

4. Small Craft Operator

 (WG-5786 or any other occupational series in which the incumbent may perform the duties
described below)

Incumbents are required to operate small oar, sail or mechanically propelled craft, generally
under 55 meters (180 feet) in length, to transport personnel including high level state and Federal
officials, supplies, and equipment. They also control harbor pollution, remove aquatic plants,
conduct hydrographic surveys of rivers and harbors, or carry out similar functions. The
operations are characterized by regular daily tours of duty followed by employees' physical
departure from the boat rather than watch and watch, which is characteristic of maritime industry
practices. This work requires the ability to steer and navigate the small craft, operate the engines
and, in some assignments, to make operating repairs to the engines and the boat itself. Vessels
must be operated in a safe manner in order not to endanger lives and/or to risk loss of property.

Drug usage diminishes the mental and neuromuscular capacity necessary to operate vessels of
this size. This, in turn, leads to the operator’s inability to properly control the vessel leading to a
possible loss of life, personal injury, or destruction of property.

5. Criminal Investigator

GS-1811

Incumbents perform, advise on, and administer investigations concerning suspected violations of
Federal statutes and regulations. Close coordination must be maintained with U.S. Attorneys,
military security, and local, state and Federal law enforcement officials. Incumbents interrogate
witnesses and suspects, serve subpoenas, testify before grand juries, administer oaths, and
conduct searches for physical and documentary evidence.

Some incumbents carry and use firearms in the performance of their duties. The conduct of
these duties requires the highest level of personal integrity and credibility since it involves
investigating and charging others who are accused of wrongdoing or violation of the law. These
duties also require extensive exercise of sound personal judgment.

Drug usage could result in loss of life or injury and improper adjudication of criminal or
administrative actions. For example, if criminal investigators fail to obtain key data, ascertain
witness veracity, follow legal procedures, or execute rules of evidence properly, sensitive and
costly investigations could be compromised. Additionally, improper or unauthorized use of
weapons could result in loss of life. The high level of personal integrity required of criminal
investigators is not consistent with the use of illegal drugs.



                                                 A-2
April 14, 2011
                                                                              DR 4430-792-2


6. Departmental Medical Director or other like positions

GS-602

The incumbents, as the Chief Medical Officer of the Department, or other GS-602 medical
officers, are responsible for a variety of functions including operation of the Health Units,
dispensing medications, and emergency treatment of patients. The incumbent must recognize
patients’ adverse signs and symptoms and react swiftly. This includes taking resuscitative
measures in case of cardiac or respiratory arrest. These duties require keen sensory perception,
judgment, and neuromuscular coordination.

Drug usage could result in the loss of the patients’ life or injury to the patient. Additionally, the
incumbent’s access to medication and participation in assessing the drug usage of USDA
employees requires the utmost personal integrity. Improper or illegal drug usage is not
consistent with these responsibilities.

7. Drug Free Workplace Program Personnel

Employee Relations Officer
Drug Free Workplace Program Manager and staff
Medical Review Officer
Agency Drug Testing Liaisons
Counselors to Drug Abusers

Incumbents in these positions are directly involved in the administration and day-to-day
operation of the Drug Free Workplace Program. As such they are in positions having access to
sensitive employee and drug testing program information.

Drug usage by the incumbents could result in incorrect decisions, embarrassment to USDA, or
the release of information which could undermine the program. Therefore, the incumbents have
a responsibility to demonstrate the absence of use of illegal drugs to maintain the credibility and
employee confidence in the program.

8. Employees authorized to carry firearms

Incumbents preserve and protect government employees and property. They also are authorized
to carry firearms for self protection in remote locations such as U.S. Forests.

Illegal drug use calls to doubt the integrity and credibility of the employee and their ability to
perform their duties of protecting persons, property or themselves. Drug usage produces
diminished mental and neuromuscular capacity. This could lead to life-threatening lapses in
judgment or ability.

9. Employees directly involved in drug-interdiction duties



                                                 A-3
DR 4430-792-2                                                                April 14, 2011


Incumbents are involved in: (1) detecting cannabis cultivation activity occurring on National
Forest lands; (2) investigating cannabis and other controlled substance violations; (3)
apprehending and prosecuting offenders; (4) eradicating cannabis plants and cultivating sites;
and (5) cooperating with other Federal, State and local law enforcement agencies in controlled
substance investigations where there is a mutual interest.

Illegal drug use could have serious effects on the agency’s interdiction responsibilities. A drug
user’s indifference to the agency’s basic responsibility and mission or activity complicity with
malefactors can facilitate illicit drug activity on National Forest lands. The employee may suffer
from impaired perception and judgment leading to possible loss of life, personal injury, or
destruction of property.

10. Employees with Top Secret Security Clearances

Incumbents have access to national security information with Top Secret classification, serve in
sensitive Foreign Service or overseas positions which require a Top Secret security clearance, or
are involved in duties demanding the highest degree of public trust.

Drug usage could result in inability to properly perform the duties of their positions,
indiscretions while under the influence of drugs, or susceptibility to financial considerations
which could cause an incumbent to be susceptible to releasing the classified information or
otherwise compromising national security for personal gain.

11. Employees stationed at Plum Island Animal Disease Center with special access to the
biocontainment laboratories (a Biocontainment Science Lab Level 3 – BSL3) or employees
with special access at other BSL3 laboratories.

Incumbents with special access to the biocontainment laboratories either work within the
confines of the biocontainment laboratories, or have frequent access to the biocontainment
laboratories, although their primary work site may be in other buildings. This special access
authorizes the incumbents to move freely without supervision or escort throughout the entire
biocontainment facility (approximately 250,000 sq. ft. of Laboratory/Mechanical space and
Animal Rooms), which allows them access to dangerous and exotic disease agents which pose a
high individual risk of life-threatening disease. United States law mandates that certain etiologic
microorganisms which are foreign to the United States may only be studied at the Plum Island
Animal Disease Center. The microorganisms included exhibit varying degrees of
pathogenicity/infectivity for man (in some cases unknown). The risk of extensive damage to the
United States livestock industry by exposure to these disease agents is extremely high.

Drug use could result in accidental or deliberate violation of biological safety regulations and
procedures which could be potentially disastrous to human safety and economic welfare of the
United States.

12. Fire Protection and Prevention Personnel

GS-081



                                                A-4
April 14, 2011
                                                                           DR 4430-792-2


Incumbents are responsible for performing work in controlling and extinguishing fires and
rescuing persons endangered by fire. Hazards encountered may involve burns and other effects
of heat, smoke inhalation, falling materials, explosion, and exposure to toxic materials.
Incumbents must be prepared to deal with fire victims in varying states of fright and panic. Also,
they may be required to operate or ride on fire trucks at high speed under adverse conditions.
These duties require keen sensory perception and neuromuscular coordination.

Drug usage could result in loss of life or injury and damage to, or destruction of property. Use of
illegal drugs by a fire fighter could endanger fire victims, employees in the fire vicinity, other
fire fighters and all property threatened by fire.

13. Guard

GS-085

Incumbents preserve and protect government employees and property. They must maintain a
high standard of conduct at all times, must be mentally alert and aware of their surroundings, and
be ready to act to provide protective measures at any time. A high level of integrity and
credibility are necessary in discharging the duties of the position. Incumbents are expected to
remain calm under pressure, think rationally, and respond intelligently, despite adverse
circumstances, and deal effectively in interpersonal confrontations. They often carry firearms in
the line of duty.

Illegal drug use calls to doubt the integrity and credibility of the employee and their ability to
perform their duties of protecting persons and property. Drug usage produces diminished mental
and neuromuscular capacity. This could lead to life-threatening lapses in judgment or ability.
For example, if a guard failed to exercise sound observation powers and judgment and used a
weapon improperly, needless injury or death could result.

14. Job Corps Center Staff (Includes any occupational series in which the incumbent may
perform the duties described below)

Each Center staff member sees students every day, and each staff member is responsible for the
safety of every student, including administering CPR and/or first aid whenever needed. Each
staff member is required to receive training in CPR and first aid. In addition, staff members may
be required to operate motor vehicles to transport students for both routine and emergency
purposes, as students are prohibited from possessing privately owned vehicles on campus. These
staff members are required to possess a valid driver’s license. Staff members who are not in
such positions in practice almost always possess a valid driver’s license due to the remote
location of Centers and their absence of staff housing. These staff members also in practice
frequently are called upon to drive students for a wide variety of purposes.

Drug usage by Center staff members could result in the loss of students’ lives or injury to the
students. Also, all Center staff personnel are responsible for administering the Zero Tolerance



                                               A-5
DR 4430-792-2                                                                  April 14, 2011


for Drug Policy. Improper or illegal drug use is inconsistent with assisting others in becoming
and remaining drug-free.

15. Motor Vehicle Operator Include only operators of passenger carrying vehicles

WG-5703

Incumbents operate motor vehicles such as buses, trucks, passenger vans, and other passenger
carrying vehicles as their predominant duty and responsibility. The vehicles are used to move
people and equipment including providing chauffeur services to high level officials. Vehicles
must be operated in a safe manner to avoid endangering lives of the public or passengers, or
risking the loss of property.

Drug usage produces diminished mental and neuromuscular capacity. This could in turn lead to
the operators’ inability to properly control the vehicle, leading to the possible loss of life,
personal injury, or destruction of property. For example, if the driver of a passenger carrying
shuttle failed to notice a traffic light, death or serious injury could result to USDA employees
and the general public. The use of illegal drugs is therefore inconsistent with the responsibility
of safe vehicle operation.

16. Nurse, Practical (Vocational) Nurse, Health Technician, Nursing Assistant

GS-610, GS-620, GS-699, & GS-621
Excluding those positions not having responsibility for patient care, drug testing or access to
controlled substances

Incumbents provide care to people with injuries and illnesses, administer injections, and must be
able to recognize patients; adverse signs and symptoms to be able to react swiftly in emergency
situations. This includes taking resuscitative measures in case of cardiac or respiratory arrest
when a physician is not present or immediately available. They must be able to provide
emergency treatment to accident victims. These duties require keen sensory perception and
neuromuscular coordination.

Drug usage could result in the loss of patients’ lives or injury to the patient. Additionally, the
incumbent’s access to medication requires the utmost personal integrity on their part concerning
drug usage.

17. Other Personnel with Access to Controlled Substances

Incumbents have access to controlled substances. As a result, incumbents must maintain the
highest level of personal integrity in order that full confidence can be placed in the integrity of
the agency.

Drug abuse could result in diminished mental capacity, or personal use of the controlled
substance to which incumbents have access. Additionally, incumbents who are drug users are
highly vulnerable to extortion, which could result in the unauthorized release of these substances.



                                                 A-6
April 14, 2011
                                                                             DR 4430-792-2


18. Presidential Appointees

These are individuals appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate.
They serve the American public in the highest levels of the Department in positions such as
Secretary of Agriculture, Deputy Secretary of Agriculture, Assistant and Under Secretaries and
Agency Heads. They participate with the President and the Congress in developing public policy
in the many areas within the scope of USDA, make the most complex and sensitive decisions,
and require the highest degree of public trust and confidence.

Drug usage could result in loss of trust and confidence by the American public and governments
throughout the world. In addition, drug usage by incumbents in these positions will have a direct
and negative effect on USDA and the American Government, national security, and the
efficiency, effectiveness, and cost of USDA programs.

19. Special-Sensitive Positions

Incumbents of these positions are designated as such under criteria found at 5 CFR 732.201 and
the Office of Personnel Management position sensitivity designation guidance. Individuals serve
in positions of the highest level of sensitivity with the potential for the greatest degree of damage
to the national security. Most occupants of these positions require access to Top Secret national
security information in accordance with Executive Order 10450 and 12968, or access to sensitive
compartmented information under authority of Director of Central Intelligence Directive 6/4.

These positions also include any ADP-Computer position that meets the above criteria or is
determined by the head of a USDA agency to impose a risk in terms of ADP-Computer security
above that at the critical-sensitive level. Incumbents are in positions that have potential for
inestimable impact involving duties especially critical to the agency mission. They have broad
scope and authority (e.g., overall direction of a major Federal program) or other extremely
important responsibilities which affect the overall efficiency of the service.

Drug usage could result in one’s inability to properly perform the duties of their position or
indiscretions while under the influence of drugs. Drug usage could cause incumbents to be
subject to increased financial need which may cause them to be susceptible to compromising
national security information or otherwise compromising national security for personal use.

20. Employees required to have a Commercial Drivers License (CDL)

As required by the Department of Transportation (DOT) Regulations (49 CFR e. al.), all
applicants for and employees of positions in which they are required to have a CDL to perform
their duties are subject to random alcohol and drug testing. (Not subject to applicant alcohol
testing).

See DOT Regulation 49 CFR e. al. for justification.
http://www.dot.gov/ost/dapc/NEW_DOCS/part40.html?proc



                                                A-7
April 14, 2011
                                                              DR 4430-792-2




                                 APPENDIX B:

                   DRUG TEST RESULTS MONTHLY REPORT

                    REPORT EXAMPLE FOR FOREST SERVICE (B-2)

                 REPORT EXAMPLE FOR ALL AGENCIES EXCEPT FS (B-3)




                                      B-1
DR 4430-792-2                                                                                                    April 14, 2011


                                                APPENDIX B
                                  MONTHLY REPORT OF DRUG TESTING ACTIVITIES
                                              AGENCY NAME
                                                  MONTH
                                MODE      T EST FOR    T EST    FOR
Name            ID (last 5)   DOT /NDOT      D, A      T YPE    ORG/LEVEL    POSIT ION         T EST ED   REASON NOT T EST ED
DOE, JOHN             12345     DOT         D,A         RAN     01-00-0009   FOREST RY T ECH      Y
DOE, JANE             56789     NDOT        D,A         PRE     01-02-0000   ENGR EQUIP OPR       Y
MAJOR, MAJOR          12347     NDOT        D,A         RAN     01-02-0000   MT R VEH OPR         N       T DY-WILL BE T EST ED UPON RT N
GAT OR, ALI           12348     DOT         D,A         RAN     01-15-0005   SUPVY FOR T ECH      N       ON FIRE LINE - T EST ED UPON RT N




                                          REPORT EXAMPLE FOR FOREST SERVICE
                                                  USE FOR BOTH NDOT AND DOT TESTING




                                                                B-2
April 14, 2011                                                                                                    DR 4430-792-2




                                                 APPENDIX B
                                   MONTHLY REPORT OF DRUG TESTING ACTIVITIES
                                               AGENCY NAME
                                                   MONTH
                                 MODE      T EST FOR    T EST
Name             ID (last 5)   DOT /NDOT      D, A      T YPE    POSIT ION              T EST ED   REASON NOT T EST ED
DOE, JOHN              12345     DOT         D,A         RAN     MT R VEH OPR              Y
DOE, JANE              56789     NDOT         D          PRE     WLDLF BIOLGST             Y
MAJOR, MAJOR           12347     NDOT         D          RAN     BIOL SCI T ECH (WLDF      N       T DY-WILL BE T EST ED UPON RT N
GAT OR, ALI            12348     NDOT         D          RAN     BIOL SCI T ECH (WLDF      N       SEASONAL EMPLOYEE




                                   REPORT EXAMPLE FOR ALL AGENCIES EXCEPT FS
                                                   USE FOR BOTH NDOT AND DOT TESTING




                                                                 B-3
April 14, 2011                                                                DR 4430-792-2


                                           APPENDIX C

X. REASONABLE SUSPICION TESTING-USDA Plan for a Drug Free Workplace

A. Grounds

Reasonable suspicion testing may be required of any employee in a position which is designated
for random testing when there is a reasonable suspicion that the employee uses illegal drugs
whether on or off duty. Reasonable suspicion testing may also be required of any employee in
any position when there is a reasonable suspicion of on-duty use or on-duty impairment. In
addition there shall be grounds for reasonable suspicion testing of any employee if the employee
is the focus of a criminal investigation into the illegal use, possession, distribution or trafficking
of controlled substances.

Reasonable suspicion testing may be conducted for the drugs listed in Appendix D of this
Regulation or for any drug listed in Schedule I or II of the Controlled Substances Act as
specified in the HHS Guidelines (Mandatory Guidelines for Federal Workplace Drug Testing
Programs: (November 25, 2008, Subpart C Section 3.2 (a)), contained in Appendix E of this
Regulation. Testing may be based upon, among other things:

       1. Observable phenomena, such as direct observation of drug use or possession and/or
          the physical symptom(s) of being under the influence of a drug;

       2. A pattern of abnormal conduct or erratic behavior;

       3. Arrest or conviction for a drug-related offense, or the identification of an employee as
          the focus of a criminal investigation into illegal drug possession, use, or trafficking;

       4. Information provided either by reliable and credible sources or independently
          corroborated; or

       5. Newly discovered evidence that the employee has tampered with a previous drug test.

Although reasonable suspicion testing does not require certainty, mere ―hunches‖ are not
sufficient to meet this standard.

B. Procedures

If an employee is suspected of using illegal drugs, the appropriate supervisor or management
official will gather all information, facts, and circumstances leading to and supporting this
suspicion. Mission Area Personnel Officers may make the determination of reasonable suspicion
in cases involving employees within their jurisdiction. This authority may be delegated to
Personnel Officers (or equivalent administrator) one level below the Mission Area Personnel
Officer. Competent medical and legal authorities may be consulted if necessary.

C. Obtaining the Sample



                                                 C-1
DR 4430-792-2
                                                                             April 14, 2011


The employee may be required to provide the urine sample under observation in accordance with
the criteria in Appendix F of this Regulation.

D. Documentation

When higher-level concurrence of a reasonable suspicion determination has been made, the
appropriate supervisor will promptly prepare a written report detailing the circumstances which
formed the basis to warrant the testing. This report should include the appropriate dates and
times of reported drug related incidents, reliable/credible sources of information, rationale
leading to the test, and the action taken.

E. Supervisory Training

In accordance with Section 6 l of this Regulation, supervisors will be trained to address illegal
drug use by employees, to recognize facts that give rise to a reasonable suspicion, and to
document facts and circumstances to support a finding of reasonable suspicion. Failure to
receive such training, however, shall not invalidate otherwise proper reasonable suspicion.




                                                C-2
April 14, 2011                                                            DR 4430-792-2


                                         APPENDIX D

                    DRUGS FOR WHICH INDIVIDUALS ARE TESTED

The following drugs or categories of drug constitute the basis of the USDA drug testing program,
and will be tested for in each sample:

       1. Marijuana

       2. Cocaine

       3. Opiates

       4. Amphetamines

       5. Phencyclidine (PCP)

When conducting reasonable suspicion, post accident, or unsafe practice testing, a Federal
agency may have a urine specimen tested for any drug listed in Schedule I or II of the Controlled
Substances Act.

Federal agency drug testing programs shall have validity tests performed on urine specimens as,
provided in Subpart C Section 3.1(c) of the Mandatory Guidelines for Federal Workplace Drug
Testing Programs (November 25, 2008).




                                              D-1
April 14, 2011                                                      DR 4430-792-2


                                    APPENDIX E


     MANDATORY GUIDELINES for FEDERAL WORKPLACE DRUG TESTING
                            PROGRAMS

                                LINKS TO GUIDELINES


                  http://edocket.access.gpo.gov/2008/pdf/e8-26726.pdf


                  http://edocket.access.gpo.gov/2008/pdf/z8-26726.pdf


                 http://edocket.access.gpo.gov/2010/pdf/2010-10118.pdf




                                         E-1
April 14, 2011                                                                    DR 4430-792-2


                                               APPENDIX F

                               TEST PROCEDURES IN GENERAL

Privacy Assured

Any individual subject to testing under this Regulation will be permitted to provide urine
specimens in private and in a rest room stall or similar enclosure so that the employee is not
observed while providing the sample. Collection site personnel, however, may observe the
individual provide the urine specimen when there is reasonable, articulable, and individualized
suspicion that the employee may tamper with the specimen to be provided and when directed to
do so by the DFWP Manager. In all such cases, the collection site personnel must be of the same
sex as the individual providing the sample.

Collection site personnel or the DFWP Manager may have reason to believe that a particular
individual may alter or substitute the specimen to be provided when:

       1. The individual—

                 a. Is being tested pursuant to Section X relating to reasonable suspicion
                    testing;

                 b. Has previously been found by USDA to be an illegal drug user; or

                 c. Has previously tampered with a sample; or

       2. Facts and circumstances suggest that the individual—

                 a. Is an illegal drug user;

                 b. Is under the influence of drugs at the time of the test; or

                 c. Has equipment or implements capable of tampering with or altering
                    urine samples; or

       3. The specimen—

                 a. Has a temperature outside the range of 32.5-37.7 degrees C/90.5-
                    99.8 degrees F; or

                 b. Shows signs of contaminants.

    In cases of observation, the reasons therefore must be documented by the collection site
    personnel (on the Chain of Custody) or the DFWP Manager and submitted to the MRO.
    Submission of the documentation will normally be completed after the observed collection
    has been approved.



                                                   F-1
