                                 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                        WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250



     DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION
                                                                                   Number:
                                                                                   4430-792-1

SUBJECT    Employee Assistance Program                            DATE:
                                                                           March 12, 2012
                                                                  OPI: Office of Human
                                                                  Resources Management



Section                                                             Page
1      Purpose                                                       1
2      Special Instructions                                          1
3      Policy                                                        2
4      Definitions                                                   2
5      Authorities                                                   4
6      Responsibilities                                              5
7      Program Administration                                        6
8      Inquiries                                                     8

1.    PURPOSE

      This regulation establishes requirements for Department of Agriculture (USDA) agencies
      to develop and implement an Employee Assistance Program (EAP).

2.    SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS

      a.      This regulation supersedes Departmental Regulation (DR) 4430-792-1 dated
              August 1, 2003.

      b.      The principal changes to DR 4430-792-1 are as follows:

              (1)   Changed responsibilities to reflect current duties due to reorganization.

              (2)   Changed the definition of EAP to a more inclusive program that emphasizes
                    both prevention and intervention to enhance organizational productivity.

              (3)   Deleted the restriction on agencies not being authorized to use appropriated
                    funds to meet personal needs of family members (household members
                    residing in the home of the employee including authorized same-sex
                    domestic partners) as family members are authorized to utilize the EAP
                    if their problems are related to the employee’s problems for drug and
                    alcohol abuse even though the employee is not a client of the EAP.
                    However, family members of Federal employees may not participate in any
                other EAP health service programs, as the use of appropriated funds for
                family members is not authorized by Title 5 United States Code (U.S.C. §
                7901). Clarified the definition of a family member

          (4)   Clarified that failure of an employee to voluntarily participate in counseling
                or in a rehabilitative program at the informal referral of a supervisor cannot
                be used as a basis for taking disciplinary action except in cases of drug use
                and/or refusal to take a drug test.

     c.   Supplementation: Agencies and staff offices may supplement this directive with
          prior approval of the Director, OHRM. Supplemental regulations issued by
          agencies or staff offices may not conflict with the contents of this directive.
          Agencies and staff offices must provide copies of any supplemental regulations to
          employees as required.

3.   POLICY

     a.   Agencies must provide appropriate programs and services to employees whose
          emotional, personal, alcohol, and/or drug problems may affect their work
          performance or conduct.

     b.   Agencies may join a consortium, negotiate their own contracts, join existing EAP
          agreements, or provide in-house counseling which meets the requirements of Title
          5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 792. The Office of Human Resources
          Management (OHRM) Employee Relations Office will assist agencies in program
          development.

     c.   To the extent feasible, and when it will enhance the performance of the
          employee, agencies are encouraged to extend these services to families of
          employees. Family members whose problems are related to the employee’s
          problems for drug and alcohol abuse may receive service even though the
          employee is not a client of the EAP as authorized by 5 U.S.C. § 7361-7362.
          However, family members of Federal employees may not participate in any other
          EAP health service programs, as the use of appropriated funds for family
          members is not authorized (5 U.S.C. § 7901).         .

4.   DEFINITIONS

     a.   EAP is a worksite based program designed to assist in the identification and
          resolution of work-related and non-work-related productivity problems
          associated with employees impaired by personal concerns including, but not
          limited to, health, marital, family, financial, alcohol, drug, legal, emotional, or
          other personal concerns which may adversely affect employee job performance.
          The specific core activities of EAPs include:




                                            2
     (1) Services for individuals (such as identification and resolution of job-
         performance issues related to an employee’s personal concerns, and
         assessment, referral, and follow-up);

     (2) Services for managers and supervisors (such as assistance in referring
         employees to the EAP, supervisor training, and management consulting);

     (3) Services for organizations (such as violence prevention/crisis
         management, group interventions, and employee orientation); and

     (4) Administrative services (such as the development of EAP policies and
         procedures, outreach, evaluation, and referral resources development).

b.   EAP Consortium is a group of federal agencies contracting with one agency or
     contractor to provide employee assistance services.

c.   EAP Coordinator is the individual designated by USDA Mission Area/Agency
     Heads and Staff Office Directors as responsible for implementing and operating
     the EAP within their agency.

d.   EAP member is an employee covered under an Agency EAP.

e.   Employee is an individual meeting the criteria described in 5 U.S.C. 2105.

f.   Extending services to families means allowing counseling of family members
     (including same-sex domestic partners as defined by OPM memorandum in
     paragraph 5j) where the treatment or counseling concerns the alcohol, and/or
     drug problems of the employee himself/herself, and for employees where the
     counseling relates to the alcohol, and/or drug problems of the family member.
     The family members are covered under the contract the Agency/Mission Area
     enters into with the EAP provider.

     Family members are:

     (1)   Spouse – legally married spouse of an EAP member.

     (2)   Children – dependents of the EAP member.

     (3)   Domestic partner – partner who resides in the home of an EAP member.

     (4)   Household members – any legal dependent regardless of home address, or
           significant other living in the employee’s household.

     (5) Student – dependent children of the EAP member who attend school but do
         not reside with the eligible EAP member.



                                      3
5.   AUTHORITIES

     a.   Comptroller General (CG) Decision B-187074, dated November 7, 1977, holds
          that under 5 U.S.C. 7901, an agency may expend appropriated funds for the
          procurement of diagnostic and preventive psychological counseling services.
          Such services should not include treatment, but rather problem identification,
          referral for treatment or rehabilitation and follow-up to aid an employee in
          effective readjustment on the job during and after treatment.

     b.   Public Law 99-570 (5 U.S.C. §§7361-7362), The Federal Employee Substance
          Abuse Education and Treatment Act of 1986, and Title 5 Code of Federal
          Regulations (CFR) Part 792, requires Federal agencies to establish appropriate
          prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation programs and services for alcohol and
          drug abuse problems for Federal civilian employees.

     c.   5 U.S.C § 7901 authorizes the head of an agency to establish health services
          programs for employees, also forms the basis for expanding counseling programs
          from those dealing solely with substance abuse to broad range programs which
          provide counseling for other personal problems, e.g., family, financial, marital,
          etc.

     d.   5 U.S.C. §§ 7361-7362 authorized agencies to provide counseling services, to the
          extent feasible, to family members of employees who have alcohol and drug
          problems, and to employees with family members who have substance abuse
          problems.

     e.   Executive Order 12564 dated September 15, 1986, “Drug-Free Federal
          Workplace,” established the goal of a Drug-Free Workplace through education
          and training programs, drug testing programs, and employee assistance programs.

     f.   Department of Agriculture’s Plan for a Drug Free Workplace certified to
          Congress by the Department of Health and Human Services on April 27, 1988, as
          meeting the requirements of Public Law 100-71 (codified at 5 U.S.C. Section
          7301), and Executive Order 12564 on Drug-Free Workplace Programs. The
          Secretary of Agriculture and the Department of Health and Human Services have
          approved all subsequent changes and modifications made to the 1988 certified
          plan.

     g.   42 CFR Part 2, Confidentiality of Alcohol and Drug Abuse Patient Record,
          prohibits disclosure of information without the patient’s written consent.

     h.   5 U.S.C. 552a establishes requirements governing the maintenance of records by
          agencies pertaining to individuals and access to these records by the individual(s)
          to whom they pertain.




                                           4
     i.   Presidential Memorandum, dated June 2, 2010,-“Extension of Benefits to Same-
          Sex Domestic Partners of Federal Employees.”

     j.   Guidance in memorandum from the Director of OPM dated June 2, 2010 –
          “Implementation of the President’s Memorandum Regarding Extension of
          Benefits to Same-Sex Domestic Partners of Federal Employees.”

6.   RESPONSIBILITIES

     a.   The Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA) will: Advise the Secretary of
          Agriculture, Mission Area/Agency Heads, and Staff Office Directors in the
          development and implementation of policies, programs, and oversight of EAPs.

     b.   The Director, Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM) will:

          (1)   Advise the ASA in planning, developing, and implementing policies,
                programs, and systems to manage EAPs; and,

          (2)   Provide and interpret USDA policies and standards for EAPs.

     c.   The Employee Relations Officer, OHRM will:

          (1)   Provide oversight of EAPs; and,

          (2)   Provide agency officials with technical assistance and consultative
                services for complex EAP issues.

     d.   The Mission Area/Agency Heads/Staff Office Directors will:

          (1)   Designate an EAP coordinator to coordinate the program with both external
                sources and internal USDA offices;

          (2)   Issue policy statements and implementing instructions;

          (3)   Develop and maintain programs for short-term counseling (not to exceed
                6 to 8 visits) and/or referral services for employees with personal (e.g.,
                emotional, financial, legal), alcohol, and/or drug abuse problems;

          (4)   Provide for education and awareness programs to inform employees of the
                counseling and referral services and to emphasize prevention, early
                intervention, and treatment; and,

          (5)   Provide for training to help managers and supervisors recognize (NOT
                diagnose) early signs of potential problems, which could involve
                alcohol/drug abuse, and to understand confrontation and referral procedures.




                                            5
7.   PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION

     a.   Employee Participation:

          (1)   Employees may voluntarily participate in EAP or their supervisor may refer
                them for counseling on personal, alcohol, and/or drug problems that
                adversely affect work performance or conduct.

          (2)   Except as otherwise provided in paragraph 7a(4)(b), failure to voluntarily
                participate in counseling or in a rehabilitative program at the referral of a
                supervisor cannot be used as the basis for taking disciplinary action against
                an employee.

          (3)   Employees who fail to improve their conduct or performance, after a
                referral to the EAP may have a conduct or performance-based action
                initiated against them.

          (4)   The EAP is not responsible for the implementation or operation of the
                USDA drug testing program. The EAP is there to provide counseling and
                assistance as follows:

                (a)   Employees who use illegal drugs may self-refer to the EAP under the
                      Safe Harbor provision in the USDA Plan for a Drug Free Workplace.
                      This provision protects employees from disciplinary actions that may
                      otherwise be taken against employees found to be using drugs
                      illegally. In order to qualify for this provision, the employee must:
                      voluntarily admit their drug use to appropriate supervisors or
                      management officials before being identified through other means;
                      obtains and completes counseling and rehabilitation through the EAP;
                      and thereafter refrains from illegal drug use. The Safe Harbor
                      provision does not protect employees from disciplinary actions and/or
                      random testing if they refuse to notify their supervisors that they are
                      seeking help for their drug problems.

                (b)   Employees with a verified positive result to a drug test will be referred
                      to the EAP. The EAP will then perform its normal functions of
                      counseling and assisting employees in dealing with the drug problem.
                      As provided by the Department’s Plan for a Drug-Free Workplace,
                      employees may be subject to disciplinary action, including removal
                      from service, for refusing to obtain counseling or rehabilitation after
                      having been found to use drugs.

          (5)   Costs associated with treatment (beyond the assessment sessions provided
                by the EAP counselor) are the responsibility of the employee. Employees
                can use their Federal employee health benefits plan for financial assistance
                with covered services.

                                            6
     (6)   Employees are on official duty when they meet with the EAP, provided that
           they obtain prior consent from their supervisor. The impact of the
           employee’s absence on the workplace will be considered by the supervisor
           in making this accommodation. In an emergency, supervisory approval
           may be obtained after using the EAP. The supervisor may allow the
           employee up to one hour (or more as necessitated by travel time) of
           excused absence for each counseling session during the assessment/referral
           phase. Confirmation of attendance will be provided by the EAP in
           accordance with confidentiality procedures in paragraph 7(b). If an
           employee does not want their supervisor to know of their attendance, they
           must arrange for appointments outside of normal duty hours or while on any
           leave except sick leave. Thereafter, absences during duty hours for
           rehabilitation or treatment at community resources must be charged
           to the appropriate leave category in accordance with law and leave
           regulations.

b.   Confidentiality: Given the personal nature of visits to the EAP, employees are
     naturally concerned about the privacy and confidentiality of information
     maintained by the EAP. When an employee comes to the EAP for assistance, the
     EAP staff will provide him/her with a written notice concerning the confidential
     nature of EAP records along with the conditions where information discussed in
     counseling may be disclosed. EAP client information and records are protected
     from disclosure under 5 U.S.C. § 552a, the Privacy Act of 1974. In addition,
     records of individuals with alcohol and drug issues are subject to extra
     restrictions, which are provided under 42 CFR, Part 2: “Confidentiality of
     Alcohol and Drug Abuse Patient Records” regulations. Depending on the
     location in which EAP services are provided and the professional credentials of
     the EAP counselor, additional protection of client information may be provided
     by state and professional association laws, regulations and procedures. Generally,
     these laws and regulations prohibit EAP staff from sharing any information
     about clients to anyone outside of the EAP, without the specific written consent of
     the client. The EAP maintains a Privacy Act System of Records Notice that
     details the procedures for maintaining the confidentiality of client information and
     records. Prior to any counseling (even telephonically which is only done in an
     emergency) confidentiality is discussed and agreed upon by the client.

c.   When can information about an employee’s participation in the EAP be
     disclosed?

     (1) Disclosure with consent: Obtain the employee’s written consent before
         releasing any information, except where disclosure without consent of the
         client is allowed (7c (2)). This applies to all releases, including those to
         supervisors, treatment facilities, and family members, without regard to the
         type of problem(s) the individual is experiencing.




                                       7
            (2) Disclosure without consent: Disclosure without consent is only permissible
                in a few specific instances, such as: To medical personnel in a medical
                emergency; In response to an order of a court of competent jurisdiction; To
                comply with Executive Order 12564, “Drug Free Federal Workplace.”

            Unauthorized release of any information covered under this provision could result
            in fines up to $5,000. Under certain circumstances, however, a counselor may
            disclose information without the patient’s written consent. For example, any
            instances of suspected child abuse and neglect may be reported to appropriate
            State or local authorities. Also, when a patient commits, or threatens to commit, a
            crime that would harm themselves or someone else, or cause substantial property
            damage, law enforcement personnel may be informed.

            Employees may be referred to the EAP by supervisors because of work
            performance and/or conduct issues. Information about an employee’s visit to the
            EAP will not be released to a supervisor without the employee’s written consent,
            regardless of the nature of the referral, except in very limited situations (e.g.,
            when an employee uses the EAP during work hours, the EAP will confirm that
            the employee attended an EAP session). Employees are not required to release
            information about their visits to the EAP to supervisors. When they choose to do
            so, they will sign a consent form that allows for the release of limited information.

     c.     Records: The Privacy Act (5 U.S.C. 552a) and confidentiality regulations (42
            CFR Part 2) provide guidelines for maintaining USDA EAP consortium and
            agency EAP records. These laws and regulations establish the circumstances
            justifying release of these records. Employees receiving counseling services must
            receive a copy of the EAP provider Privacy Act Statement pertaining to EAP
            records. An example of the information required in the Privacy Act Statement
            and confidentiality guidelines is provided in Appendix A.

            Note: The same confidentiality and privacy guidelines cover employee family
            members who are authorized to utilize the EAP services.

8.   INQUIRIES

     Direct all inquiries to the Office of Human Resources Management, Employee Relations
     Office, Room 302W Whitten Federal Building, 1400 Independence Ave. SW,
     Washington, D.C. 20250; telephone number (202) 720-3585.

                                           -END-




                                              8
                                          APPENDIX A

   PRIVACY ACT STATEMENT and CONFIDENTIALITY INFORMATION (EXAMPLE)

We know it is a difficult decision to see an EAP counselor for the first time. Employees are
sometimes concerned about the privacy of what they say. We would like to assure you that your
EAP record is confidential and explain some of the laws and regulations that protect it. Your
EAP counselors are committed to upholding the highest professional standards in maintaining
your privacy.

The principal purpose of maintaining information about you is to document your assessment,
intervention and follow-up activities. The information is also used to monitor your progress. The
information provided by you is voluntary. Limited information, however, may impact the EAP
counselor's ability to provide full services.

The Privacy Act covers all EAP records. In addition, EAP records of clients with alcohol and
drug problems are subject to extra restrictions described in the "Confidentiality of Alcohol and
Drug Abuse Patient Records" regulations. In some cases, EAP records may also be subject to the
Privacy rule under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). Generally,
these laws and regulations prohibit EAP staff from sharing any information about you outside the
EAP.

There are some situations, however, when information about you can be released. We are
required by law and regulation to inform you about these situations. We can disclose
information:

           There are three types of disclosure:
               a Disclosure with consent - employee's written consent is obtained before any
                 information is released, except where disclosure without the consent of the
                 client is allowed.
               b Disclosure without consent - only permissible in a few instances, such as the
                 following:

                  (1)   to medical personnel in a medical emergency or when the disclosure is
                        made in a non-identifiable form to qualified personnel for research,
                        audit or program evaluation;
                  (2)   in response to an order of a court of competent jurisdiction;
                  (3)   to comply with Executive Order 12564, "Drug Free Federal
                        Workplace";
                  (4)   an EAP is required by law to report incidents of suspected child abuse
                        and neglect (in some States, elder and spouse abuse) to the appropriate
                        State and local authorities;
                  (5)   an EAP may make a disclosure to appropriate individuals, such as law
                        enforcement authorities and persons being threatened, if the client has


                                                  A-1
                         committed, or threatens to commit, a crime that would physically harm
                         someone. This can be done only if the disclosure does not identify the
                         EAP client as an alcoholic or drug abuser;
                   (6)   to a private firm, individual, or group providing EAP functions
                         contractually. The contractor shall be required to maintain all
                         confidentiality safeguards and surrender these records to the EAP
                         Administrator at the time of contract termination;

                   (7)   when your direct supervisor needs to confirm that you have made or
                         kept EAP appointments during regular duty hours or sick leave (no
                         other information will be given without proper consent); and

                   (8) if you are tested and receive a verified positive drug test result (under the
                       Drug Free Workplace Program), in which case your direct supervisor
                       must be informed.

               c Secondary disclosure - any information disclosed with the employee's consent
                 must be accompanied by a statement that prohibits further disclosure unless
                 the consent expressly permits further disclosures.
           Clients of the EAP have the right to access their own EAP records.
           All EAP records are the property of the Federal department or agency sponsoring the
           program.


I understand that the initial EAP assessment is free of charge. If short-term counseling is
determined to be clinically appropriate, the EAP counselor or local affiliate (if applicable) will
also provide this service at no cost up to the maximum allowed by their contract with USDA.
However, I acknowledge and understand that the EAP contractor or its affiliates are not
responsible for the treatment costs and/or services for which I may be referred beyond the local
EAP counselor or local affiliate counselor. I understand that it is my sole responsibility to pay
for all such services including all charges not covered by insurance plans.

I have read the foregoing Privacy Act Statement and Confidentiality Information, and I
understand and agree to it.


Client Name (Printed)


Client Signature                                                            Date


EAP Counselor                                                               Date


                                                A-2
