                             U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                   WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                    NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                            DR 4600-003
                                                                    DATE:
 SUBJECT: USDA Insider Risk Program                                 May 14, 2026
                                                                    EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of Homeland Security
                                                                    May 14, 2031



Section                                                                                         Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                       1
2.   Scope                                                                                         1
3.   Special Instructions/Cancellation                                                             2
4.   Background                                                                                    2
5.   Policy                                                                                        2
6.   Committee and Working Groups                                                                  5
7.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                                    6
8.   Inquiries                                                                                    15

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                          A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                         B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                          C-1
Appendix D – Insider Risk Program-Potential Risk Indicators                                      D-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of Agriculture
     (USDA) policy for the Insider Risk Program.


2. SCOPE

     This DR applies to all USDA Federal employees and any non-Federal individuals who
     perform duties in partnership with or on behalf of USDA under any type of arrangement,
     such as a consultant, contractor, cooperator, collaborator, visiting scientist, affiliate, advisor,
     fellow, retired annuitant, volunteer, emeritus professor, student, or intern.
3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  This DR supersedes DR 4600-003, USDA Defensive Counterintelligence and Insider Threat
  Programs, dated July 12, 2021. This policy is effective upon publication and will remain in
  effect until it is superseded or it expires.


4. BACKGROUND

  As a result of Executive Order (E.O.) 13587, Structural Reforms to Improve the Security of
  Classified Networks and the Responsible Sharing and Safeguarding of Classified
  Information, dated October 7, 2011; and the Presidential Memorandum, National Insider
  Threat Policy and Minimum Standards for Executive Branch Insider Threat Programs, dated
  November 21, 2012, all executive branch departments and agencies are mandated to develop
  and implement a program with the primary mission of preventing, deterring, and detecting
  compromises of classified information by insiders.

  The expanding and evolving threat landscape necessitates our efforts to address the full scope
  of insider risks, including compromises of sensitive, but unclassified, information that
  jeopardizes our national and economic security.

  Insiders, defined as those who have authorized access to federal resources and assets, pose
  the risks of espionage, terrorism, extremism, unauthorized disclosure, fraud, theft, sabotage,
  acts of harm to self or others, and workplace violence.

  In addition, USDA must strengthen protection of its Research and Development (R&D)
  against foreign government interference and exploitation by controlling access to, and
  utilization of, our research facilities and information in accordance with National Security
  Presidential Memorandum (NSPM) 33, Supported Research and Development National
  Security Policy, dated January 14, 2021, the CHIPS and Science Act, dated August 9, 2022,
  the National Farm Security Action Plan, dated July 8, 2025, and the America First
  Memorandum for USDA Arrangements and Research Security, issued July 8, 2025.


5. POLICY

  The Office of Homeland Security (OHS) Insider Risk Program acts as a central hub to detect,
  deter, and mitigate potential insider risks. The program ingests reported concerns and
  utilizes interdisciplinary teams to triage each case and determine the best course of action,
  such as referrals for administrative action or criminal investigation.

  a.   Critical program requirements include:

       (1) Monitoring: Continuous, authorized monitoring of user activity on networks and
           systems to detect anomalies and potential insider risks, to include incorporating
           User Activity Monitoring (UAM) and communication compliance tools on the



                                                 2
         unclassified network with the support of the Office of the Chief Information Officer
         (OCIO);

     (2) Information Analysis & Referral: Analyzing, reporting, and referring potential
         insider risks to the appropriate party for action;

     (3) Employee Awareness & Training: Providing employees with initial and annual
         insider risk awareness training;

     (4) Access to Information: Gathering and analyzing information relevant to insider
         risks from all sources, including various departments covering security, human
         resources, ethics, legal, and information assurance, and publicly available electronic
         information (PAEI); and

     (5) Compliance & Oversight: Collaboration and assessment of the program’s policies,
         procedures, effectiveness, and legal compliance.

b.   OHS provides an electronic reporting capability for individuals to report potential risk
     indicators (PRI) via the Insider Risk Program intranet page at Report a Potential Insider
     Risk. As an alternative method, concerns may be sent to insider@usda.gov.

c.   All Federal records maintained by the Insider Risk Program will be restricted to
     personnel who need such information to perform their authorized functions and act on
     insider risk referrals. Specific non-disclosure agreements (NDA) are required by all
     parties involved in conducting inquiries or analyzing results.

d.   The Insider Risk Program works with the OHS Personnel and Document Security
     Division (PDSD) to review continuous vetting (CV) alerts that may contain insider risk
     concerns.

e.   The Insider Risk Program works with PDSD to review information reported by
     individuals occupying sensitive positions or access to classified information in
     accordance with the Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 3, Reporting
     Requirements for Personnel with Access to Classified Information or Who Hold a
     Sensitive Position, or its successor, as it related to potential insider risks.

f.   The Insider Risk Program works with Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Personnel
     Security offices to review self-reported information from the Federal workforce in
     accordance with “Reporting Requirements for the Continuous Vetting Trusted
     Workforce” under the Federal Personnel Vetting Management Standards (PVMS), dated
     July 23, 2024, or its successor, as it relates to potential insider risks.

g.   OHS consults with the Departmental Records Officer, the General Counsel, Civil Rights
     Directors, Labor Relations Officers, and the Departmental Chief Privacy Officer to
     ensure any legal, privacy, civil rights, or civil liberties issues (including use and




                                               3
     inappropriate dissemination of personally identifiable information (PII)) are
     appropriately addressed.

h.   OHS performs self-assessments in compliance with Federal insider risk-related policies
     and standards.

i.   OHS will enable independent assessments, in accordance with Section 2.1(d) of E.O.
     13587, Structural Reforms to Improve the Security Classified Networks and the
     Responsible Sharing and Safeguarding of Classified Information, of compliance with
     established insider threat policy, procedures, and standards.

j.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will ensure non-United States (U.S)
     Persons visiting or on an arrangement with USDA, including those working from co-
     owned spaces or remotely, are reported to OHS for screening in accordance with DR
     4600-004, Foreign Visits and Assignments Vetting.

k.   The Insider Risk Program provides mandatory insider risk awareness training on an
     initial orientation and annual basis. This training is reinforced through periodic
     messaging campaigns to individuals holding sensitive positions (with or without a
     security clearance) and personnel conducting Science and Technology (S&T) activities
     or participating in the process of allocating Federal R&D funding. The required training
     audience across the S&T enterprise will vary by agency. Personnel will be tasked who
     are in positions deemed vulnerable to insider risk concerns, and those in positions whose
     duties support identifying potential insider risk indicators. The training will address the
     following topics:

     (1) The importance of detecting potential insider risks and reporting suspected activity
         to the Insider Risk Program;

     (2) Methodologies of adversaries to recruit trusted insiders; and

     (3) PRI and how to report to the Insider Risk Program.

l.   OHS complies with any assessment or reporting requirements on program
     implementation and status as set by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence
     (ODNI) or other authority.

m. Records are retained in accordance with the USDA Records Control Schedules (RCS)
   and General Records Schedules (GRS) from the National Archives and Records
   Administration (NARA).

n.   OHS immediately advises the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) of any information,
     regardless of origin, that indicates that classified information is being, or may have been,
     disclosed in an unauthorized manner to a foreign power or agent of a foreign power as
     required by Public Law (P.L.) 103-359, Section 811, Extract from Intelligence
     Authorization Act of Fiscal Year 1995, Coordination of Counterintelligence Activities.



                                                4
6. COMMITTEE AND WORKING GROUPS

  a.   Senior Steering Committee.

       (1) Senior-level officials from multidisciplinary programs will be appointed by the
           appropriate agency and staff office Heads to a Senior Steering Committee (the
           “Committee”), chaired by the OHS Senior Official. Members of the Committee
           represent staff offices with a role in the receipt and retention of information relating
           to the background, conduct, and activities of USDA employees, contractors, and
           volunteers. This cross-functional committee will provide strategic advice and
           facilitate information sharing to address potential counterintelligence (CI) threats or
           insider risk inquiries. The Committee members will be from the following
           organizational components, with additional members added from other Mission
           Areas, agencies, and staff offices as needed to address specific inquiries:

           (a) Director of OHS, serving as the Senior Steering Committee Chair;

           (b) Office of Contracting and Procurement (OCP);

           (c) Office of Ethics (OE);

           (d) Office of Human Resource Management (OHRM);

           (e) Office of Safety, Security, and Protection (OSSP);

           (f) Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights (OASCR);

           (g) Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO);

           (h) Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO);

           (i) Office of the Chief Scientist (OCS);

           (j) Office of the General Counsel (OGC); and

           (k) Office of the Inspector General (OIG).

       (2) OIG will play an advisory role and only for the purpose of engaging in proper
           sharing of information with the Department, as appropriate, to ensure that both OIG
           and the Department can engage in their respective roles regarding potential insider
           risks. The OIG, however, will not be part of the decision-making process for
           determining the program operating steps the Department takes with respect to the
           related Departmental programs.




                                                  5
  b.   Working Groups.

       (1) Working groups will be formed for specific purposes and durations, and with
           specific goals and objectives. These working groups will report to the Insider Risk
           Program Manager and share information with the Senior Steering Committee
           members.

       (2) The working group members should possess a minimum of a Secret (S) level
           security clearance, and up to Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information
           (TS/SCI) access to provide the full scope of the information or designate someone
           from their agency with the appropriate security clearance based on the situational
           needs of an inquiry or project. Exceptions are permitted as needed by the Senior
           Official. Members without a security clearance will be restricted from classified
           discussions and information.


7. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Secretary of Agriculture delegates authority to the Director of OHS, per the Code of
       Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 7, § 2.95, Director, Office of Homeland Security, to
       establish, direct, and maintain an Insider Risk Program at USDA.

  b.   The Director, OHS, will:

       (1) Serve as the Senior Official responsible for the overall management and oversight
           of the Insider Risk Program;

       (2) Chair the Senior Steering Committee;

       (3) Provide resource recommendations to the Secretary of Agriculture;

       (4) Delegate the authority to the Insider Risk Program Manager (PM) to carry out daily
           duties and policies for the implementation of the Insider Risk Program consistent
           with guidance and standards developed by the National Insider Threat Task Force
           (NITTF);

       (5) Ensure that OHS offices, including PDSD and the National Security Division
           (NSD), provides Insider Risk Program personnel with regular, timely, and, where
           possible, electronic access to information necessary to identify, analyze, and resolve
           insider risk matters including, but not limited to, all information contained in
           personnel security files, background investigation reports and alerts, security
           incidents and violations records, and any self-reported information, such as those
           items reported under SEAD 3, CV, and for SCI holders;




                                                 6
(6) Maintain Service Level Agreements (SLA) or Memoranda of Agreement (MOA)
    with the providers of classified network access for user monitoring on USDA user
    accounts to detect activity indicative of an insider risk behavior;

(7) Facilitate oversight reviews to ensure compliance with national and Departmental
    insider risk policies and applicable legal, privacy, and civil liberty protections by:

    (a) Performing self-assessments of compliance with insider risk policies and
        standards;

    (b) Establishing an external Oversight Review Panel (the “Panel”) with OGC,
        OIG, and civil liberties and privacy officials (excluding personnel associated
        with the Insider Risk Program and members of the Senior Steering Committee)
        to conduct annual independent oversight reviews. The oversight process will
        be formalized with written documentation; and

    (c) Enabling independent assessments, in accordance with Section 2.1(d) of E.O.
        13587, of compliance with established insider risk policy and standards by
        providing information and access to personnel of the NITTF or other Federal
        partners.

(8) Provide an annual report through the Assistant Secretary for Administration for the
    Secretary on the status of the Insider Risk Program, including documented results of
    the program’s accomplishments, resources allocated, risks identified, program
    goals, impediments, and challenges;

(9) Collaborate with the General Counsel, the Departmental Chief Privacy Officer, the
    Departmental Records Officer, Labor Relations Officer, and the Assistant Secretary
    for Civil Rights (ASCR) to ensure that all program activities are conducted in
    accordance with applicable laws, regulations, whistleblower protections, civil
    liberties safeguards, and privacy policies;

(10) Establish oversight mechanisms or procedures to ensure proper handling and use of
     records and data, and ensure that access to such records and data is restricted to
     personnel who are authorized to use the information to perform their assigned
     functions;

(11) Establish guidelines and procedures as required by E.O. 13587 and in accordance
     with NARA and USDA records management requirements for the retention of
     records and documents necessary to document the Department’s activities, per:

    (a) GRS 5.6, Security Management Records, or its successor;

    (b) DR 3080-001, Records Management, August 16, 2016;




                                           7
         (c) DR 3090-001, Litigation Retention Policy for Documentary Materials
             including Electronically Stored Information, May 28, 2008; and

         (d) DR 3099-001, Records Management Policy for Departing Employees,
             Contractors, Volunteers, and Political Appointees, July 2, 2012.

     (12) Coordinate referrals to the FBI for violations of P.L. 103-359, § 811, with OGC and
          OIG; and

     (13) Serve as the USDA senior liaison to the Intelligence Community (IC) for all insider
          risk-related activities.

c.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Heads will:

     (1) Submit information on all non-U.S. Persons working with or visiting USDA to
         OHS for screening before allowing logical or physical access, in accordance with
         DR 4600-004, Foreign Visits and Assignments Vetting, May 27, 2021, or its
         successor;

     (2) Support OHS in ensuring insider risk awareness training requirements are met by
         impacted personnel; and

     (3) Proactively and expeditiously refer identified PRI to the Insider Risk Program at
         Insider@usda.gov. See Appendix D of this DR, Insider Risk Program-Potential
         Risk Indicators.

d.   Chiefs of Personnel Security Offices and Personnel Security Adjudicators will:

     (1) Provide timely, and where possible, electronic access to relevant Personnel Security
         databases and files, such as personnel security files, standard forms, background
         investigation reports, position designation records, contract statements of work, and
         self-reported information, when requested and necessary for the purpose of
         identifying and assessing insider risk;

     (2) Refer all closed investigations that are identified as a field referral on the Case
         Closing Transmittal (CCT) by the Defense Counterintelligence and Security
         Agency (DCSA), Investigations Threat Operations Group (ITOG), or its successor,
         to the Insider Risk Program for review prior to final adjudication; and

     (3) Proactively and expeditiously refer identified PRI to the Insider Risk Program at
         insider@usda.gov for review prior to making an adjudicative decision. See
         Appendix D, Insider Risk Program-Potential Risk Indicators.

e.   Human Resources Officers will:




                                              8
     (1) Identify a primary and alternate member to represent OHRM on the Senior Steering
         Committee and, as applicable, to working groups;

     (2) Provide regular, timely, and where possible, electronic access to all relevant Human
         Resources (HR) databases and files, such as personnel files, personnel security files,
         position designation records, position descriptions, payroll and voucher files,
         outside work and activities requests, performance appraisals, disciplinary action
         files, misconduct investigations, reported workplace violence incidents, drug
         testing, and personal contact records, that may be necessary to identify, analyze,
         and resolve insider risk matters; and

     (3) Proactively and expeditiously refer identified PRI to the Insider Risk Program at
         Insider@usda.gov. See Appendix D, Insider Risk Program-Potential Risk
         Indicators.

f.   The Inspector General (IG) will:

     (1) Identify a primary and alternate member to represent OIG as a member of the
         Senior Steering Committee and, as applicable, to working groups;

     (2) Provide regular, timely access to information in OIG’s investigative files that the IG
         determines are relevant and necessary to identify, analyze, and resolve insider risk
         matters in accordance with the information sharing Memorandum of Understanding
         (MOU) between OHS and OIG, signed March 9, 2026;

     (3) Conduct preliminary investigative actions on referrals sent from the Insider Risk
         Program and provide the resulting decisions (acceptance for investigation,
         declination, or referral to another component for administrative action, such as OE);
         and

     (4) Proactively and expeditiously refer identified PRI to the Insider Risk Program at
         Insider@usda.gov. See Appendix D, Insider Risk Program-Potential Risk
         Indicators.

g.   The Chief Information Officer (CIO) will:

     (1) Identify a primary and alternate member to represent OCIO as a member of the
         Senior Steering Committee and, as applicable, to working groups;

     (2) Implement and support insider risk-related network monitoring tools, such as the
         built-in Microsoft Insider Risk Management (IRM) and Communication
         Compliance (CC) solutions (or their successors), on the unclassified network in
         accordance with the MOU between OHS and OCIO signed August 20, 2025. As
         the owner and operator of the USDA unclassified network, the implementation of
         IRM and CC, or their successors, is highly reliant on OCIO;




                                               9
(3) Identify primary and alternate OCIO personnel who will work with the Insider Risk
    Program Manager to assign and manage user roles (IRM Admins, Analysts,
    Investigators, Auditors, and Approvers) in IRM, or its successor, to designated OHS
    staff;

(4) Work with the Insider Risk Program Manager to configure system policies and
    settings in IRM and CC, or their successors, to support criteria (keyword and
    triggers) from OHS, to identify potential insider risk and CI concerns;

(5) Provide regular, timely, and if possible, electronic access to all relevant unclassified
    network information including personnel usernames and aliases, levels of network
    access, audit data, unauthorized use of removable media, print logs, email and
    internet activity, login activity, missing or failure to return government-furnished
    equipment incidents, repetitive requests for or abused use of login exemptions,
    unauthorized use of remote access tools, and other data that may be necessary to
    identify, analyze, and resolve insider risk matters;

(6) To protect against cyberespionage by Foreign Intelligence Entities (FIE), ensure all
    appropriate unclassified network systems are compliant with the following:

    (a) The Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA);

    (b) Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130, Managing
        Information as a Strategic Resource; and

    (c) National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) guidance.

(7) Ensure the protection of privacy and civil liberties remains imperative and a key
    element of all activities, including network monitoring, using pseudonymization,
    role-based access controls, admin explicit opt-in controls, audit logs, and other
    tools;

(8) Ensure network banners provide sufficient legal framework for the monitoring of
    user activity and subsequent Departmental actions because of such monitoring,
    including language advising that:

    (a) The network, information, and records are owned by the U.S. Government;

    (b) The user understands there is no expectation of privacy on the network;

    (c) The user is aware of, and consents to, monitoring; and

    (d) Improper use may result in the Government taking administrative, civil, or
        criminal action.




                                          10
     (9) Ensure personnel follow the guidance from DR 3580-005, Securing Client Devices
         for International Travel, to protect against foreign threats to the USDA information
         technology (IT) architecture; and

     (10) Proactively and expeditiously refer identified PRI to the Insider Risk Program at
          insider@usda.gov. See Appendix D, Insider Risk Program-Potential Risk
          Indicators.

h.   The ASCR will:

     (1) Identify a primary and alternate member to represent OASCR as a member of the
         Senior Steering Committee and, as applicable, to working groups; and

     (2) Advise on applicable civil liberty laws and regulations.

i.   The General Counsel will:

     (1) Identify a primary and alternate member to represent OGC as a member of the
         Senior Steering Committee and, as applicable, to working groups;

     (2) Participate in legal forums hosted by the NITTF and other Federal partners; and

     (3) Provide guidance and assistance to ensure the Department’s compliance with
         applicable laws and whistleblower protections.

j.   The Director, OSSP, and Physical Security Specialists will:

     (1) Identify a primary and alternate member to represent OSSP as a member of the
         Senior Steering Committee and, as applicable, to working groups;

     (2) Provide regular, timely, and if possible, electronic access to all relevant OSSP
         databases and files including credential records and pictures (to assist in identity
         verification), facility access records, physical security assessments, workplace
         violence records, and hotline complaints that may be necessary to identify, analyze,
         and resolve insider risk matters;

     (3) Obtain notifications from OCIO on newly disabled non-Federal employee IT
         accounts to ensure badges are deactivated in a timely manner;

     (4) Ensure badges are recovered from separating employees and non-Federal
         employees and destroyed, in accordance with NIST Federal Information Processing
         Standards Publication (FIPS PUB) 201-3, Personal Identity Verification (PIV) of
         Federal Employees and Contractors; and




                                              11
     (5) Proactively and expeditiously refer identified PRI to the Insider Risk Program at
         insider@usda.gov. See Appendix D, Insider Risk Program-Potential Risk
         Indicators.

k.   The Office of Ethics Directors and Ethics Program Advisors will:

     (1) Identify a primary and alternate member to represent OE as a member of the Senior
         Steering Committee and, as applicable, to working groups;

     (2) Provide regular, timely, and if possible, electronic access to all relevant OE files
         including but not limited to financial disclosures, reports of outside activities,
         reports of potential conflict of interest or conflict of commitment, or any other
         identified information reported to OE that may be necessary to identify, analyze,
         and resolve insider risk matters;

     (3) Report any patterns of individuals who fail to self-report outside activities or other
         required ethics-reportable information to the Insider Risk Program;

     (4) Identify any potential conflict of interest or commitment to the Department through
         foreign collaboration precluding unwitting participation in foreign government-
         sponsored talent recruitment programs (FTRP);

     (5) Advise on applicable ethics laws and regulations; and

     (6) Proactively and expeditiously refer identified PRI to the Insider Risk Program at
         Insider@usda.gov. See Appendix D, Insider Risk Program-Potential Risk
         Indicators.

l.   The Chief Financial Officer (CFO) will:

     (1) Identify a primary and alternate member to represent OCFO as a member of the
         Senior Steering Committee and, as applicable, to working groups;

     (2) Provide regular, timely, and if possible, electronic access to all relevant OCFO
         databases and files including, but not limited to, travel card records, purchase card
         records, wage garnishments, incidents of misuse, and other financial information
         that may be necessary to identify, analyze, and resolve insider risk matters; and

     (3) Proactively and expeditiously refer identified PRI to the Insider Risk Program at
         insider@usda.gov. See Appendix D, Insider Risk Program-Potential Risk
         Indicators.

m. The Chief Privacy Officer will:

     (1) Identify a primary and alternate member to provide support to the Insider Risk
         Program, and, as applicable, to working groups;



                                               12
     (2) Ensure the program adheres to data protection laws to include guidance on Privacy
         Impact Assessments (PIAs) and review of UAM triggers for data minimization and
         safeguarding; and

     (3) Provide review and guidance to the Insider Risk Program to ensure that privacy,
         civil liberties, and constitutional requirements are protected in program policies and
         operations.

n.   The Director of the Office of Contracting and Procurement (OCP) will:

     (1) Identify a primary and alternate member to provide support to the Insider Risk
         Program, and, as applicable, to working groups;

     (2) Work with the Head of the Contracting Activity (HCA) to ensure all contractual
         agreements that are managed by the Chief of Contracting Office’s (COCO),
         Mission Area Senior Program Managers (MASPM), and Contracting Officer’s
         (CO) include enforceable safeguards to detect and mitigate insider risks; and

     (3) Proactively and expeditiously refer identified PRI to the Insider Risk Program at
         insider@usda.gov. See Appendix D, Insider Risk Program-Potential Risk
         Indicators.

o.   The Departmental Records Officer will:

     (1) Identify a primary and alternate member to provide support to the Insider Risk
         Program, and, as applicable, to working groups; and

     (2) Provide review and guidance to the Insider Risk Program to ensure that records
         management responsibilities are addressed in program policies and operations.

p.   The Senior Steering Committee will:

     (1) Serve as advisors to the Defensive CI and Insider Risk Programs in accordance with
         the committee charter;

     (2) Address resource and information needs of the Insider Risk Program to support case
         inquiries;

     (3) Designate members, as requested, for working groups; and

     (4) Provide a forum to address cross-organizational issues.

q.   The Director, OCS, will:




                                              13
     (1) Identify a primary and alternate member to represent OCS as a member of the
         Senior Steering Committee and, as applicable, to working groups;

     (2) Identify sensitive areas of research, including critical and emerging technologies, to
         ensure proper safeguarding of Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) or other
         protected information, and to support detection efforts by the Insider Risk Program;

     (3) Partner with OHS, OIG, and OE to establish policies or clarify existing policies,
         where applicable, that prohibit Federal personnel currently employed by their
         respective agencies who are also participants in the U.S. R&D enterprise from
         participating in FTRPs;

     (4) Ensure proper oversight and compliance against the exploitation of the USDA R&D
         enterprise by FTRPs;

     (5) Partner with OCIO to provide policy guidance regarding the maximum level of IT
         access non-U.S. Persons working with USDA should have as participants in the
         U.S. R&D enterprise;

     (6) Partner with OSSP to establish policies and processes to control and track access to
         and utilization of Federal Government research facilities; and

     (7) Proactively and expeditiously refer identified PRI to the Insider Risk Program at
         insider@usda.gov. See Appendix D, Insider Risk Program-Potential Risk
         Indicators.

r.   The Directors of the Principal Research and Statistical Mission Areas, agencies, and
     staff offices will:

     (1) Identify Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) to provide technical support in the review
         of scientific research information obtained during insider risk inquiries;

     (2) Identify and document sensitive research and other areas of CUI in their areas that
         require additional protections and monitoring from potential insider risks; and

     (3) Proactively and expeditiously refer identified PRI to the Insider Risk Program at
         insider@usda.gov. See Appendix D, Insider Risk Program-Potential Risk
         Indicators.

s.   USDA Federal Employees will:

     (1) Protect all classified national security information from improper disclosure and
         mishandling in accordance with DR 3440-001, USDA Classified National Security
         Information Program Manual, and E.O. 13556, Controlled Unclassified
         Information, November 4, 2010;




                                              14
      (2) Protect all sensitive information, assets, and activities from improper disclosure and
          mishandling, including CUI as identified by E.O. 13556;

      (3) Uphold Title 5 of the U.S. Code (U.S.C.), Part III, Subpart B, § 3331, Oath of
          Office, pledging to support and defend the U.S. Constitution against enemies, swear
          allegiance to the Constitution, and faithfully execute their duties; and DR 4070-735-
          001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007;

      (4) Place loyalty to the U.S. Constitution, laws, and ethical principles above private
          gain in accordance with 5 CFR § 2635.101(a), Basic Obligation of Public Service.
          Employees of the Federal Government may not accept employment, gifts, or
          compensation from any foreign government, including any entity which is owned or
          operated by the foreign government, which may include research institutions or
          universities. This prohibition is based on Article I, Section 9, Clause 8 of the U.S.
          Constitution (Foreign Emoluments) and DR 5200-003, Gift Acceptance Policy,
          January 4, 2018. Any questions regarding this policy should be directed to the
          USDA OE at daeo.ethics@usda.gov;

      (5) Refrain from participating in FTRP. If an employee is uncertain whether a
          proposed activity falls within the scope of an FTRP, they must follow ethics review
          procedures relevant to the activity proposed (e.g., outside activity, acceptability of
          gifts or donations). Any questions regarding this should be directed to USDA OE at
          daeo.ethics@usda.gov;

      (6) Report any information that could adversely affect their continued eligibility to hold
          a sensitive position to PDSD in accordance with SEAD 3;

      (7) Report to their servicing Personnel Security program when a life event changes
          information previously reported on their investigative form related to their personal
          history, activities, conduct, and behavior in accordance with reporting requirements
          for the entire workforce under PVMS;

      (8) Complete annual insider risk awareness training as required, commensurate with
          their position; and

      (9) Proactively and expeditiously refer identified PRI to the Insider Risk Program via
          our webpage or Insider@usda.gov. See Appendix D, Insider Risk Program-
          Potential Risk Indicators.


8. INQUIRIES

  Please address inquiries concerning this DR to OHS via email at Insider@usda.gov.


                                           -END-



                                               15
 1                                      APPENDIX A
 2
 3                          ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
 4
 5
 6   ASCR       Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights
 7   CC         Communication Compliance
 8   CDSE       Center for Development of Security Excellence
 9   CFO        Chief Financial Officer
10   CFR        Code of Federal Regulations
11   CI         Counterintelligence
12   CIO        Chief Information Officer
13   CNSS       Committee on National Security Systems
14   CNSSD      Committee on National Security Systems Directive
15   CNSSI      Committee on National Security Systems Instruction
16   CO         Contracting Officer
17   COCO       Chief of Contracting Office
18   CUI        Controlled Unclassified Information
19   CV         Continuous Vetting
20   DCSA       Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency
21   DOD        Department of Defense
22   DR         Departmental Regulation
23   E.O.       Executive Order
24   FBI        Federal Bureau of Investigation
25   FIE        Foreign Intelligence Entity
26   FIPS PUB   Federal Information Processing Standards Publication
27   FISMA      Federal Information Security Modernization Act
28   FTRP       Foreign Government-Sponsored Talent Recruitment Program
29   GRS        General Records Schedule
30   HCA        Head of the Contracting Activity
31   HR         Human Resources
32   IC         Intelligence Community
33   IRM        Insider Risk Management
34   IT         Information Technology
35   LPR        Legal Permanent Resident
36   MASPM      Mission Area Senior Program Managers
37   MOA        Memorandum of Agreement
38   NARA       National Archives and Records Administration
39   NCSC       National Counterintelligence and Security Center
40   NDA        Nondisclosure Agreement
41   NICCS      National Initiative for Cybersecurity Careers and Studies
42   NIST       National Institute of Standards and Technology
43   NITTF      National Insider Threat Task Force
44   NSD        National Security Division
45   NSPM       National Security Presidential Memorandum
46   NT50       Non-Title 50
47   OASCR      Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights

                                             A-1
 1   OCFO     Office of the Chief Financial Officer
 2   OCIO     Office of the Chief Information Officer
 3   OCP      Office of Contracting and Procurement
 4   OCS      Office of the Chief Scientist
 5   ODNI     Office of the Director of National Intelligence
 6   OE       Office of Ethics
 7   OGC      Office of the General Counsel
 8   OHRM     Office of Human Resource Management
 9   OHS      Office of Homeland Security
10   OIG      Office of the Inspector General
11   OMB      Office of Management and Budget
12   OPM      Office of Personnel Management
13   OSSP     Office of Safety, Security, and Protection
14   PAEI     Publicly Available Electronic Information
15   PDSD     Personnel and Document Security Division (OHS Component)
16   PII      Personally Identifiable Information
17   PIV      Personal Identity Verification
18   P.L.     Public Law
19   PM       Program Manager
20   PRI      Potential Risk Indicators
21   PVMS     Personnel Vetting Management Standards
22   R&D      Research and Development
23   RCS      Records Control Schedule
24   S        Secret
25   S&T      Science and Technology
26   SCI      Sensitive Compartmented Information
27   SCRM     Supply Chain Risk Management
28   SEAD     Security Executive Agent Directive
29   SLA      Service Level Agreement
30   SME      Subject Matter Expert
31   SSI      Sensitive Security Information
32   TS       Top Secret
33   UAM      User Activity Monitoring
34   U.S.     United States
35   U.S.C.   United States Code
36   USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                                          A-2
 1                                            APPENDIX B
 2
 3                                            DEFINITIONS
 4
 5
 6   Asset. A person, structure, facility, information, and records, information technology
 7   systems and resources, material, process, relationships, or reputation that has value.
 8   (Source: The National Initiative for Cybersecurity Careers and Studies (NICCS),
 9   Cybersecurity Glossary)
10
11   Classified Information. Information that requires protection against unauthorized disclosure
12   and that is marked to indicate its classified status when in documentary form. (Sources:
13   E.O. 13526, Classified National Security Information, or any successor order, E.O. 12951,
14   Release of Imagery Acquired by Space-Based National Intelligence Reconnaissance Systems,
15   or any successor order, or the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, codified at 42 U.S.C. § 2011)
16
17   Conflict of Commitment. “Conflict of commitment” or “conflicts of commitments” means a
18   situation in which an individual accepts or incurs conflicting obligations between or among
19   multiple employers or other entities. Many institutional policies define conflicts of
20   commitment as conflicting commitments of time and effort, including obligations to dedicate
21   time in excess of institutional or funding agency policies or commitments. Other types of
22   conflicting obligations, including obligations to share improperly information with, or to
23   withhold information from, an employer or funding agency, can also threaten research security
24   and integrity, and are an element of a broader concept of conflicts of commitment. (Source:
25   NSPM 33)
26
27   Conflict of Interest. The basic criminal conflict of interest statute prohibits Government
28   employees from participating personally and substantially in official matters where they have
29   a financial interest. In addition to their own interests, those of their spouse, minor child,
30   general partner, and certain other persons and organizations are attributed to them. Assets
31   and other interests, such as employment interests, may also present potential conflicts under
32   other criminal and civil statutes. In addition, “conflict of interest” or “conflicts of interest”
33   means a situation in which an individual, or the individual’s spouse or dependent children,
34   has a financial interest or financial relationship that could directly and significantly affect the
35   design, conduct, reporting, or funding of research. (Sources: 18 U.S.C. § 208, Acts affecting
36   a personal financial interest; 5 CFR § 2635, Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of
37   the Executive Branch; and NSPM 33)
38
39   Continuous Vetting (CV). The evolution of the continuous evaluation concept. CV is the
40   review of the background of an individual at any time to determine whether that individual
41   continues to meet applicable requirements. Vetting policies and procedures shall be
42   sustained by an enhanced risk-management approach that facilitates early detection of issues.
43   CV is a real-time review of an individual’s background at any time to determine if they
44   continue to meet their requirements. (Source: E.O. 13764, Amending the Civil Service Rules,
45   Executive Order 13488, and Executive Order 13467 To Modernize the Executive Branch-


                                                      B-1
 1   Wide Governance Structure and Processes for Security Clearances, Suitability and Fitness
 2   for Employment, and Credentialing, and Related Matters)
 3
 4   Counterintelligence (CI). Information gathered and activities conducted to identify, deceive,
 5   exploit, disrupt, or protect against espionage, other intelligence activities, sabotage, or
 6   assassinations conducted for or on behalf of foreign powers, organizations, or persons, or their
 7   agents, or international terrorist organizations or activities. (Source: E.O. 12333, United
 8   States Intelligence Activities, as amended)
 9
10   Digital Persistent Identifier. The term “digital persistent identifier” or “digital persistent
11   identifiers” means a unique digital identifier that permanently and unambiguously identifies a
12   digital object or an individual. (Source: NSPM 33)
13
14   Economic Espionage. Stealing of trade secret or proprietary information or appropriating,
15   taking, carrying away, or concealing, or by fraud, artifice, or deception obtaining, a trade
16   secret or proprietary information without the authorization of the owner of the trade secret or
17   proprietary information; copying, duplicating, downloading, uploading, destroying,
18   transmitting, delivering, sending, communicating, or conveying a trade secret or proprietary
19   information without the authorization of the owner; or knowingly receiving, buying, or
20   possessing a trade secret or proprietary information that has been stolen or appropriated,
21   obtained, or converted without the authorization of the owner. (Source: 18 U.S.C. § 1831,
22   Economic Espionage Act of 1996, as amended)
23
24   Emolument. An advantage, profit, or gain received as a result of one’s employment or one’s
25   holding of office. The purpose of the Foreign Emoluments Clause is to prevent corruption
26   and limit foreign influence on Federal officers. (Source: U.S. Constitution, Article I, Section
27   9, Clause 8)
28
29   Federal Records. Includes all recorded information, regardless of form or characteristics,
30   made or received by a Federal agency under Federal law or in connection with the transaction
31   of public business and preserved or appropriate for preservation by that agency, or its
32   legitimate successor, as evidence of the organization, functions, policies, decisions,
33   procedures, operations, or other activities of the United States Government or because of the
34   informational value of data in them. (44 U.S.C. 3301)
35
36   Foreign Government-Sponsored Talent Recruitment Program (FTRP). A FTRP is an effort
37   directly or indirectly organized, managed, or funded by a foreign government or institution to
38   recruit science and technology professionals or students (regardless of citizenship or national
39   origin, and whether having a full-time or part-time position). Some FTRPs operate with the
40   intent to import or otherwise acquire from abroad, sometimes through illicit means,
41   proprietary technology or software, unpublished data and methods, and intellectual property
42   to further the military modernization goals or economic goals of a foreign government.
43   Many, but not all, programs aim to incentivize the targeted individual to physically relocate
44   to the foreign state for the above purpose. Some programs allow for or encourage continued
45   employment at United States research facilities or receipt of Federal research funds while
46   concurrently working at or receiving compensation from a foreign institution, and some


                                                     B-2
 1   direct participants not to disclose their participation to United States entities. Compensation
 2   could take many forms including cash, research funding, complimentary foreign travel,
 3   honorific titles, career advancement opportunities, promised future compensation, or other
 4   types of remuneration or consideration, including in-kind compensation. (Source: NSPM
 5   33)
 6
 7   Foreign National. A person born outside the jurisdiction of the United States, who is subject
 8   to some foreign government and has not been naturalized under U.S. law.
 9
10   Insider. Any person with authorized access to any United States Government resource,
11   including personnel, facilities, information, equipment, networks, or systems. (Source: E.O.
12   13587, Structural Reforms to Improve the Security Classified Networks and the Responsible
13   Sharing and Safeguarding of Classified Information)
14
15   Insider Threat. The threat that an insider will use their authorized access, wittingly or
16   unwittingly, to do harm to the security of the United States. This threat can include
17   damage to the United States through espionage, terrorism, unauthorized disclosure of
18   national security information, or through the loss or degradation of departmental resources
19   or capabilities. (Source: E.O. 13587, Structural Reforms to Improve the Security Classified
20   Networks and the Responsible Sharing and Safeguarding of Classified Information)
21
22   Insider Risk Program Manager (PM). Individual delegated authority by the Senior Official to
23   carry out the day-to-day responsibilities of the Insider Risk Program.
24
25   LincPass. USDA branded its smart card the “LincPass” to honor President Abraham Lincoln,
26   founder of the Department of Agriculture. The card links an individual’s personal identity to
27   their ability to access Federal buildings and computer systems. The LincPass will be used for
28   access by USDA employees and affiliates.
29
30   Non-Title 50 (NT50). Refers to those Federal departments and organizations who derive
31   authority derive from portions of U.S.C. other than Title 50 or E.O. 12333, which address
32   U.S. intelligence activities. NT50s are involved in many activities that affect national
33   security, such as conducting foreign affairs; combating pandemic diseases; halting illicit
34   trafficking; conducting scientific and medical research; regulating finance, commerce, and
35   transportation; and protecting food, water, and nuclear infrastructures.
36
37   Personal Identity Verification (PIV). PIV outlines a standard procedure developed by the
38   National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) that all Federal Departments and
39   Agencies must follow to confirm the identities of its employees and contractors before
40   issuance of a credential (identification badge).
41
42   Publicly Available Electronic Information (PAEI). Information that is available to the public
43   on an electronic platform.
44
45   Sensitive Information, Assets, and Activities. Unclassified information that requires
46   safeguarding or dissemination controls pursuant to and consistent with laws, regulations, and


                                                     B-3
 1   U.S. Governmentwide policies. Activities authorized by law or policy, as determined by
 2   departments or agencies, that would have a debilitating impact on the mission of the department
 3   or agency or on the economic or national security of the U.S. if compromised.
 4   (Sources: E.O. 13526, E.O. 12829, National Industrial Security Program, and E.O. 13549,
 5   Classified National Security Information Programs for State, Local, Tribal, and Private Sector
 6   Entities; Critical Infrastructure as defined in E.O. 13636, Improving Critical Infrastructure
 7   Cybersecurity; such as E.O. 13556; National Security systems, as defined by the Committee on
 8   National Security Systems (CNSS) in the Committee on National Security Systems Directive
 9   (CNSSD) 505, Supply Chain Risk Management (SCRM), and Committee on National Security
10   Systems Instruction (CNSSI) 4009, Committee on National Security Systems (CNSS) Glossary)
11
12   Trade Secrets. All forms and types of financial, business, scientific, technical, economic, or
13   engineering information, including patterns, plans, compilations, program devices, formulas,
14   designs, prototypes, methods, techniques, processes, procedures, programs, or codes, whether
15   tangible or intangible, and whether or how stored, compiled, or memorialized physically,
16   electronically, graphically, photographically, or in writing if:
17
18      1. The owner thereof has taken reasonable measures to keep such information secret; and
19
20      2. The information derives independent economic value, actual or potential, from not
21         being generally known to, and not being readily ascertainable through proper means
22         by, another person who can obtain economic value from the disclosure or use of the
23         information. (Source: 18 U.S.C. § 1832, Theft of trade secrets)
24
25   United States Research and Development Enterprise. Participants include researchers at
26   academic research institutions, independent research institutions, medical centers and
27   institutes, private companies, and Federal government research centers and laboratories, as
28   well as those who participate in the process of allocating and awarding Federal R&D
29   funding. Projects include those funded by the United States Government, in whole or in
30   part; projects that use United States Government facilities for conducting R&D; and projects
31   in which the United States Government employee and contractor personnel participate,
32   regardless of project’s funding source. (Source: NSPM 33)
33
34   U.S. Person. Includes U.S. citizens and permanent resident aliens (aka Lawful Permanent
35   Residents (LPRs) or green card holders). (Source: E.O. 12333)
36
37   USDA Security Council. The USDA Security Council is a centralized structure for USDA
38   Agency and Departmental Leadership to discuss, coordinate, and share security related
39   information and activities across USDA. The USDA Security Council is comprised of two
40   Co- Chairs, a Vice-Chair and Voting Members. The Director of OHS and the Director of
41   OSSP serve as the permanent Co-Chairs.
42
43   User Activity Monitoring (UAM). The technical capability to observe and record the actions
44   and activities of an individual, at any time, on any device, accessing U.S Government
45   information to detect insider risks and to support authorized investigations. (Source:
46   Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency (DCSA), Center for Development of



                                                    B-4
1   Security Excellence (CDSE), Insider Threat Job Aid, Insider Threat Indicators in User
2   Activity Monitoring)




                                                 B-5
1                                               APPENDIX C
2
3                                AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES
4
5
6    5 CFR § 2635, Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch
7
8    5 CFR § 2635.101(a), Basic Obligation of Public Service
9
10   7 CFR § 2.95, Delegations of Authority by the Assistant Secretary for Administration to the
11   Director, Office of Homeland Security
12
13   5 U.S.C. § 3331, Oath of office
14
15   18 U.S.C. § 208, Acts affecting a personal financial interest
16
17   18 U.S.C. § 1831, Economic Espionage Act of 1996, October 11, 1996, as amended
18
19   18 U.S.C. § 1832, Theft of trade secrets
20
21   44 U.S.C. § 3551, et seq., Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) of 2014,
22   December 18, 2014, as amended
23
24   CDSE, Insider Threat Indicators in User Activity Monitoring, June 2023
25
26   CNSS, CNSSD 504, Directive on Protecting National Security Systems from Insider Threat,
27   September 27, 2021
28
29   CNSS, CNSSI 4009, Committee on National Security Systems (CNSS) Glossary, March 2, 2022
30
31   E.O. 12333, United States Intelligence Activities, December 4, 1981
32
33   E.O. 12674, Principles of Ethical Conduct for Government Officers and Employees, April 12,
34   1989, as amended by E.O. 12731
35
36   E.O. 12829, National Industrial Security Program, January 6, 1993, as amended
37
38   E.O. 12923, Continuation of Export Control Regulations, June 30, 1994
39
40   E.O. 13467, Reforming Processes Related to Suitability for Government Employment, Fitness
41   for Contractor Employees, and Eligibility for Access to Classified National Security
42   Information, June 30, 2008
43
44   E.O. 13488, Granting Reciprocity on Excepted Service and Federal Contractor Employee
45   Fitness and Reinvestigating Individuals in Positions of Public Trust; January 16, 2009
46


                                                     C-1
 1   E.O. 13526, Classified National Security Information, December 29, 2009
 2
 3   E.O. 13549, Classified National Security Information Programs for State, Local, Tribal, and
 4   Private Sector Entities, August 18, 2010
 5
 6   E.O. 13556, Controlled Unclassified Information, November 4, 2010
 7
 8   E.O. 13587, Structural Reforms to Improve the Security Classified Networks and the
 9   Responsible Sharing and Safeguarding of Classified Information, October 7, 2011
10
11   E.O. 13636, Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity, February 12, 2013
12
13   E.O. 13764, Amending the Civil Service Rules, E.O. 13488, and E.O. 13467 to Modernize
14   the Executive Branch-wide Governance Structure and Process for Security Clearance,
15   Suitability and Fitness for Employment, and Credentialing, and Related Matters, January
16   17, 2017
17
18   NARA, GRS 5.6, Security Records, March 2022
19
20   NICCS, Cybersecurity Glossary web page
21
22   NIST, FIPS PUB 201-3, Personal Identity Verification (PIV) of Federal Employees and
23   Contractors, January 2022
24
25   NITTF, 2014 Guide to Accompany the National Insider Threat Policy and Minimum Standards
26
27   NITTF, Insider Threat Program Maturity Framework, November 1, 2018
28
29   NITTF, Insider Threat Guide: A Compendium of best practices to accompany the National
30   Insider Threat Minimum Standards, as amended September 26, 2024
31
32   NSPM 33, United States Government-Supported Research and Development National Security
33   Policy, January 14, 2021
34
35   ODNI, National Insider Threat Policy and Minimum Standards for Executive Branch Insider
36   Threat Programs, November 21, 2012
37
38   ODNI, SEAD 3, Reporting Requirements for Personnel with Access to Classified Information
39   or Who Hold a Sensitive Position, June 12, 2017
40
41   OMB, Circular A-130, Managing Information as a Strategic Resource, July 28, 2016
42
43   Office of Personnel Management (OPM), Systems of Records Notice, Central 9 – Personnel
44   Investigations Record, October 11, 2016.
45
46



                                                   C-2
 1   P.L. 103-359, Section 811, Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1995, Coordination
 2   of Counterintelligence Activities, 1995
 3
 4   U.S. Constitution, Foreign Emoluments Clause (Article I, Section 9, Clause 8, September 17,
 5   1787
 6
 7   USDA, America First Memorandum for USDA Arrangements and Research Security, July 8,
 8   2025.
 9
10   USDA, DG 4600-004, Foreign Visits and Assignments Vetting Procedures, February 1, 2023
11
12   USDA, DR 1043-055, U.S. Department of Agriculture Science Council, January 5, 2021
13
14   USDA, DR 3080-001, Records Management, August 16, 2016
15
16   USDA, DR 3090-001, Litigation Retention Policy for Documentary Materials including
17   Electronically Stored Information, May 28, 2008
18
19   USDA, DR 3099-001, Records Management Policy for Departing Employees, Contractors,
20   Volunteers, and Political Appointees, July 2, 2012
21
22   USDA, DR 3440-001, USDA Classified National Security Information, June 9, 2016
23
24   USDA, DR 3440-002, Control and Protection of “Sensitive Security Information” (SSI),
25   January 30, 2003
26
27   USDA, DR 3580-005, Securing Client Devices for International Travel, November 30, 2018
28
29   USDA, DR 4070-735-001, Employee Responsibilities and Conduct, October 4, 2007
30
31   USDA, DR 4600-004, Foreign Visits and Assignments Vetting, May 27, 2021
32
33   USDA, DR 5200-003, Gift Acceptance Policy, January 4, 2018
34
35   USDA, Insider Risk Program, Report a Potential Insider Threat, web page
36
37   USDA, National Farm Security Action Plan, July 8, 2025
38
39   White House, Presidential Memorandum, National Insider Threat Policy and Minimum
40   Standards for Executive Branch Insider Threat Programs, November 21, 2012
41




                                                   C-3
 1                                              APPENDIX D
 2
 3                                     INSIDER RISK PROGRAM
 4                                   POTENTIAL RISK INDICATORS
 5
 6
 7   The following information was issued by the Department of Defense (DOD) Center for
 8   Development of Security Excellence (CDSE) and supported by the National Insider Threat
 9   Task Force (NITTF).
10
11   USDA applies the Potential Risk Indicators (PRI) to all USDA Federal employees, and any
12   category of non-Federal individual who performs duties in partnership with or on behalf of
13   USDA, such as a consultant, contractor, cooperator, advisor, volunteer, student, or intern that
14   uses his or her authorized access, wittingly or unwittingly, to do harm to the security of the
15   United States. This threat can include damage to the United States through espionage,
16   terrorism, extremism, unauthorized disclosure, fraud, theft, sabotage, acts of harm to self or
17   others, and workplace violence.
18
19   Immediately report any of the following PRI to the Insider Risk Program at insider@usda.gov,
20   or via our webpage.
21
22
23   WHAT ARE POTENTIAL RISK INDICATORS (PRI)?
24
25   Individuals at risk of becoming insider threats, and those who ultimately cause significant harm,
26   often exhibit warning signs or indicators. PRI include a wide range of individual predispositions,
27   stressors, choices, actions, and behaviors. Some indicators suggest increased vulnerability to
28   insider threat, while others may be signs of an imminent and serious threat. This list is not all-
29   inclusive.
30
31
32   WHY ARE SPOTTING AND REPORTING PRI SO IMPORTANT?
33
34   Indicators do not always have diagnostic value or reflect wrongdoing. Exhibiting PRI does not
35   necessarily mean someone is a risk. Most insider risks, however, exhibit one or more PRI.
36   Some PRI may involve activities that are constitutionally protected. Timely and appropriate
37   reporting of PRI is crucial for assessing and mitigating insider threats. National security, critical
38   services, and public safety depend on it. Preventing harm due to insider threats is a shared
39   responsibility. Individuals should adhere to insider threat policies and procedures; organizations
40   will investigate potential threats while preserving employee privacy and civil liberties.
41
42
43   PROFESSIONAL LIFECYCLE AND PERFORMANCE
44
45   All individuals possess a unique set of characteristics and circumstances that influence their risk
46   of becoming an insider threat. Organizational change, career progression, job performance, and



                                                       D-1
 1   other workplace dynamics can be relevant factors. Human resources personnel and supervisors
 2   are often positioned to recognize risk indicators related to professional lifecycles and
 3   performance. Some indicators may seem routine or commonplace, not everyone gets the
 4   promotion; some employees underperform, quit, or are fired but when there is grievance,
 5   conflict, or unanticipated duress, such indicators deserve security concern.
 6
 7   Examples:
 8      • Furloughs and lay-offs
 9      • Separations and terminations
10      • Demotions and reprimands
11      • Non-judicial punishments
12      • Leaves of absence
13      • Unauthorized absence / Absent Without Leave (AWOL)
14      • Involuntary administrative leave
15      • Hardship leave
16      • Declining performance ratings
17      • Poor performance ratings
18      • Human resources complaints
19      • Negative characterizations of previous employment or service
20
21
22   SECURITY AND COMPLIANCE INCIDENTS
23
24   The proper handling and safeguarding of protected information are crucial to combating many
25   insider threats such as fraud, theft, and espionage. Protected information includes proprietary
26   information, in addition to classified and other sensitive Government information. All
27   individuals with access have a duty to adhere to rules and regulations for protected information.
28   Compliance failures are a security concern whether they are deliberate or not. Insider risks are
29   frequently the result of negligence. Risk indicators include security and compliance violations,
30   unauthorized use or disclosure, and any inappropriate efforts to view or obtain protected
31   information outside one’s need-to-know.
32
33   Examples:
34      • Violations related to the handling of protected information
35      • Negligent or lax physical or information security practices despite counseling
36      • Non-compliance with security training requirements
37      • Security clearance denial, suspension, or revocation
38      • Failure to self-report information required for security clearance eligibility
39      • Misuse of information security privileges or credentials
40      • Misuse of facilities or work-issued equipment
41      • Anomalous or suspicious accessing of facilities or systems during non-work hours
42
43
44



                                                      D-2
 1   TECHNICAL ACTIVITY
 2
 3   As organizations adopt information technology to improve operations, they also require
 4   additional safeguards to prevent insider risks. Information technology comprises an
 5   organization’s systems, networks, devices, and associated components such as hardware,
 6   software, or firmware. Indicators of the misuse of information technology may also involve the
 7   mishandling of protected information.
 8
 9   Examples:
10      • Unauthorized access or use of any information technology
11      • Violations of acceptable use or other automated information system policies
12      • Suspicious or improper activity or correspondence on any system
13      • Unauthorized modification, destruction, or manipulation of any information technology
14         Unauthorized deletion or modification of electronic records or data
15      • Downloading, storing, or transmitting protected information using unauthorized
16         information technology
17      • Unauthorized introduction, removal, duplication, or disabling of software on any system
18      • Negligent or lax information technology security practices despite counseling
19
20
21   ALLEGIANCE TO THE UNITED STATES
22
23   Individuals in the Government, or other positions of public trust, are held to a higher standard of
24   conduct compared to the general public. Such individuals may have access to Government
25   facilities, sensitive information, and other assets which require safeguarding. While there is no
26   positive test for it, allegiance may dictate an individual’s willingness to protect classified or
27   sensitive information. Negative indicators are broad and include participation in, or support for,
28   acts against U.S. interests; placing the welfare or interests of another country above those of the
29   U.S.; and active participation in extremist organizations that advance, encourage, or advocate the
30   use of violence.
31
32   Examples:
33      • Support or advocacy of any acts of sabotage, espionage, treason, terrorism, or sedition
34         against the U.S.
35      • Association or sympathy with people attempting or committing such acts
36      • Association or sympathy with people or organizations who advocate, threaten, or use
37         violence to:
38             o Overthrow or influence federal, state, or local Government
39             o Prevent Government personnel from performing their official duties
40             o Gain retribution for perceived wrongs caused by the Government
41             o Prevent others from exercising their constitutional or legal rights
42      • Active participation in violent extremist groups may include
43             o Fundraising, demonstrating, and rallying
44             o Recruiting, training, and organizing
45             o Distributing print or online material
46             o Knowingly wearing clothing, or having tattoos associated with such groups


                                                      D-3
 1   FOREIGN INFLUENCE AND PREFERENCE
 2
 3   Foreign associations may exist for a variety of reasons, including familial ties or work duties.
 4   Foreign contacts and interests rise to a national security concern when they result in divided or
 5   conditional U.S. allegiance. They also pose a risk if they create vulnerability to foreign
 6   manipulation, coercion, or pressure to act against U.S. interests. Contacts from countries linked
 7   to terrorism or known to target U.S. citizens for intelligence operations may be of particular
 8   concern. Foreign involvement, such as possessing or seeking foreign citizenship, while not
 9   inherently harmful, is a security concern when an individual expresses foreign preference over
10   U.S. interests or attempts to conceal such involvement.
11
12   Examples:
13      • Foreign travel to countries of concern
14      • Frequent unofficial foreign travel
15      • Foreign, unofficial contact with a known or suspected foreign intelligence entity (FIE)
16      • Enabling or facilitating an officer, agent, or member of a FIE
17      • Continuing foreign national contact
18             o Personal contact, telephone, email, or social media
19             o Bonds of affection
20             o Intimate contact
21             o Exchange of personal information
22      • Foreign business and political interests
23      • Foreign residency or property interests
24      • Foreign bank accounts and sources of income
25      • Possession of a foreign passport or identity card
26      • Voting in a foreign election
27      • Service in a foreign military or government
28      • Application for and receipt of foreign citizenship
29      • Foreign national cohabitant or roommate
30
31
32   OUTSIDE ACTIVITIES
33
34   An individual who engages in outside employment or services, whether on a volunteer or paid
35   basis, does not represent an inherent threat. Outside activities, however, are a security concern if
36   they pose a conflict of interest with the individual’s security responsibilities. Any involvement
37   in outside activities that increases the risk of unauthorized disclosure of protected information is
38   of particular concern. While potential risk indicators may have foreign considerations, they also
39   include outside activities with U.S. organizations or persons, especially when it involves matters
40   of national security or sensitive technology. Failure to fully disclosure outside activities when
41   required is also cause for concern.
42
43   Examples:
44      • Foreign employment or service
45             o Government of a foreign country
46             o Any foreign national or organization


                                                       D-4
 1             o Representative of any foreign interest
 2      •   Any employment or service involving analysis, discussion, or publication of
 3             o Intelligence
 4             o National defense
 5             o Foreign Affairs
 6             o Protected Technology
 7      •   Concealment or failure to fully disclose outside activities
 8
 9
10   FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS
11
12   Personal finances and finance-related activities may have a substantial bearing on an individual’s
13   suitability for holding sensitive positions and safeguarding protected information. It is not
14   uncommon for individuals to experience financial loss or hardship. However, financial distress
15   is a security concern when it indicates poor judgement or self-control; or it impairs an
16   individual’s ability or willingness to adhere to rules and regulations. Financial distress may also
17   arise because of, and thus indicate, other security concerns such as gambling and substance
18   addictions. Unexplained affluence is pertinent to the extent it may result from criminal activity,
19   including espionage.
20
21   Examples:
22      • Inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts
23      • History of unmet financial obligations
24             o Pay garnishment
25             o Loan defaults
26             o Liens or judgements
27             o Bankruptcy
28      • Evidence of frivolous or irresponsible spending
29             o Excessive debt
30             o Significant negative cash flow
31             o Late payments or non-payments
32      • Deceptive or illegal financial practices
33             o Embezzlement
34             o Employee theft
35             o Check or expense account fraud
36             o Mortgage or tax fraud
37             o Intentional financial misstatements
38      • Failure to file or pay income taxes
39      • Significant transactions, debts, losses, or conflicts due to gambling
40      • Unexplained affluence
41             o Lifestyle or standard of living
42             o Increases in net worth or cash flow
43
44
45



                                                      D-5
 1   SUBSTANCE ABUSE
 2
 3   The illegal use of controlled substances demonstrates an individual’s inability or unwillingness
 4   to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Substance misuse further raises concerns about an
 5   individual’s reliability and trustworthiness because such behavior may also result in physical or
 6   psychological impairment. Alcohol, while not illegal, can similarly increase the risk of insider
 7   threat when it is consumed inappropriately, excessively, or abusively. Alcohol-related incidents
 8   may be security concerns whether they occur at or away from the workplace.
 9
10   Examples:
11      • Illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or holding a sensitive
12         position
13      • Illegal possession of a controlled substance, including drug paraphernalia
14      • Misuse of prescription and non-prescription drugs
15      • Drug test failures or refusals
16      • Qualified diagnosis of substance use disorder
17      • Alcohol-related incidents away from work (e.g. drinking and driving, disturbing the
18         peace, spouse or child abuse)
19      • Alcohol-related incidents at work (e.g. reporting for duty intoxicated, drinking on the job)
20      • Habitual or binge drinking to the point of impaired judgement
21      • Voluntary or involuntary treatment for drug or alcohol abuse
22      • Failure to follow court orders regarding drug or alcohol education, evaluation, treatment,
23         or abstinence.
24
25
26   PERSONAL CONDUCT
27
28   A pertinent security concern is defined as any personal conduct that undermines an individual’s
29   trustworthiness and reliability; or, if known, could damage one’s personal, professional, or
30   community standing.
31
32   Examples:
33      • Disruptive, violent, bizarre, or other inappropriate behavior
34      • Family conflict and domestic abuse
35      • Compulsive, self-destructive, or high-risk behaviors
36      • Sexual behavior that causes vulnerability to coercion, exploitation, or duress
37      • Emotional or mental instability
38      • Self-harm, harm to others, or suicidal ideation
39      • Voluntary or involuntary inpatient hospitalization
40      • A pattern of dishonesty, falsifying information, or rule violations
41      • Association with people involved in criminal activity
42
43
44




                                                      D-6
 1   CRIMINAL CONDUCT
 2
 3   Criminal conduct raises doubts about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness to hold
 4   sensitive positions and safeguard protected information. On its face, it demonstrates the inability
 5   or unwillingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Potential risk indicators of a
 6   criminal nature do not require formal criminal charges or prosecution; credible allegations or
 7   admissions are sufficient. Minor offenses (certain traffic offenses, for example) are unlikely
 8   indicators of insider threat, unless they contribute to a pattern or combination of offenses that
 9   causes concern about an individual’s trustworthiness, reliability, or judgement.
10
11   Examples:
12      • Criminal violent behavior
13      • Sexual assault and domestic violence
14      • Weapons-related crimes
15      • Parole or probation or violation thereof
16      • Failure to follow court orders
17      • Credible allegations or reports of criminal activity
18      • Admissions of criminal activity
19      • A pattern or combination of minor criminal offenses
20      • Military discharge or dismissal for reasons less than “Honorable”
21




                                                      D-7
