                        U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                              WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

   Departmental Regulation                          NUMBER:
                                                    4600-002
Subject:                                            Date:
                                                    September 13, 2013
Procedures for the Denial or Revocation             Originating Office:
of Access to National Security                      Office of Homeland Security and
Information                                         Emergency Coordination



   Section                                                            Page

        1      Purpose                                                  1
        2      Cancellation                                             1
        3      Background                                               1
        4      Policy                                                   2
        5      Responsibilities                                         3

        Figure 1       Due Process Flow Chart                           9
        Figure 2       Due Process Flow Chart (Cont.)                   10
        Appendix A     Reconsideration Procedures                       A-1
        Appendix B     OIG Review of Whistleblower Reprisal             B-1
                       Claims Pursuant to PPD-19

   1.   PURPOSE

        This regulation updates policies, procedures, and responsibilities for United States
        Department of Agriculture (USDA) employees and applicants who have been
        determined ineligible for access to classified national security information
        pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 12968, “Access to Classified Information”
        (hereafter, E.O. 12968).

        This regulation also establishes a whistleblower reprisal review program and sets
        forth the procedures to be followed by USDA employees, including applicants
        and probationary employees (hereinafter USDA employees), and USDA
        contractors when making protected disclosures. Further, this regulation prohibits
        USDA officials from taking, failing to take, or threatening to take a personnel
        action or making a decision/recommendation impacting a USDA employee’s or
        contractor’s eligibility for access to classified information in reprisal for making a
        protected disclosure. This regulation also promulgates the policies and
        procedures for USDA employees and contractors to file whistleblower reprisal
        complaints with the USDA Office of Inspector General (OIG).
2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATION

  This Departmental Regulation (DR) is a revision of, and cancels, DR 4600-002
  (amended), dated February 11, 2002.

3. BACKGROUND

  E.O. 12968 requires the Department to establish a formal review process for
  individuals who elect to appeal a decision to deny or revoke their access to
  classified information. The Department established a Personnel Security Review
  Board (PSRB) in 2001 to handle these formal reviews. This formal appeal and
  review process is referred to as “due process.” PSRB is comprised of three senior
  career officials, who must occupy a Critical Sensitive duty position. Two of the
  members are selected from outside the security field.

  Due process allows for an individual to provide a written appeal to the PSRB. In
  addition to the written appeal to PSRB, individuals may request an opportunity to
  make a personal appearance before an Administrative Law Judge to present
  relevant documents, material, or information prior to PSRB rendering a final
  written decision.

  On October 10, 2012, President Barack Obama issued Presidential Policy
  Directive/PPD-19, Protecting Whistleblowers with Access to Classified
  Information. PPD-19 prohibits retaliation against agency employees who report
  fraud, waste, and abuse, while still protecting classified national security
  information. The Directive requires certain agencies to establish internal
  procedures to review allegations of whistleblower reprisal. Section B sets forth
  the requirements for non-Intelligence Communities agencies that have employees
  who have access to classified information, including but not limited to USDA.

4. POLICY

  a. Any USDA officer or employee who has authority to take, direct others to
     take, recommend, or approve any action affecting a USDA employee’s
     Eligibility for Access to Classified Information shall not, with respect to such
     authority, take or fail to take, or threaten to take or fail to take, any action
     affecting a USDA employee’s Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
     as a reprisal for a Protected Disclosure, as defined in PPD-19.

  b. No USDA employee shall be deemed to be eligible for access to classified
     information merely by reason of Federal service or contracting, licensee,
     certificate holder, or grantee status, or as a matter of right or privilege, or as a
     result of any particular title, rank, position, or affiliation. Eligibility shall be
     granted only where the facts and circumstances indicate access to classified
     information is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the



                                         2
     United States, and any doubt shall be resolved in favor of national security.

  c. The authority to issue decisions to deny or revoke access to classified
     information is delegated to the Director, Office of Homeland Security and
     Emergency Coordination (OHSEC), who shall convey the decision in writing.

  d. With the exception of a case that falls within the guidelines of PPD-19, the
     OHSEC Director’s decision will be implemented immediately and will not be
     postponed by the filing of an appeal.

  e. The Director, OHSEC may suspend an employee’s security clearance upon
     notification or discovery of credible adverse information. The clearance will
     remain suspended until the information is adjudicated and the Director either
     reinstates or revokes the security clearance. Due process is not applicable to a
     clearance suspension and can only begin after the Director makes a decision to
     revoke or deny a clearance.

  f. All Department personnel involved in the appeal process must ensure that the
     employee’s privacy rights are adhered to throughout the appeal process. The
     process is designed to give individuals fair treatment and an opportunity to
     refute or mitigate any derogatory information that has surfaced during the
     personnel security clearance process.

  g. Agency officials shall not serve to intervene in due process procedures, unless
     the individual has identified the official in writing as his/her personal
     representative.

  h. A decision to deny or revoke a security clearance is not considered an adverse
     personnel action and is not subject to the provisions of the Merit Systems
     Protection Board.

  i. Should the individual choose not to appeal, the decision is final and will result
     in termination of any further proceedings.

5. RESPONSIBILITIES

  a. Secretary of Agriculture is responsible for:

     (1) Ensuring USDA’s personnel security clearance program is viable and
         effectively supports USDA’s work with classified national security
         programs, which includes active oversight and continuing security
         education and awareness programs to ensure effective implementation of
         E.O. 12968;

     (2) Designating a senior USDA executive responsible to develop, direct, and
         administer a Department-wide, comprehensive personnel security

                                       3
       clearance program, to include due process rights, for employees and
       applicants (see DR 4600-001, Personnel Security Clearance Program); and

   (3) Exercising his/her authority granted in 5 U.S.C. 7532 to suspend without
       pay, and then remove, a Department employee, when the Secretary
       considers the action necessary in the interests of national security. The
       authority to remove an employee under 5 U.S.C. 7532 may not be re-
       delegated.

b. Subcabinet Officers, Agency Administrators, and Staff Office Directors are
   responsible for:

   (1) Ensuring successful implementation of the provisions of this DR to uphold
       due process rights for employees and applicants within their areas of
       responsibility; and

   (2) Ensuring that employees who have been issued a letter of intent to deny or
       revoke a security clearance are not permitted to have access to classified
       information until an appeal process has been completed and only after a
       favorable eligibility determination has been rendered.

c. Mission Area and Human Resource Directors are responsible for:

   (1) Ensuring that, upon notification that an employee’s security clearance has
       been suspended, immediate action is taken to restrict the employee to non-
       sensitive duties; temporarily reassigning the employee to a non-sensitive
       position with the same grade and pay; or, placing the employee on
       administrative leave with pay;

   (2) Ensuring that an applicant whose position requires access to classified
       information has an opportunity to exercise due process rights prior to
       withdrawing a conditional job offer, if applicable;

   (3) Canceling an appointment to a national security position if an applicant is
       denied a security clearance; and

   (4) Removing employees from Special Sensitive, Critical Sensitive, or Non-
       critical Sensitive duty positions, after a denial or revocation of the security
       clearance has been sustained by PSRB (should the individual choose to
       appeal).

d. Assistant Secretary for Administration or his/her designee, is responsible for:

   (1) Ensuring the establishment and sustainment of the PSRB;




                                      4
   (2) Delegating operational responsibilities of the PSRB to the Director,
       OHSEC; and Appointing PSRB members.

e. Director, OHSEC, or his/her designee, is responsible for:

   (1) Establishing, disseminating, and enforcing the provisions of this DR and
       relevant Departmental Manuals;

   (2) Coordinating with OIG on all cases that fall within the guidelines of
       PPD-19.

   (3) Suspending an individual’s access to classified information or assignment
       to sensitive duties based on the receipt of relevant derogatory information,
       notifying the individual in writing as to the reasons for the suspension,
       and making a final eligibility determination for all suspensions;

   (4) Ensuring that the Personnel and Document Security Division (PDSD) has
       issued the individual a Letter of Intent (LOI) to deny or revoke the
       individual’s access to classified information, which conforms to the
       following process:

       (a)   The LOI shall include a Statement of Reasons (SOR), which will
             inform the individual of PDSD's intention to deny or revoke a
             security clearance and will include all findings from the investigation
             and/or information on which the action is based;

       (b)   The LOI will include a copy of all pertinent adjudicative guidelines
             upon which the SOR is based;

       (c)   The LOI/SOR will be mailed to the individual’s home, via Priority
             Mail - Delivery Confirmation. The individual will have 30 calendar
             days to respond, which begins upon PDSD being notified by the US
             Postal Service of delivery confirmation. A copy of the LOI,
             excluding the SOR and any specific information, will be forwarded
             to the employing agency/office and security office, to take any
             necessary administrative action as deemed necessary;

       (d)   Upon receipt of the LOI/SOR, the individual will have 30 calendar
             days to request any documents, records and reports used as a basis
             for the SOR from appropriate agencies. PDSD must receive a copy
             of any and all Freedom of Information requests at the time they are
             made to ensure they are accomplished within the allotted time;

       (e)   Any reports not under the direct control of USDA must be requested
             from the originating Agency/Department (e.g. OPM). To request a
             background investigation from OPM, the request must be made in

                                     5
         writing and the individual must include their full name, complete
         social security number, and date and place of birth. The request
         must be mailed to: Freedom of Information/Privacy Act Office,
         OPM-FIPC, P.O. Box 618, Boyers, PA 16018-0618. The individual
         must notify PDSD with the date of receipt immediately upon
         receiving the requested information from the outside agency.

   (f)   After receiving all requested information, the individual will have 30
         calendar days to provide a response to the LOI/SOR to the Director,
         OHSEC. The response should be addressed to the Director, OHSEC
         and mailed to the following address: US Department of Agriculture,
         Personnel and Document Security Division, 1400 Independence
         Ave, SW, Room S-310, Mail Stop 5050, Washington, DC 20250-
         5050, Attention: Division Chief, PDSD - Eyes Only;

   (g)   Upon receipt of a response provided to the LOI/SOR, PDSD will
         review the response and make a recommendation to the Director,
         OHSEC, who will render a final adjudicative determination that
         either reinstates, denies, or revokes the individual's eligibility for
         access to national security information; or

   (h)   Should 30 calendar days elapse without a response being received
         from the individual, the Director, OHSEC, will render a final
         adjudicative determination that either denies, or revokes the
         individual's eligibility for access to national security information.

   (i)   Within 10 days of the adjudication determination, the Director,
         OHSEC will provide the employee and the employee’s agency a
         Letter of Notification with the reasons for and results of the
         determination concerning the employee’s eligibility for access to
         classified information. If the employee is deemed ineligible for
         access to classified information, the Letter of Notification will also
         inform the employee of the following: (1) His/her right to appeal in
         writing to the PSRB. (2) His/her right to appear in person and to
         present relevant documents, materials and evidence before a
         presiding officer of the Office of Administrative Law Judge.

(5) Corresponding directly with the individual, regardless of whether or not
    the individual has selected someone to represent them during the appeal
    process;

(6) Providing all case documentation, including the written appeal and
    summary of personal appearance, if one is held, to the PSRB;

(7) Managing adherence to established timeliness by all parties during each
    phase of the appeal process;


                                  6
     (8) Ensuring that only Departmental Officials with a need-to-know are
         apprised of any specific information pertaining to due process cases;

     (9) Nominating qualified PSRB members from outside the Mission Area or
         specific employing agency of the affected individual; and

     (10) Providing written notification to the individual, and the Administrator or
         Director of the employing Agency or Office, of the PSRB's decision.

f. Office of the Administrative Law Judge (OALJ) is responsible for:

     (1) Conducting a hearing that allows for the personal appearance by the
         individual (if so chosen), to present documents, material, and information
         to refute and/or mitigate the security concerns cited in the final
         determination letter. The hearing should not exceed one hour, will be
         scheduled within 30 calendar days of request, held in the Washington, DC
         area, and any travel expenses incurred will be borne by the employing
         Agency/Office;

     (2) Arranging to have a transcript of the hearing prepared; and

     (3) Providing the transcript with recommendations to OHSEC within 15
         calendar days of the hearing.

g.   PSRB is responsible for:

     (1) Meeting to review all information and documentation provided by
         OHSEC within 30 calendar days of receipt, and, if applicable, reviewing
         transcripts from the OALJ;

     (2) Selecting one of the three board members to act as President for the
         Board; and

     (3) Issuing the final eligibility decision in writing, within 30 calendar days, to
         the Director, OHSEC. The decision is final and may not be appealed to
         the Secretary. The PSRB may decide one of the following options:

        (a)   Sustain the OHSEC Director’s decision;

        (b)   Overturn the OHSEC Director’s decision; or

        (c)   Grant the individual access to classified information with conditions.
              The conditions will be clearly outlined in the decision memorandum
              to the Director, OHSEC.




                                       7
h. Office of General Counsel is responsible for providing guidance and
   assistance, when requested, to appropriate personnel to ensure the
   Department’s compliance with this DR. The Office of General Counsel will
   make available an attorney to participate as a non-voting member in the board
   deliberations, address legal questions or issues raised by board members, and
   provide legal counsel to the PSRB. In addition, the attorney will review
   appeal decisions for legal sufficiency prior to issuance. The General Counsel
   will keep the Board President advised of any potential litigation risk resulting
   from Board decision.

i. Office of Inspector General is responsible for reviewing cases that falls within
   the guidelines of PPD-19. Such reviews will be handled in accordance with
   Appendix B.

j. Employees and Applicants who receive a final Letter of Notification to deny
   or revoke their eligibility for access to national security information are
   responsible for:

   (1) Notifying OHSEC in writing, within 30 calendar days of receipt, if they
       appeal a denial or revocation decision, limiting their responses to the
       disqualifying factors listed in the Letter of Notification;

   (2) Notifying OHSEC in writing, within 30 calendar days of receipt, when
       they desire a personal appearance before an OALJ official as part of their
       appeal;

   (3) Requesting to review, within 30 calendar days of receipt, should they
       desire, materials that the employee or applicant provided in response to the
       LOI/SOR upon which a denial or revocation decision is based;

   (4) Exercising their right, if they choose, to be represented by counsel or other
       representative at their own expense and identifying such representative in
       writing to OHSEC; and

   (5) Providing their full cooperation during the appeal process to ensure timely
       decisions.




                                     8
FIGURE 1




   9
           FIGURE 2

DUE PROCESS FLOW CHART (CONT.)




              10
                                   APPENDIX A

                               RECONSIDERATION


1. The following are guidelines and requirements for requesting reconsideration of a
   prior decision by the Director, Office of Homeland Security and Emergency
   Coordination (OHSEC) or the USDA Personnel Security Review Board (PSRB)
   that resulted in the denial or revocation of an individual’s eligibility for a security
   clearance.

  a. Individuals are not permitted to request reconsideration; request for
     reconsideration will be considered only when forwarded by, and
     recommended by, a senior official (Senior Executive Service) of the
     employing agency.

  b. The passage of at least one calendar year since the last adjudicative action on
     the case. The year is counted from the date of the final denial/revocation
     decision by the Director, OHSEC or the PSRB decision, whichever is later.
     Occasionally, the issues in a case will be so recent or serious that a longer time
     may be appropriate to accomplish the actions necessary to overcome the issues
     and/or to establish an affirmative track record to minimize probability of
     recurrence. Not all cases meet the test for reconsiderations. Passage of time
     alone is not sufficient criterion. An agency request for reconsideration to
     simply “test the water” is prohibited.

   c. An agency request for reconsideration must meet an operational need of the
      agency. There has to be an actual requirement for a security determination.
      The individual should be selected or tentatively selected for a sensitive
      position that requires access to classified information. The request for
      reconsideration must include an explicit statement of the agency’s support.

   d. The agency’s security point-of-contact will ensure the request for
      reconsideration is complete. All information and evidence of mitigation must
      be submitted by the individual with the request. The request should include
      evidence that the issues, which caused the denial or revocation, have been
      resolved. For instance, if the denial or revocation was for Financial
      Considerations, the request should include evidence (e.g canceled checks,
      monthly statements, correspondence with creditor, credit reports, trustee
      report for Chapter 13) showing that delinquent debts have been or are being
      serviced; finances subsequent to a bankruptcy have been managed
      responsibly; and, the individual is living within available financial means; etc.

                                         A-1
   e. Once the request for reconsideration is submitted, no supplemental
      information will be accepted or considered unless requested by PDSD.

2. A request for reconsideration does not “reopen” or otherwise affect the finality of
   the OHSEC Director’s denial/revocation or the PSRB decision. The OHSEC
   Director’s approval of a request for reconsideration provides PDSD with the
   authority to request any necessary information required for an adjudicative
   determination and recommendation. Acceptance or denial of a request for
   reconsideration is an OHSEC Director’s determination. The OHSEC Director’s
   determination is final. No due process is afforded for denial of a request for
   reconsideration. Resubmission of a denied request for reconsideration is not
   permitted for one year from the date of the OHSEC Director’s determination.




                                       A-2
                                  APPENDIX B

         OIG REVIEW OF WHISTLEBLOWER REPRISAL CLAIMS
                      PURSUANT TO PPD-19

1   PURPOSE

    This Appendix sets forth procedures for USDA employees and contractors
    (hereinafter complainant) to file whistleblower reprisal complaints with USDA-
    OIG.

2   SCOPE AND AUTHORITY

    PPD-19 prohibits retaliation against agency employees who report fraud, waste,
    and abuse, while still protecting classified national security information. The
    Directive requires certain agencies to establish internal procedures to review
    allegations of whistleblower reprisal. Section B sets forth the requirements for
    non-intelligence community agencies that have employees who have access to
    classified information, including but not limited to USDA.

    As part of the review process, the agency Inspector General (IG) is required to
    conduct a review to determine whether an action affecting Eligibility for Access
    to Classified Information violated PPD-19. The IG may recommend that the
    agency reconsider the employee’s eligibility and recommend that the agency take
    other corrective action to return the employee to the position he/she would have
    held had the reprisal not occurred. The agency head shall “carefully consider” the
    IG’s findings and recommended actions.

    Additionally, Section C states that an employee alleging reprisal who has
    exhausted his/her agency’s internal review process may request an external
    review by a three-member IG panel.

3   PROCEDURES FOR FILING WHISTLEBLOWER REPRISAL COMPLAINT

    a      Allegations of whistleblower reprisal must be filed within 90 calendar
           days of the complainant being notified of the reviewable personnel action
           or a decision/recommendation impacting the complainant’s eligibility for
           access to classified information.

    b      To file allegations of whistleblower reprisal under PPD-19, the
           complainant should contact the OIG Hotline via one of the following
           methods:

           Telephone: (800) 494-9121
           Facsimile: (202) 690-2474

                                       B-1
           E-mail: usda.hotline@oig.usda.gov
           U.S. mail: USDA OIG, P.O. Box 23399, Washington, DC 20026

           The OIG Hotline staff will take the complainant’s contact information and
           refer the matter to an OIG official who will contact the complainant in
           order to obtain additional information. Complainants should not provide
           any classified information to the Hotline staff when making the initial
           complaint.

    c      The allegations of whistleblower reprisal must be filed directly with OIG
           by the complainant and not by a surrogate. However, OIG may grant
           certain, limited exceptions such as allegations of whistleblower reprisal
           forwarded to OIG by a Member of Congress or a Congressional
           Committee.

    d      An allegation of whistleblower reprisal will be accepted for review when
           the complainant establishes a prima facie case of whistleblower reprisal.
           Consistent with Title 5 of the United States Code, a prima facie case
           requires a finding that:

           (1)    The complainant made a protected disclosure; and

           (2)    A personnel action or a decision and/or recommendation impacting
                  the complainant’s eligibility for access to classified information
                  followed the protected disclosure.

    e      Once the complainant establishes a prima facie case of reprisal, OIG will
           initiate a review.

4   OIG REPORTS

    Upon completing its review of a complainant’s whistleblower reprisal complaint,
    OIG shall:

    a      Prepare a written report that sets forth its findings and any recommended
           actions. The report will be provided to OHSEC.

    b      Issue a letter to the complainant notifying him/her of OIG’s findings. The
           letter will include instructions on how to obtain a copy of the report if
           desired.

    c      If the complainant wishes to obtain a copy of the OIG report, he/she must
           submit a written request to OIG, in accordance with instructions in the
           letter referred to in paragraph 4b. OIG will provide the complainant with
           a copy of the report, appropriately redacted.



                                       B-2
5   CORRECTIVE ACTION

    a    As part of the review process, OIG may recommend that USDA take
         specific corrective action to return the complainant, as nearly as
         practicable and reasonable, to the position such complainant held or would
         have held had the reprisal not occurred.

    b    The Secretary shall careful consider the findings of and actions
         recommended by OIG. To the extent authorized by law (including the
         Back Pay Act), corrective action may include, but is not limited to,
         reinstatement, reassignment, the award of reasonable attorney’s fees, other
         reasonable costs, back pay and related benefits, travel expenses, and
         compensatory damages.

6   APPEALS BEFORE THE EXTERNAL REVIEW PANEL (ERP)

    a    Consistent with PPD-19, a complainant who has exhausted the USDA
         review process may request an external review by a three-member
         Inspector General panel, the ERP. The ERP is chaired by the Inspector
         General of the Intelligence Community.

    b    Procedures for filing appeals with the ERP (including timeframes and
         documentation requirements) are available from the Inspector General of
         the Intelligence Community, who can be contacted by one of the following
         methods:

         Telephone: (703) 482-1300
         Facsimile: (703) 482-3254
         U.S. Mail: Office of the IC IG, Washington, DC 20511.

    c    The Secretary shall carefully consider the recommendation of the ERP
         and, within 90 calendar days, inform the ERP and the Director of National
         Intelligence of what action the Secretary has taken.

7   DEFINITIONS

    a    Covered Agency means an executive department or independent
         establishment, as defined under sections 101 and 104 of title 5, United
         States Code, that contains or constitutes an Intelligence Community
         Element, as defined below.

    b    Eligibility for Access to Classified Information means the result of the
         determination whether an employee (a) is eligible for access to classified
         information in accordance with Executive Order 12968 (relating to access
         to classified information), or any successor thereto, and Executive Order

                                     B-3
    10865 of February 20, 1960, as amended (relating to safeguarding
    classified information with industry), or any successor thereto; and
    (b) possesses a need to know under such orders.

c   Intelligence Community Element means any executive agency or unit
    thereof determined by the President under section 2302(a)(2)(C)(ii) of title
    5, United States Code, to have as its principal function the conduct of
    foreign intelligence or counterintelligence activities, including but not
    limited to the Office of the DNI, the Central Intelligence Agency, the
    National Security Agency, the Defense Intelligence Agency, the National
    Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, and the National Reconnaissance Office.
    For purposes of this directive, the term “Intelligence Community Element”
    does not include the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

d   Personnel Action means an appointment, promotion, detail, transfer,
    reassignment, demotion, suspension, termination, reinstatement,
    restoration, reemployment, or performance evaluation; a decision
    concerning pay, benefits, or awards; a decision concerning education or
    training if the education or training may reasonably be expected to lead to
    an appointment, reassignment, promotion, or performance evaluation; a
    decision to order psychiatric testing or examination; and any other
    significant change in duties, responsibilities, or working conditions.

    Personnel Action does not include:

    (1)    the termination of an employee pursuant to 10 U.S.C. § 1609.

    (2)    the termination of an employee pursuant to section 102A(m) of the
           National Security Act of 1947, section 104A(e) of the National
           Security Act of 1947, or 5 U.S.C. § 7532, so long as the official
           authorized by those provisions to terminate the employee (and not
           his or her delegee)

           (i)     determines that the alternative legal procedures to terminate
                   the employee cannot be invoked in a manner consistent
                   with the national security; and

           (ii)    promptly notifies OIG;

    (3)    actions taken with respect to a position that the Secretary has
           designated, prior to the action as being of a confidential, policy
           determining, policymaking, or policy advocating character;

    (4)    actions taken with respect to a member of the Armed Forces, as
           used in 10 U.S.C. § 1034.



                                B-4
    (5)    actions taken prior to the issuance of PPD-19 (October 10, 2012).

e   Protected Disclosure means:

    (1)    a disclosure of information by the employee to a supervisor in the
           employee’s direct chain of command up to and including the head
           of the employing agency, to the Inspector General of the
           employing agency or Intelligence Community Element, to the
           Director of National Intelligence, to the Inspector General of the
           Intelligence Community, or to an employee designated by any of
           the above officials for the purpose of receiving such disclosures,
           that the employee reasonably believes evidences (i) a violation of
           any law, rule, or regulation; or (ii) gross mismanagement, a gross
           waste of funds, an abuse of authority, or a substantial and specific
           danger to public health or safety;

    (2)    any communication described by and that complies with
           subsection (a)(1), (d), or (h) of section 8H of the Inspector General
           Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.); subsection (d)(5)(A) of section 17 of
           the Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949 (50 U.S.C. § 403q); or
           subsection (k)(5)(A), (D), or (G), of section 103H of the National
           Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. § 403-3h);

    (3)    the exercise of any appeal, complaint, or grievance with regard to
           the violation of Section A or B of PPD-19;

    (4)    lawfully participating in an investigation or proceeding regarding a
           violation of Section A or B of PPD-19; or

    (5)    cooperating with or disclosing information to an Inspector General,
           in accordance with applicable provisions of law in connection with
           an audit, inspection, or investigation conducted by the Inspector
           General,

    if the actions described under subparagraphs 7e(3) through 7e(5) do not result
    in the employee disclosing classified information or other information
    contrary to law.




                                 B-5
