                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                               NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                       DR 4610-001
                                                               DATE:
 SUBJECT: Security Screening Unit Procedures                   December 9, 2021
                                                               EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of Safety, Security, and Protection (OSSP)
                                                               December 9, 2026



Section                                                                                 Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                     1
3.   Scope                                                                                  2
4.   Policy                                                                                 2
5.   Procedures                                                                             2
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                             5
7.   Inquiries                                                                              7

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                  A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                 B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                  C-1



1. PURPOSE

     a.   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the policy and procedures to be followed
          by the Departmental Administration, Office of Operations (OO), Mail and Reproduction
          Management Division (MRMD); the OO Mail Services Branch; and the OSSP Security
          Screening Unit (SSU).

     b.   The SSU provides a central facility for screening all incoming mail and authorized
          courier delivery items to the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)
          Headquarters in the National Capital Region (NCR), specifically the Whitten, South, and
          Yates Buildings, and the George Washington Carver Center.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     This regulation supersedes DR 4610-001, Security Screening Unit Procedures, dated July 16,
     1991.
3. SCOPE

  This DR applies to all Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices operating in the USDA
  Headquarters.


4. POLICY

  a.   The OSSP SSU will screen, X-ray, or visually inspect all incoming deliveries of mail,
       envelopes, and packages by couriers and messengers to the USDA Headquarters.

  b.   All incoming deliveries by couriers and messengers, which include but are not limited to
       packages and envelopes, will be delivered to the SSU located in room 0460-South
       Building (4th wing basement near the Central Shipping and Receiving dock).

  c.   The hours of operation are 0700-1800 Eastern Time, Monday through Friday, to exclude
       Federal holidays.

  d.   USDA Uniformed Officers at all entrances will direct all couriers and messengers to the
       South Building, Court 4, C Street SW to gain access to the SSU.

  e.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must follow the security screening protocol
       based on the identified security level and Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
       Interagency Security Committee (ISC) facility standards security requirements for the
       specific facility, as proscribed by OSSP.

  f.   For procedures on processing classified mail, see Departmental Manual (DM) 3440-001,
       USDA Classified National Security Information Program.


5. PROCEDURES

       Suspicious Mail Incident Response Procedures

  a.   Initial Alert Procedures

       Suspicious mail response procedures will vary by organization and will be based upon a
       combination of factors such as the type of item discovered, the location of the mail
       screening facility, internal facility configuration, the number of personnel in the facility,
       and specific organization emergency response protocols. The following procedures
       should be followed:

       (1) Remain calm;

       (2) Alert others in the immediate area that you have identified a suspicious item;



                                                2
     (3) Contact the USDA OSSP Security Control Center (SCC) at 202-720-0000. The
         SCC will contact the Security Services Division (SSD) Director. Local law
         enforcement and first responders will be notified as required;

     (4) Do not attempt to move the suspicious item;

     (5) Put the envelope or package on a stable surface if it is currently being carried or
         handled by mail center personnel;

     (6) Do not sniff, touch, or taste any contents that may have spilled;

     (7) Do not open the letter or package. Do not shake or empty the contents of a
         suspicious letter or package;

     (8) Do not carry the letter or package or allow others to examine it;

     (9) Report suspicious items with threatening content to the USDA Mail Center
         Manager; and

     (10) Report suspicious items to the USDA OO Mail Service Branch Chief and USDA
          OSSP SSD Director for further inspection. The OSSP SSD Director will notify
          local law enforcement as required. Building management should be contacted as
          well.

b.   Evacuation Procedures

     (1) Specific evacuation procedures will vary from site-to-site and must be coordinated
         in advance with organization management (to include property or facility managers,
         as appropriate), safety, and security personnel.

     (2) List all persons who were in the room or area when the suspicious letter or package
         was recognized or who may have handled the letter or package. Be prepared to
         provide the list to local public health authorities and law enforcement officials if
         requested.

     (3) When possible, write down the information regarding the appearance of the letter or
         package and photograph the item with a digital camera.

     (4) All suspicious items should be maintained as evidence as part of a criminal
         investigation until released by the appropriate law enforcement agency.

     (5) All incidents involving suspicious mail and packages must be reported immediately
         to mail center management personnel and security, local law enforcement, and first
         responders.




                                             3
     (6) Within the mail center, managers should provide employees an initial briefing and
         regular updates during an ongoing incident. This is especially important when a
         suspicious item has necessitated the evacuation of the mail center.

     (7) As soon as possible, mail center personnel should be briefed on any required or
         recommended medical treatment in accordance with guidance provided by
         emergency medical personnel, first responders, and public health officials.

c.   Specific Substance Initial Response Procedures

     (1) Explosive Device

         (a) Immediately leave the mail screening area and initiate local evacuation
             procedures.

         (b) If the mail or package is inside an X-ray scanner, leave it there.

         (c) Do not use cell phones, radios, smart watches, mobile devices, etc., within the
             immediate proximity of the suspicious package. Ensure that this prohibition is
             part of all mail screening training; additional safety procedures will be
             provided to all mailroom staff.

     (2) Chemical Substance

         (a) Leave the mail screening area.

         (b) Close all doors to prevent others from entering the area.

         (c) If possible, shut off any fans and the ventilation system of the local facility.

     (3) Biohazard Substance

         (a) Remain in the negative pressure mail screening environment until directed to
             leave by first responders or Hazardous Materials (HAZMAT) personnel.

         (b) If there is no negative pressure system, shut off any fans and the ventilation
             system of the local facility and await arrival of first responders or HAZMAT
             personnel.

         (c) Follow guidance from emergency response personnel.

     (4) Radiation or Nuclear Substance

         (a) Leave the immediate area where the radiation source appears to be located.

         (b) Do not touch any source material or the packaging materials surrounding it.



                                             4
  d.   Post-Event Follow-Up Procedures

       (1) The USDA OO Mail Services Branch Chief and USDA OSSP SSD Director should
           conduct a joint review of the incident and response actions with mail center
           employees and first responders following the incident. The USDA OSSP SSD
           Director will lead this review and issue after actions reports.

       (2) Employees should be given an opportunity to speak with medical personnel, human
           resources representatives, environmental health and safety professionals, and other
           organization personnel as desired.

       (3) The USDA OO Mail Service Branch Chief should also document and share
           information about the incident with other Federal mail center managers as permitted
           by organizational security protocols and general policies and procedures.

       (4) Suspicious mail will simultaneously lead to an investigation by the local police, the
           U.S. Postal Inspection Service (USPIS), or the Federal Bureau of Investigation
           (FBI), or the DHS Federal Protective Service (FPS). Mail center personnel should
           be reminded not to destroy evidence by vacuuming up white powder, shredding
           suspicious letters, disposing of dangerous packages, or similar activities.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Chief Security Director, OSSP, will:

       (1) Provide executive leadership, guidance, and the needed staff and resources for the
           SSU per 7 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) § 2.94, Chief Security Director,
           Office of Safety, Security, and Protection;

       (2) Provide exception authorizations for couriers and messengers to enter the facilities;
           and

       (3) Implement and execute the necessary internal controls to proactively monitor,
           measure, audit, report, and enforce compliance with the provisions of this directive.

  b.   The Director, OSSP SSD, will:

       (1) Receive and respond to reports of suspicious items requiring further inspection;

       (2) Clear security personnel who discover suspicious items to leave the immediate area;

       (3) Conduct a joint after-action review, in collaboration with the OO Mail Services
           Branch Chief, of incident and response actions; and




                                               5
     (4) Train and remind SSU employees of incident response procedures.

c.   The Chief Communications Officer, OSSP SCC, will:

     (1) Receive and respond to initial reports of suspicious items; and

     (2) Contact, notify, and coordinate with leadership, the SSD Director, building
         management, local law enforcement, the USPIS, the FBI, DHS FPS, first
         responders, emergency medical personnel, HAZMAT personnel, and public health
         officials as required.

d.   The Director, OO, will:

     (1) Provide executive leadership, guidance, and the needed staff and resources for the
         MRMD and the Mail Services Branch per Federal Management Regulation, 41
         CFR Part 102-192, Mail Management; 7 CFR § 2.96, Director, Office of
         Operations; and DR 3050-001, Mail Management; and

     (2) Coordinate with the OSSP Chief Security Director, the SSD Director, and the SCC
         Chief Communications Officer as needed.

e.   The Director, OO MRMD, will:

     Provide leadership, direction, and policy for the Departmental Mail Services Branch per
     DR 3050-001, Section 6a.

f.   The Chief, OO Mail Services Branch, also known as the Departmental Mail Manager,
     will:

     (1) Provide leadership and direction for the Mail Services Branch per DR 3050-001,
         Section 6c;

     (2) Receive and respond to reports of suspicious items requiring further inspection;

     (3) Provide briefings to employees on ongoing incidents;

     (4) Conduct a joint after-action review, in collaboration with the OSSP SSD Director,
         of incident and response actions;

     (5) Document and share incident information with other Federal mail center managers
         as permitted by organizational security protocols; and

     (6) Train and remind employees of incident response procedures.




                                            6
  g.   The OSSP SSU personnel will:

       (1) X-ray all incoming mail and small packages;

       (2) Visually inspect all incoming mail and small packages which are clearly labeled
           “Do Not X-ray;”

       (3) Sign for the delivery of and notify the addressee(s) that the package(s) have arrived.
           The addressee will have the option to come to the SSU in person to retrieve the
           package(s) or the package(s) will be delivered on the next scheduled mail run.
           Exceptions will be couriers authorized by the OSSP Chief Security Director to enter
           the facilities;

       (4) Maintain a record of deliveries to the SSU;

       (5) Inspect all incoming packages for damages caused by couriers that occur in transit
           and record the details of the damage on the package receipt;

       (6) Identify and mark all packages as being X-rayed or visually inspected prior to pick-
           up or delivery to addressee; and

       (7) Secure in place any weapons or unusual material discovered, and contact the
           supervisor. Security personnel who discover suspicious items must remain in place
           until cleared by the OSSP SSD Director.

  h.   Departmental Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office personnel will:

       (1) Report in person to the SSU to receive packages directly from the couriers;

       (2) Report in person to the SSU for deliveries which involve the exchange of money
           (Cash on Delivery; C.O.D.) or require an official stamp (legal documents);

       (3) Advise vendors and contacts to clearly label and identify any mail or small
           packages which cannot be X-rayed;

       (4) Advise their subscribers that newspapers are not subject to security screening; and

       (5) Notify the SSU staff of any special arrangements for time sensitive deliveries (e.g.,
           bid proposals).


7. INQUIRIES

  Questions regarding this DR should be directed to OSSP at 202-401-6777 or
  securityservicehelp@usda.gov.




                                               7
-END-




8
                            APPENDIX A

                 ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


CFR      Code of Federal Regulations
C.O.D.   Cash on Delivery
DHS      Department of Homeland Security
DM       Departmental Manual
DR       Departmental Regulation
FBI      Federal Bureau of Investigation
FedEx    Federal Express
FPS      Federal Protective Service (DHS Component)
HAZMAT   Hazardous Materials
ISC      Interagency Security Committee (DHS Responsibility)
MRMD     Mail and Reproduction Management Division (OO Component)
NCR      National Capital Region
OO       Office of Operations
OSSP     Office of Safety, Security, and Protection
SCC      Security Control Center
SSD      Security Services Division (OSSP Component)
SSU      Security Screening Unit (OSSP SSD Component)
UPS      United Parcel Service
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture
USPIS    United States Postal Investigation Service
USPS     United States Postal Service




                                 A-1
                                        APPENDIX B

                                        DEFINITIONS


Courier. Mail delivery company and bicycle carriers to include: United States Postal Service
(USPS), Federal Express (FedEx), United Parcel Service (UPS), DHL, etc.




                                             B-1
                                         APPENDIX C

                             AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


7 CFR § 2.90, Director, Office of Property and Fleet Management (Note: Renamed Office of
Property and Environmental Management effective March 26, 2021)

7 CFR § 2.94, Chief Security Director, Office of Safety, Security, and Protection

7 CFR § 2.96, Director, Office of Operations

Federal Management Regulation, 41 CFR Part 102-192, Mail Management

USDA, DM 3440-001, USDA Classified National Security Information Program, June 9, 2016

USDA, DR 3050-001, Mail Management, May 22, 2012




                                               C-1
