                                 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                        WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250




    DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION
                                                                                  Number:
                                                                                  4710-001
SUBJECT:                                                          DATE:
Alternative Dispute Resolution                                    April 5, 2006
                                                                  OPI:
                                                                  Conflict Prevention and
                                                                  Resolution Center



1   PURPOSE


    This regulation establishes the Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) policy on the use of
    Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) techniques designed to work towards preventing and
    resolving workplace and program conflicts within USDA.


2   REFERENCES

    The following authorities, among others, authorize this regulation: Administrative Dispute
    Resolution Act of 1996 (ADR Act); Agricultural Credit Act of 1987, as amended by the
    Federal Crop Insurance Reform and Department of Agriculture Reorganization Act of 1994,
    and the Grain Standards and Warehouse Improvement Act of 2000 (Public Law No. 106-
    472); the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) regulations on Federal sector
    equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaint processing, 29 C.F.R. 1614; Contract
    Disputes Act of 1978, as amended (41 U.S.C. 601-613); and administrative grievance system
    regulations, 5 C.F.R. 771.

    This regulation will operate in conjunction with the Federal Sector Complaint Processing
    Manual, EEOC MD-110, Processing Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Complaints of
    Discrimination, USDA DR-4300-7 and EEO Complaint Processing Procedures, USDA DM
    4300-001


3   SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

    This regulation supersedes and modifies the USDA Alternative Dispute Resolution Policy,
    Departmental Regulation 4710-001, dated July 20, 2001.
DR 4710-001                                                                       April 5, 2006


4   DEFINITIONS

    a   Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) - Any of a number of conflict resolution techniques
        that use a neutral third party to assist employees, managers, agencies, and USDA customers
        in resolving disputes. (See examples of ADR techniques in Appendix A).

    b   Conflict - Any disagreement, discord, argument, complaint, or legal action, as well as the
        circumstances leading up to it.
    c   Customer - Individuals, organizations, or businesses external to USDA that provide
        services to or receive services from USDA or that have contact with any USDA office or
        employee.

    d   Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Complaint process stages and ADR:

        (1)    Informal Process - The counseling stage of an EEO complaint and during which
               ADR is offered and conducted.

        (2)    Formal Process - The stage of an EEO complaint initiated by the filing of a
               written complaint with the Office of Civil Rights and during which ADR is
               offered and conducted.

    e   Good faith - An effort to honestly, sincerely, and fully discuss problems and matters in
        conflict, and to explore solutions to those problems or conflicts.

    f Mediation - An ADR technique that involves a confidential discussion among two or
      more parties in conflict, with one or more mediators present to facilitate the discussion in
      an attempt to reach a resolution that is acceptable to all parties.

    g Neutral - The person who is authorized to conduct, lead, or facilitate an ADR session.
      The neutral has no personal interest in the outcome of the conflict, and acts impartially
      and without bias. Neutrals include mediators, facilitators, and arbitrators.

    h   Parties - The agencies, employees, managers, or customers who are in conflict.

    i   Resolution – A decision reached by the parties that results in the total or partial end or
        closure of a conflict, complaint, grievance, appeal, or litigation.

    j   Resolving Official – In an EEO complaint, the ADR session official who the responding
        agency has designated and assigned the authority to make, change, accept and approve
        proposals for resolution during an ADR session. The Resolving Official binds a
        responding agency by signing an EEO settlement.

    k   Responsible Management Official (RMO)– The EEO ADR session official(s) who,
        according to the complainant’s allegations, is (are) responsible for the action or made the
        decision that harmed the complainant. A RMO may not be the designated Resolving




                                                  2
April 5, 2006                                                                     DR 4710-001


        Official in an ADR session. The RMO is sometimes identified as the “Responding
        Management Official.”


5   POLICY

    It is the policy of USDA to prevent conflicts whenever possible and, when conflicts do occur,
    to make every effort to reach the earliest possible, consensual resolution of conflicts and
    issues, using ADR as an essential tool toward achieving that goal. The goal of ADR
    processes is to achieve effective and mutually satisfactory conflict resolutions to foster a
    culture of respect and trust among USDA, its customers, and employees. The benefits of
    using ADR can include decreasing time, cost, and other resources expended in resolving
    conflicts and increasing customer satisfaction, and employee morale.

    a General Provisions

        (1) The USDA should utilize ADR as a standard tool for resolving workplace conflicts
            and conflicts between USDA and its customers.

        (2) The USDA, its representatives, employees, customers and contractors, shall seek to
            resolve conflicts at the earliest stage possible consistent with laws, and regulations.

        (3) In any ADR proceeding involving a conflict with a USDA agency or other
            organizational entity, an individual with authority to fully resolve the matter on behalf
            of the agency or entity must be in attendance or readily accessible to the parties
            during the proceeding.

        (4) All parties participating in ADR are expected to participate in good faith.
            Participation in ADR is voluntary for all, except in those instances specified in this
            regulation.

        (5) Agreement to resolve a conflict shall be voluntary for all parties participating in
            ADR.

        (6) Parties are entitled to be accompanied, represented, and advised by a personally
            chosen representative in ADR proceedings consistent with laws and regulations.

        (7) The use of ADR shall not adversely affect the rights of individuals to seek resolution
            of their issues through the established complaint, grievance, and appeal systems,
            provided established time frames in each system are otherwise met.

        (8) No employee shall commit, authorize, or condone any retaliation against any
            employee or customer because of the pursuit of, or participation in, ADR.




                                                  3
DR 4710-001                                                                       April 5, 2006




         (9) Agencies shall make available training and educational services designed to promote
             effective conflict management. These shall include explanations of available ADR
             services and employees’ responsibilities relating to ADR participation.

        (10) Consistent with its legal and regulatory obligations, the USDA shall provide
             reasonable accommodations to persons with disabilities or special needs, and persons
             who require alternative means of communication at any ADR session or activity.

        (11) All parties are entitled to and shall receive a copy of any settlement agreement or
             resolution, which they signed.

        (12) Every ADR program shall maintain an agency ADR file separate from individual
             EEO files.

    b     ADR in Workplace Disputes (Early Intervention Programs, Non-EEO)

         (1) ADR, including, at a minimum, mediation shall be available for the early resolution
             of workplace conflicts during the period before the initiation of a grievance or a
             complaint.

         (2) All employees, e.g., GS, WG, Supervisory, SES, volunteers, contract, Stay-In-
             School, Summer Interns, etc., are strongly encouraged to use mediation or other ADR
             processes to resolve workplace conflicts at the earliest stage possible. Employees
             may request the use of ADR at any point they believe assistance is needed.

         (3) In a workplace conflict that is not an EEO complaint, managers and supervisors are
             expected to participate in ADR when requested to do so, absent compelling reasons.

         (4) Agencies and labor organizations are encouraged to work cooperatively to include or
             enhance ADR provisions in future negotiated agreements, partnership agreements,
             separate addenda, or memoranda of understanding. Management and bargaining units
             are encouraged to consider suspending time frames for a mutually agreed upon
             period in order to use ADR before and during the grievance process.

         (5) Within the administrative grievance system, either the grievant or management may
             request or propose the use of ADR to facilitate the informal and voluntary resolution
             of workplace disputes. The parties may mutually agree to suspend the timeframes for
             completing the grievance process for the purpose of participating in ADR.

         (6) Management must fulfill its notice and any bargaining obligations under the Federal
             Labor Management Relations Act, and applicable collective bargaining agreements
             prior to implementation of any new ADR procedures or programs affecting
             bargaining unit employees.




                                                  4
April 5, 2006                                                                       DR 4710-001


         (7) ADR may not be appropriate for, and need not be used by an agency, in every non-
             EEO workplace dispute. A decision that ADR is not appropriate should be the
             exception. Before the decision is final, it should be discussed with the appropriate
             ADR Program Manager.

         (8) Each USDA agency/mission area shall establish a permanent ADR Awareness
             Program or effort within their respective area. The ADR Awareness Program shall
             be designed to bring Early Intervention Program (EIP) ADR to the attention of all
             employees and to promote understanding of EIP ADR and its usefulness within the
             USDA workplace. Each program shall be designed to provide all employees with the
             following information:

                (a) the Agency’s/mission area’s support for EIP ADR,
                (b) the requirement explaining that ADR is available for all employees,
                (c) examples of the kinds of conflicts and situations in which ADR may be
                    appropriate,
                (d) a description of the EIP ADR techniques available in the agency/mission area,
                (e) the participant’s rights to representation in the EIP ADR process if applicable,
                (f) the requirement that, as ADR participants, agency officials must participate in
                    good faith, and
                (g) an official/contact office to learn more about the EIP ADR programs.

                Agencies/mission areas may select any of the suggested components outlined in
                Appendix D to build their ADR Awareness Programs. In order to satisfy this
                requirement, other components not listed in Appendix D may also be selected upon
                the prior approval of CPRC.

     c   ADR in Workplace Disputes (EEO only)

         (1) Consistent with the USDA policy that Agency representatives, employees,
             customers and contractors should seek to resolve conflicts at the earliest stage
             possible. All USDA agencies should use ADR as early as possible in the EEO
             complaint process.

         (2) Agencies shall offer ADR to all aggrieved employees/complainants at the informal
             (pre-complaint) stage except when an agency documents an incident reasonably
             related to the complaint that involved workplace violence, sexual assault/battery, or
             other criminal activity. Agencies should strongly consider offering ADR to all
             aggrieved employees/complainants at the formal stage even when ADR was
             conducted during the informal stage, except in those situations referenced above
             involving workplace violence, sexual assault/battery, or other criminal activity. If an
             agency decides not to offer ADR for other reasons, at the formal stage, the agency
             shall document the decision. The completed documentation must cite merit-based
             reasons, be signed and dated by the decision maker and be placed in the agency
             ADR file. The documentation shall not also be placed in the EEO complaint file.
             The decision maker shall, as soon as possible, send a copy of the completed



                                                    5
DR 4710-001                                                                      April 5, 2006


              documentation to the Conflict Prevention and Resolution Center (CPRC). To
              ensure consistency, agencies shall use the forms in Appendix E, or one with similar
              content for all formal EEO cases in which ADR is offered and/or conducted. Having
              offered and/or conducted ADR at the informal stage is not considered, by itself, to be
              a merit-based reason for not offering ADR at the formal complaint stage. The
              completed documentation will be available to CPRC for review as needed and
              during internally or externally conducted compliance reviews.

        (3) Whenever an agency decides to offer ADR in exception cases and has any concerns
            about the safety of participants in the ADR process, the agency is obliged to take
            appropriate safety precautions.

        (4) An agency need not offer ADR if to do so would conflict with any law, government-
            wide, or departmental regulation that limits its use in that agency.

        (5) ADR is voluntary for the aggrieved party or complainant. Once an agency offers
            ADR to a complainant and the complainant elects ADR, management is required to
            participate in ADR in good faith.

        (6) Agencies may determine which ADR technique, as provided in Appendix A, is
            offered in each case. However, complainants’ preferences may be considered.

        (7) To ensure the effective transmittal of complaints to ADR units, EEO Counselors (for
            informal complaints) or civil rights offices (for formal complaints) must first collect
            certain information via the EEO counselor’s routine limited inquiries. The EEO
            counselor or office must then provide the ADR unit the following information

               (a) the complainant’s specific allegations;
               (b) the names of the agency and all the parties involved in the complaint (including
                    titles, addresses (mailing and e-mail), and phone numbers);
               (c) the names and titles of the responsible and resolving officials;
               (d) the name of the complainant’s representative (if applicable);
               (e) the case numbers of any pending formal EEO complaints, and
               (f) other relevant information routinely compiled.

              Whether or not the agency will be offering ADR, EEO Counselors must provide all
              complainants a detailed explanation of the agency’s available EEO ADR and
              counseling programs in all informal complaints.

              EEO Counselors should make both written and oral ADR offers to informal
              complainants as soon as possible during the counseling process consistent with their
              responsibilities. In addition, as part of the ADR offer to a complainant and so that
              the complainant may make an informed decision, the EEO Counselor shall identify
              on the ADR Offer Form (Appendix B) and describe in detail the specific ADR
              technique the agency has chosen to offer the complainant. Once a complainant
              accepts an ADR offer, the ADR technique offered will be provided to the



                                                 6
April 5, 2006                                                                       DR 4710-001


                complainant. The complainants shall either accept or decline ADR offers as soon as
                possible after receiving an offer. The counseling process will continue if the
                complainant has not accepted the ADR offer within a reasonable period of time after
                it was made.

          (8) To ensure consistency in the manner EEO ADR is offered and in the effective
              transmittal of informal and formal complaints to ADR units, Agencies shall use the
              forms in Appendices B & C, or ones with similar content for all EEO cases in which
              ADR is offered and/or conducted.

          (9) Each USDA agency/mission area shall establish a permanent ADR Awareness
              Program or effort within their respective area. The ADR Awareness Program shall
              be designed to bring EEO ADR to the attention of all employees and to promote
              understanding of EEO ADR and its usefulness within the EEO complaint process.
              Each program shall be designed to provide all employees with the following
              information:

                (a) the Agency’s/mission area’s support for EEO ADR,
                (b) the requirement explaining that ADR must be offered in the EEO process,
                (c) the specific exception(s) to offering ADR in EEO complaints,
                (d) a description of the EEO ADR techniques available in the agency/mission area,
                (e) the complainant’s right to representation during the EEO ADR process,
                (f) the requirement that officials must participate in good faith on behalf of the
                    agency, and
                (g) an official/contact office to learn more about the EEO ADR programs.

                Agencies/mission areas may select any of the suggested components outlined in
                Appendix D to build their ADR Awareness Programs. In order to satisfy this
                requirement, other components not listed in Appendix D may also be selected upon
                the prior approval of CPRC.

      d    ADR in Program Disputes

          (1) The USDA encourages the use of ADR as a tool to prevent or minimize escalation of
              conflicts with its customers and to resolve such conflicts at the earliest possible stage.

          (2) In states that have a USDA-certified State Agricultural Mediation Program, the
              USDA agencies shall offer mediation to customers to whom they issue an adverse
              decision relating to agricultural loans, wetlands determinations, compliance with
              farm programs, including conservation programs, agricultural credit, rural water
              loans, grazing on National Forest System lands, pesticides, rural housing loans, rural
              business loans, crop insurance, and other issues the Secretary may subsequently
              consider appropriate. If a customer chooses mediation under this subsection, the
              USDA agencies shall participate.




                                                    7
DR 4710-001                                                                      April 5, 2006


       (3) In States in which there is no USDA-certified State Agricultural Mediation Program,
           the USDA agencies shall advise all customers to whom they issue an adverse
           decision relating to the program issues identified in c(2) of this section that mediation
           may be an option and offer it to the customers as appropriate. If the customer
           expresses interest in mediation, the agency shall participate in mediation in good
           faith. In States in which there is a State Agricultural Mediation Program but the
           program is not certified to mediate each and every program issue, as to the non-
           certified issues, mediation shall be governed by the procedures for non-certified
           states.

    e Neutrals

       (1) General Mediator Requirements (Workplace)

          (a) Any individual who mediates USDA workplace disputes as a lead or solo
              mediator must have at least 40 classroom hours of mediation skills training,
              except that the minimum training standards for mediators of Shared Neutrals
              Programs operated by Federal Executive Boards or the Department of Health and
              Human Services (Washington, D.C.) are deemed to meet all of the USDA’s
              minimum training requirements.

          (b) To serve as a lead or solo mediator of an USDA workplace dispute, an individual
              must have mediated or co-mediated at least three workplace disputes.

          (c) Mediators must be familiar with and follow the Model Standards of Conduct for
              Mediators promulgated by the Society of Professionals in Dispute Resolution
              (now the Association for Conflict Resolution), the American Arbitration
              Association, and the American Bar Association. All USDA mediators are
              required to complete the USDA Ethics training (on-line).

          (d) After six months from the effective date of this regulation and beginning the first
              day of the following month, in order to maintain their qualified status, all USDA
              mediators must complete at least eight hours of supplemental training in ADR,
              i.e., mediation, facilitation, factfinding, etc. or in ADR-related areas, i.e., human
              resources, inter-personal communications, group dynamics, etc., prior to the end
              of every successive 2 year period. Mediators who lose their qualified status
              because they failed to complete the required supplemental training, may be
              considered qualified upon completion of eight supplemental hours of training,
              whenever that may occur.

          (e) After six months from the effective date of this regulation and beginning the first
              day of the following month, in order to maintain their qualified status, the USDA
              lead or solo mediators must lead or co-mediate at least two mediations prior to
              the end of each succeeding twelve month period.




                                                8
April 5, 2006                                                                     DR 4710-001




          (2) EEO Mediator Requirements

                In addition to the requirements in e(1), the following requirements must be satisfied
                for a mediator to conduct mediations for EEO complaints:

                (a) After six months from the effective date of this regulation and beginning the
                    first day of the following month, lead or solo mediators for USDA EEO
                    complaints must have completed at least 24 hours of EEO training. In
                    addition, they must have mediated or co-mediated at least five EEO informal
                    or formal complaints.

                (b) Beginning one year from the date in (2)A, in order to maintain their qualified
                    status, USDA EEO lead or solo mediators must add eight supplemental hours
                    of EEO training each annually beginning after their initial year of qualification
                    and prior to the end of the following year. Lead or solo mediators who lose
                    their qualified status because of a missed supplemental EEO training, may be
                    considered qualified upon completion of eight supplemental hours of EEO
                    training, whenever that may occur.

         (3) Agencies may choose to supplement the minimum requirements in (1) and (2) with
             additional training and are encouraged to periodically evaluate all ADR neutrals and
             to maintain records of all mediator evaluation results.

         (4) Each agency must maintain documentation for individual neutrals indicating that the
             neutrals used in their program have met the standards of certification required in this
             section. Documentation will be subject to review upon request from the CPRC.

     f   Evaluation

         All ADR programs are to engage in and support the evaluation of ADR’s use and
         benefits to ensure quality ADR services. At a minimum, evaluators should attempt to
         capture and analyze ADR usage, timesavings, cost avoidance, customer satisfaction,
         improved relationships, and other indicators consistent with the agency’s strategic goals
         and objectives.

     g Confidentiality

         (1) Confidentiality in ADR sessions is intended to allow parties to candidly discuss their
             interests in order to reach the best possible resolution, without fear that statements
             made during ADR will later be used against them. Confidentiality provides
             protection from disclosure by an ADR neutral to individuals outside of an ADR
             session of information discussed or presented during an ADR session.
             Confidentiality also provides the assurance that an ADR neutral will not disclose to
             one party of an ADR session information shared with the neutral in confidence by
             another party.



                                                   9
DR 4710-001                                                                      April 5, 2006




        (2) Information, including resolution options, discussed during or specifically prepared
            for ADR proceedings may not be introduced as evidence in subsequent hearings or
            other legal proceedings, except as permitted under the ADR Act.


6   RESPONSIBILITIES

    a Sub-cabinet officials and Agency Administrators are responsible for:

        (1) Ensuring that all employees are aware of, have access to, and are encouraged to use
            ADR programs consistent with this regulation.
        (2) Endorsing and actively supporting the earliest possible use of ADR to avoid and
            resolve workplace and program complaints.

        (3) Reporting to the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights (ASCR) at least annually on
            agency ADR programs and usage.

        (4) Ensuring that agency officials who participate in EEO-ADR are appropriately
            informed of the specifics of the EEO matters involved in advance and fulfill their
            EEO ADR responsibilities while participating.

        (5) Ensuring that agency officials who participate in program ADR are appropriately
            informed of the specifics of the program matters involved in advance and fulfill their
            program responsibilities while participating.

        (6) Establishing Agency limits or criteria for resolution or settlement of conflicts and
            complaints.

    b   The ASCR provides the overall leadership, coordination, and direction for the USDA’s
        programs of civil rights, including program delivery, compliance, EEO, and conflict
        resolution. The ASCR is also responsible for:

        (1) Establishing the regulatory, logistical, and practical tools necessary to eliminate
            conflict at USDA, not only in the workplace, but with external customers through the
            use of ADR.

        (2) Issuing Department-wide policies, regulations, and guidance on the use of ADR and
            the evaluation of programs.

        (3) Administering the Department’s EEO and ADR Programs.

        (4) Oversight and management of the EEO counseling function for USDA.




                                                 10
April 5, 2006                                                                   DR 4710-001


        (5) Ordering such corrective measures in EEO complaints as may be considered
            necessary, including the recommendation for such disciplinary action as is warranted
            when an employee has been found to engage in a discriminatory practice.

    c   The Director, CPRC is responsible for:

        (1) Developing and issuing standards for qualifications and evaluation of mediators and
            other neutrals.

        (2) Coordinating ADR activities throughout USDA.

        (3) Assisting and supporting agency ADR programs.

        (4) Promoting and encouraging the use of ADR.

        (5) Monitoring agencies’ programs, tracking usage, determining compliance with
            Departmental standards, and reporting at least annually to the Secretary on ADR
            activities.

        (6) Maintaining information on available neutrals and providing a variety of additional
            ADR services.

        (7) Providing ADR services to the Office of the Secretary, Offices of the Under
            Secretaries, Departmental Staff Offices, offices reporting to the ASCR, Assistant
            Secretary for Administration (Departmental Administration), and to any other officer
            or agency of the USDA as may be agreed.

    d   The Directors of Agency Civil Rights Offices are responsible for:

        (1) Promoting and encouraging the use of ADR in the EEO process.

        (2) Assisting the Agency Administrator in determining which ADR technique(s) is
            selected to fulfill the EEO ADR requirements found within this regulation.

        (3) Issuing to all agency officials who may serve as either a RMO or a Resolving Official
            written copies of their rights and responsibilities in the EEO ADR processes.

        (4) Ensuring that all neutrals performing EEO ADR within their agency have received
            the required training or are deemed qualified per this regulation prior to mediating
            complaints.

    e   The Agency/Mission Area ADR Program Managers are responsible for:

        (1) Developing and issuing standards for qualifications and evaluation of mediators and
            other neutrals within their respective Agency/Mission Area consistent with these
            regulations.



                                                 11
DR 4710-001                                                                   April 5, 2006




       (2) Providing ADR activities throughout their Agency/Mission Area.

       (3) Promoting and encouraging the use of ADR.

       (4) Assisting the Agency Administrator in determining which ADR technique(s) is
           selected to fulfill the EEO ADR requirements found within this regulation.
           (Applicable in agencies where the ADR Program Manager is responsible for
           providing EEO ADR.)

       (5) Monitoring their programs, tracking usage, ensuring compliance with Departmental
           requirements, and reporting at least annually to CPRC on ADR activities.

       (6) Maintaining information on neutrals and providing a variety of any additional ADR
           services as needed.

   f The General Counsel is responsible for:

       Working with the client agency, the Department of Justice, and CPRC, as appropriate, in
       recommending and using ADR in appropriate administrative and litigation matters.

   g   Employees are responsible for:

       Participating in good faith during all phases of any ADR process in which they are
       involved.


                                             END




                                               12
April 5, 2006                                                                     DR 4710-001
                                                                                  Appendix A

                                             Appendix A

                              EXAMPLES OF ADR TECHNIQUES

1.   Mediation

     Mediation is currently the most popular form of ADR used in employment-related conflicts.
     It is a form of ADR that is often used as an alternative to traditional EEO counseling.
     Mediation is an informal process in which a neutral third party assists the parties in conflict
     in reaching a voluntary, mutually agreeable settlement. It gives the parties the opportunity to
     discuss the issues, clear up misunderstandings, determine the parties’ underlying interests or
     concerns, find areas of agreement, and, ultimately, to incorporate those areas of agreement
     into resolutions. The mediator does not impose a decision on the parties, but rather, helps the
     parties to agree to their own mutually acceptable resolution.

2.   Fact-Finding

     Fact-Finding is the use of an impartial expert (or group) with the authority to determine what
     the “facts” are in a conflict. The Fact Finder is authorized only to investigate or evaluate the
     matter presented and to file a report establishing the facts in the matter. The Fact Finder may
     also issue either a situation assessment or a specific procedural or a substantive
     recommendation as to how a conflict might be resolved. The findings of fact must remain
     confidential in order to comply with the core principles of ADR.

3.   Facilitation

     Facilitation involves the use of techniques to improve the flow of information in a meeting
     between parties to a conflict. The techniques may also be applied to decision-making
     meetings where a specific outcome is desired (e.g., resolution of a conflict or dispute). A
     facilitator does not typically become as involved in the substantive issues, as does a mediator.
     The facilitator focuses more on the process involved in resolving a matter.

     The facilitator works with all of the participants at once and provides procedural directions as
     to how the group can efficiently move through the problem-solving steps of the meeting and
     arrive at the jointly agreed-upon goal. The facilitator focuses on procedural assistance and
     remains impartial with regard to the topics under discussion.

4.   Early Neutral Evaluation

     Early Neutral Evaluation is a process whereby a Neutral, usually with substantive expertise,
     evaluates the relative merits of the parties’ cases. This process usually involves an informal
     presentation to the Neutral of the highlights of the parties’ positions. The Neutral provides a
     non-binding evaluation that can give the parties a more objective assessment of their
     positions, thereby increasing the chances that further negotiations will be productive.
     Following the evaluation, the Neutral may assume the role of a mediator and assist the parties
     in reaching a mutually acceptable resolution.



                                                 A-1
DR 4710-001                                                                        April 5, 2006
Appendix A



5.   Non-binding Arbitration

     Arbitration involves presenting a conflict to an impartial or neutral individual (arbitrator) or
     panel (arbitration panel) for issuance of an advisory opinion. Under the process, the parties
     have input into the selection process, giving them the ability to select an individual or panel
     with some expertise and knowledge of the disputed issues. Generally, persons chosen are
     those known to be impartial, objective, and fair, and who have the ability to evaluate and
     make judgments about data or facts. The opinions issued by the third party in such cases
     must be non-binding.

6.   Settlement Conferences

     Settlement conferences may be conducted by a settlement judge or referee, and attended by
     representatives of the opposing parties and/or the parties themselves, in order to reach a
     mutually acceptable settlement of the disputed matter. Agencies are not precluded from
     having their own settlement conferences without a settlement judge, provided the parties
     agree.

     The role of a settlement judge is similar to that of a mediator in that he/she assists the parties
     procedurally in negotiating an agreement. Such judges may have much stronger authoritative
     roles than mediators, since they may provide the parties with specific substantive and legal
     information about what the disposition of the case might be if it were to go to court or
     hearing. They also provide the parties with possible settlement ranges for their
     consideration. In the event a settlement is not reached, the case is then processed by an
     administrative judge other than the settlement judge. Because these conferences are not
     conducted by the administrative judge hearing the case on the merits, traditional ex parte
     communication constraints are not applicable.

7.   Ombuds

     Ombuds are individuals who rely on a number of techniques to resolve conflicts. These
     techniques include counseling, mediating, conciliating, and fact-finding. When an ombud
     receives a complaint, he/she interviews parties, reviews files, and makes recommendations to
     the disputants. Ombuds typically do not impose solutions. The power of the ombud lies in
     his/her ability to persuade the parties to accept his/her recommendations. Generally, an
     individual not accepting the proposed solution of the ombud is free to pursue a remedy in
     other forums for conflict resolution.

8.   Med-Arb

     Med-Arb (mediation-arbitration) is a process whereby a third party Neutral begins by
     facilitating discussions between parties in conflict (mediation), which may enable the parties
     to reach a mutually acceptable resolution of the issues and concerns in the conflict. If the
     parties fail to reach a mutually acceptable resolution, the Neutral is empowered to issue a
     non-binding decision after hearing evidence and arguments from both parties (arbitration).



                                                  A-2
April 5, 2006                                                                   DR 4710-001
                                                                                Appendix A


9.    Minitrials

        Minitrials involve a structured settlement process in which each side to a dispute
        presents abbreviated summaries of their case before the parties and/or their
        representatives who have authority to settle the dispute. The summaries contain
        explicit data about the legal bases and the merits of a case.

        The process generally follows more relaxed rules for discovery and case
        presentation than might be found in a court or other administrative proceedings and
        usually the parties agree on specific limited periods of time for presentations and
        arguments.

10. Peer Review

        Peer Review is a problem-solving process where an employee takes a dispute to a
        group or panel of fellow employees and managers for a decision. The decision is
        usually not binding on the employee, and s/he would be able to seek relief in
        traditional forums for dispute resolution if dissatisfied with the decision. The
        principal objective of peer review is to resolve disputes early before they become
        formal complaints or grievances.

        Typically, the panel is made up of employees and managers who volunteer for this
        duty and who are trained in listening, questioning, and problem-solving skills as
        well as the specific policies and guidelines of the panel. A peer review panel may be
        a standing group of individuals who are available to address whatever disputes
        employees might bring to the panel at any given time. Other panels may be formed
        on an ad hoc basis through some selection process initiated by the employee, e.g.,
        blind selection of a certain number of names from a pool of qualified employees and
        managers.

11.   Combinations of Techniques

        Often techniques may be combined to provide advantageous aspects of more than one
        method. For example, if in a mediation the mediator finds that the parties are able to
        speak directly to each other in a productive way, the mediator may utilize the facilitator
        role and follow-up with the mediator role later. In some cases, fact finding may precede a
        facilitation or mediation session. Agencies are not limited to using only one method or
        technique in their ADR programs. They may find that using various methods in
        combination may also yield fruitful results and be very effective in reaching resolution.




                                                A-3
April 5, 2006                                                                DR 4710-001
                                                                             Appendix B

                                           Appendix B

                       EEO Informal/Formal Complaint Process
                             ADR Offer/Selection Form


TO:

Complainant’s Name

Complainant’s Office Address

Complainant’s Office Phone Number

FROM:

Name of EEO Counselor/Civil Rights Office Contact Person

        This agency is offering you an opportunity to seek resolution of your EEO complaint
through Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) [or traditional EEO Counseling (for informal
EEO complaints only)]. Please indicate your decision to opt for ADR [or to continue with the
traditional EEO Counseling process (if applicable)]. Then sign, date and return the form.

       Please note that your acceptance and participation in ADR during the informal EEO
complaint stage does not affect the ADR offering requirement during the formal EEO complaint
stage.

        SELECTION OF EEO COMPLAINT PROCESS
        (Please choose only one)

                  Alternative Dispute Resolution – [Name of ADR Technique Offered]
                  EEO Counseling (only for the informal EEO complaint stage)
                  Formal Complaint Processing (only after filing a formal EEO complaint)


My ADR, EEO counseling (if applicable) and formal complaint options have been fully
explained to me. Also, written materials providing information about these options have been
provided to me. If I have chosen ADR, I understand that the participating agency officials may
not be the officials identified by the EEO counselor.


Signature                                                                               Date

*If you selected ADR as your option and have not been contacted by the ADR program within 7
days, please contact your EEO Counselor/Civil Rights Contact Person or the ADR program.
You may contact the ADR program at ###-###-#### or ###-###-####.


                                               B-1
April 5, 2006                                                       DR 4710-001
                                                                    Appendix C

                                           Appendix C

                        EEO-ADR Complaint Notification Form
                                                                  INFORMAL
                                                                  FORMAL

                             COMPLAINANT INFORMATION

1. Date form prepared


2. Complainant’s full name

3. Complainant’s full work address



4. Complainant’s full home address



5. Complainant’s work phone number(s)

6. Complainant’s home phone number(s)

7. Complainant’s e-mail address & Fax number

8. Is Complainant a member of a Bargaining Unit?            Yes          No

9. Name of Complainant’s attorney/representative(s)

10. Attorney/Representative phone number

11. Attorney/Representative full address



12. Attorney/Representative e-mail address and Fax number




                                              C-1
DR 4710-001                                                April 5, 2006
Appendix C


                                 AGENCY INFORMATION

13. Name of Agency the complaint is filed against

14. Responsible Management Official(s):

                                     Name
                                     Title
                                     Name of Work Unit
                                     City & State
                                     Phone & FAX numbers

                                     Name
                                     Title
                                     Name of Work Unit
                                     City & State
                                     Phone & FAX numbers

                                     Name
                                     Title
                                     Name of Work Unit
                                     City & State
                                     Phone & FAX numbers

15. Resolving Official (if known):
                                     Name
                                     Title
                                     Name of Work Unit
                                     City & State
                                     Phone & FAX numbers

16. Agency/Office ADR Contact Person:
                                  Name
                                  Title
                                  Phone Number

                               COMPLAINT INFORMATION

17. ADR Election:
      a. Date ADR was offered?
      b. Date ADR offer was accepted?
         c. ADR Technique offered and accepted?




                                             C-2
April 5, 2006                                                                  DR 4710-001
                                                                               Appendix C


18. If an informal complaint:
        a. Date informal complaint was initiated with counselor
        b. Date of 90th day of informal complaint period
        c. Name and Phone number of EEO Counselor

19 If a formal complaint, provide dates for item 18 AND provide the date the formal complaint
was filed

20. If a formal complaint, check the current stage of the complaint:
       Filed       Accepted          ALJ Decision Requested          Ongoing Investigation
       ROI Completed         Hearing Date Set          Hearing Held        Appealed

21. Indicate basis(es) identified by complainant OR (if a formal complaint was filed) accepted by
the Office of Civil Rights (may attach acceptance letter)

                Sex:                                                      Religion
                       Male                                          Specify:
                       Female                                      Sexual Harassment
                Race                                               National Origin, e.g. Hispanic
                       African-American                             Specify:
                       Native American
                       Asian                                      Mental Disability
                       Pacific Islander                    Reprisal
                       White                                      Parental Status
                       Alaskan Native
                       Native Hawaiian              Political Affiliation
                       Other (specify:        )     Marital Status
                Color                                               Genetic Information
                 Specify:
                Age
                 Date of Birth:    /      /

22. Briefly list issue(s)/claim(s) identified by pre-complainant OR, if a formal complaint was
filed, accepted by the Office of Civil Rights (may attach CR acceptance letter)

        1.


        2.


        3.


        4.



                                                  C-3
DR 4710-001                                                                  April 5, 2006
Appendix C




       5.


23. How many formal complaints does this complainant currently have pending with this
    agency?             Total with USDA (if different)?

       Please list the formal complaint numbers and agencies for those complaints here:

       #                   Agency:
              Issues:


              Basis(es):

       #                   Agency:
              Issues:


              Basis(es):

       #                   Agency:
              Issues:


              Basis(es):

              (Attach additional pages as necessary)

24. This form prepared by:
                                     Name
                                     Title
                                     Phone number

ATTACHMENTS:
     -If informal complaint - Please attach the Option Form
     -If formal complaint - Attach the following, if available:
                    a. Formal Complaint filed by complainant
                    b. Counselors Report
                    c. Formal Complaint Acceptance Letter




                                             C-4
April 5, 2006                                                                 DR 4710-001
                                                                               Appendix D

                                             Appendix D

                          ADR AWARENESS PROGRAM SUGGESTIONS

I. Promotional Meetings
          • Schedule regular or traveling meetings, teleconferences, throughout the agency to
              focus on EEO-ADR/EIP-ADR.
          • All employees must attend at least one meeting per year
          • Frequency of meetings based on accessibility to all employees, i.e., field offices,
              DC offices, etc.
          • Meeting Topics/Areas: Same as above

II. Posters
                •   Posters should be either specifically for EEO-ADR/EIP-ADR or (for EEO-ADR)
                    combined with EEO Counseling poster
                •   Posters can be posted wherever the agency posts the required EEO counseling
                    posters
                •   Explain key program aspects i.e. same as above

III. New Agency/Mission Area Policy
          • Formally write the basic provisions of EEO-ADR/EIP-ADR and key aspects of
             the agency’s EEO-ADR/EIP-ADR program into either the agency’s civil rights
             policy or administrative policy, and then distribute the amended policy to all
             employees and post it on any available websites. Create policy specifically for
             EEO-ADR/EIP-ADR if none exists.

IV. Booklet, Brochure or Manual
          • Publish a booklet, brochure or manual designed solely for the purpose of
              describing and publishing the agency’s EEO-ADR/EIP-ADR program and
              distribute it to all employees.

V. ADR Promotion Training for EEO Counselors
        • Have all EEO counselors attend training specifically designed around promoting
           EEO-ADR/EIP-ADR
        • Require that all EEO counselors promote ADR in the counseling process prior to
           offering ADR

VI. Incentive Program
           • Set EEO-ADR/EIP-ADR participation goals for each (area, division, …?) of the
              agency
           • Provide financial or other kinds of incentives to any area meeting its goals
              -Annual publishing of successful areas
              -Framed certificates for offices




                                                 D-1
DR 4710-001                                                                  April 5, 2006
Appendix D

VII. ADR Video
         • Develop and distribute a video demonstrating how ADR works
         • Require that all employees view the video in person or on line.

VIII. ADR Training Requirement for all Managers
          • Require all managers to attend at least one ADR training, e.g., interest-based
             negotiations, etc.
          • Specify which courses/classes fulfill the requirement

IX. ADR Training Module
         • Include a brief, pre-designed and rehearsed ADR module in all existing employee
             training/presentation sessions

X. Institutionalized Promotional Effort
            • Require that a well-respected manager give opening remarks about and in support
               of EEO-ADR/EIP-ADR/Both at all meetings and events as part of the agenda or
               itinerary
            • Provide ADR training to all union reps
            • Require that all managers make a quick presentation during every All Employee
               meeting.




                                              D-2
April 5, 2006                                                              DR 4710-001
                                                                            Appendix E

                                         Appendix E

                                 NON-OFFER OF ADR
                            DURING THE EEO FORMAL STAGE


                            USDA EEO Formal Complaint Number

Date Formal Complaint was filed:

Date Formal Complaint was Accepted by OCR:

Date “Not to Offer ADR” Decision was Made:

Name of Official who Decided Not to Offer ADR:

Reason(s) Decision Not to Offer ADR was Made: (Include, as appropriate, any relevant
regulation citations, any offices/personnel (by name) that contributed to the decision, any
information/data supporting the decision, etc.)




(Attach additional sheets and additional documents as needed.)


Signature of Official deciding not to offer ADR                  Date Signed


Title of Signing Official

Attachment(s) (if applicable)

cc: Conflict Prevention and Resolution Center



                                                E-1
