                             U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                   WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


       DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                         Number:
                                                                       4740-005
    SUBJECT:                                                           Date:
    USDA Pathways Programs                                             May 12, 2016
                                                                       OPI:
                                                                       Office of Human Resources
                                                                       Management



TABLE OF CONTENTS

SECTION                                                                       Page

1       Purpose                                                                1
2       Special Instructions                                                   1
3       Policy                                                                 1
4       Scope                                                                  2
5       Authorities                                                            2
6       Delegations                                                            2
7       Responsibilities                                                       3
8       The USDA Pathways Programs                                             9
9       USDA Definitions                                                       28


1. PURPOSE

     This directive establishes the United States Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) policy for
     the implementation of the USDA Pathways Programs.

2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS

     This is a new policy.

3. POLICY

     All Agencies and Staff Offices will comply with and institute the policies in this directive,
     and in the USDA Pathways Programs Handbook.
  Agencies and Staff Offices do not have the flexibility to modify or customize the policies
  provided in this directive for their Agency or Staff Office, without formal written approval
  from the Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM).

  All USDA Scholarship programs that include opportunities for participants to have a
  Pathways internship position must be publicly announced via the Office of Personnel
  Management’s (OPM) job posting system and filled in compliance with Pathways and
  excepted service employment regulations. Recruiting must target agricultural and biological
  sciences as well as other USDA mission related academic fields of study regardless of the
  academic institution. Recruiters and those who are not Human Resources (HR) Operations
  staff involved in staffing these scholarship/internship positions must not accept
  resumes/applications from students nor have any role in the evaluation of candidates.
  Scholarship program offices must work with their HR Operations staff to comply with
  regulations at 5 CFR 362.302 and adhere to policy outlined herein and carried out in
  accordance with the USDA Pathways Program Handbook to fill all scholarship Pathways
  internship positions. Refer to the Job Opportunity Announcement (JOA) Desk Aids, "What
  to Expect Next" to obtain required language to use when advertising all Pathways
  internships associated with scholarships. Participation in the Pathways Programs must
  conform to Federal, State, or local laws and standards governing the employment of minors.

4. SCOPE

  This directive applies to all USDA Agencies and Staff Offices who hire individuals in the
  USDA Pathways Programs. The USDA Pathways Programs consist of the Internship
  Program, the Recent Graduates Program, and the Presidential Management Fellows (PMF)
  Program. The USDA Pathways Programs will be departmental in scope and focus on
  preparing individuals for USDA mission area careers.

5. AUTHORITIES

  This policy must be used in conjunction with:
  a. 5 CFR Part 362 - Pathways Programs 5 CFR Part 362
  b. 5 CFR Part 213 – Excepted Service 5 CFR Part 213
  c. 5 CFR Part 250 - Personnel Management Agencies 5 CFR Part 250
  d. Executive Order 13562 - Recruiting and Hiring Students and Recent Graduates
     Executive Order 13562
  e. 5 CFR Part 302 - Employment in the Excepted Service 5 CFR Part 302
  f. 5 CFR Part 610 - Hours of Duty 5 CFR Part 610
  g. 5 CFR Part 430 - Performance Management 5 CFR Part 430
  h. 5 CFR Part 890 - Federal Employees Health Benefits Program 5 CFR Part 890
  i. 5 CFR Part 536 - Grade and Pay Retention 5 CFR Part 536
  j. 5 CFR Part 531 - Pay under the General Schedule 5 CFR Part 531
  k. 5 CFR Part 731 – Suitability 5 CFR Part 731
  l. 5 CFR Part 630 – Absence and Leave 5 CFR Part 630
  m. 7 USC 2279c – Student Internship Programs

                                              2
6. DELEGATIONS

  Established by Executive Order 13562, signed December 27, 2010, the final OPM rule
  implementing the Pathways Program for all federal agencies, including USDA, became
  effective on July 10, 2012.

  OPM delegated OHRM the authority to implement and maintain oversight of the USDA
  Pathways Programs. Therefore, OHRM reserves the authority to limit, provide guidance,
  and oversee the recruitment, selection, hiring, promotion, and retention of students and
  recent graduates in the USDA Pathways Programs as well as other student and recent
  graduate employment programs that do not fall under the Pathways Programs.

  OHRM also reserves the authority to develop and/or oversee the implementation of a
  standardized training curriculum for students and recent graduates, performance
  management programs, mentoring and shadowing programs, orientation and Individual
  Development Plan completion, extension requests, break in program requests, and on-
  boarding for students and recent graduates.

  OHRM delegates Agencies and Staff Offices the authority and/or responsibility to:

  a. Adhere to caps on conversions to career-conditional and/or Term appointments;

  b. Provide information on the USDA Pathways Programs usage in the Annual Human
     Capital Management Report;

  c. Establish and ensure that an Agency or Staff Office designee signs a USDA Pathways
     Programs Participant Agreement for each participant;

  d. Apply veterans’ preference laws and procedures when recruiting and selecting
     individuals for Pathways Programs opportunities;

  e. Ensure that the designated HR operations office advertises positions, and accepts and
     evaluates all applications for the selection and hiring of all applicants/candidates under
     the Pathways Programs;

  f. Establish and implement a mentoring and shadowing program;

  g. Provide orientation, ensure the completion and execution of an Individual Development
     Plan, and establish and implement an on-boarding program;

  h. Establish work schedules; and



                                               3
  i. Participate in career and recruitment fairs in accordance with the USDA Pathways
     Programs Handbook.

  The Director of OHRM may withdraw the above mentioned authorities and responsibilities
  from Agencies and/or Staff Offices and is authorized to issue special instructions on the use
  of these delegated authorities.

7. RESPONSIBILITIES

  a. Director of the Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM) shall:

     (1)   Execute a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with OPM for the
           administration and use of the USDA Pathways Programs, according to the
           provisions of the merit system principles specified in 5 CFR Part 362;

     (2)   Maintain oversight of the USDA Pathways Programs, including collecting data for
           the Human Capital Management Report;

     (3)   Provide information to OPM regarding the job opportunities which fall under the
           USDA Pathways Programs;

     (4)   Provide leadership and policy guidance;

     (5)   Delegate authority to the USDA Pathways Programs Officer to oversee and
           monitor the management of the Program; and

     (6)   Ensure that the Mission Area/Agency Human Resources Directors (MAHRDs)
           conduct periodic reviews to measure the quality and effectiveness of the program.

  b. Provost, Virtual University, shall:

     (1)   Provide USDA Pathways Programs participants with career and professional
           development training using USDA’s AgLearn Learning Management System; and

     (2)   Train HR Professionals, Hiring Managers, Recruiters, and Student Coordinators in
           USDA’s Pathways Programs best practices.

  c. USDA Pathways Programs Officer:

     The USDA Pathways Programs Officer is responsible for providing the overall
     management and administration of the USDA Pathways Programs. The USDA
     Pathways Programs Officer shall:

     (1)   Serve as a liaison between OPM and MAHRDs by providing implementation
           updates, clarifying technical and programmatic issues, and best practices;

                                              4
   (2)   Approve and disapprove breaks in programs;

   (3)   Monitor the management of the USDA Pathways Programs;

   (4)   Periodically evaluate the implementation of the USDA Pathways Programs and
         make changes as needed; and

   (5)   Attend related training as applicable.

d. Mission Area Human Resources Directors (MAHRDs) shall:

   (1)   Comply with the USDA Pathways Programs requirements, as described in the
         OPM-USDA MOU, USDA Pathways Programs Handbook, and this DR;

   (2)   Provide OHRM with Pathways Programs data in an effort to ensure Program
         compliance;

   (3)   Ensure compliance in the implementation of the Program;

   (4)   Ensure Program objectives are met by line managers and staff in their areas of
         responsibility;

   (5)   Ensure opportunities are consistent with positions identified in workforce and
         recruitment plans or other appropriate Mission Area/Agency plans;

   (6)   Ensure USDA Pathways participants meet OPM qualifications and educational
         standards and that Veterans’ preference laws are complied with;

   (7)   Notify the USDA PMF Coordinator 30 days prior to a PMF appointment;

   (8)   Ensure that Agencies and Staff Offices have sufficient appropriations and
         resources to support the requirements of the program beyond salary and benefits
         including:

         (a) OPM fee for PMFs;

         (b) Training;

         (c) Travel;

         (d) Developmental rotation(s); and

         (e) Other related expenses.


                                            5
   (9)   Ensure that USDA Agency and Staff Office supervisors who wish to hire a PMF
         receive the approval of the first level SES in their Agency chain of command;

   (10) Approve/Disapprove Extension Requests;

   (11) Ensure that USDA Agencies and Staff Offices evaluate the value and effectiveness
        of their PMF Programs and provide a copy of the evaluation to Virtual University
        Provost on September 1 of each year;

   (12) Agencies and Staff Offices will provide orientation to each Pathways Participant,
        assign mentors within 90 days of appointment, provide a rotational experience,
        establish an Individual Development Plan (IDP) within 45 days of appointment,
        and provide students and recent graduates with a minimum of 40 hours of formal,
        interactive training per year, and PMFs with 80 hours of training per year, for 2
        years, as outlined in the Virtual University USDA Pathways Programs Training
        and Development Plan.

e. Recruiters shall:

   (1)   Ensure that all vacancies are publicly posted, in accordance with 5 CFR 362.203;

   (2)   Prior to the event, ensure recruitment/job fairs are publicly posted if Pathways
         positions are available;

   (3)   Refrain from collecting applications/resumes from prospective applicants onsite at
         any and all career and recruitment fairs/events unless public notification
         requirements have been met and the event has been approved by the USDA
         Pathways Program Officer;

   (4)   Recruit from a diverse student population, in accordance with USDA’s recruitment
         plans;

   (5)   Maintain records of recruitment sources;

   (6)   Participate in periodic USDA Pathways Programs training;

   (7)   Refer students to Student Coordinators; and

   (8)   Understand and adhere to USDA’s Pathways Programs recruitment plans.

f. Student Employment Program Coordinators shall:

   (1)   Keep abreast of Mission Area/ Pathways Programs vacancies;



                                            6
   (2)   Participate in Mission Area/Agency recruitment plan development to ensure
         Pathways Programs goals are properly established;

   (3)   Ensure supervisors identify training and educational needs which will allow interns
         to develop the competencies appropriate to the Mission Area/Agency;

   (4)   Ensure all USDA Pathways Programs vacancies are publicly posted before
         selections are made;

   (5)   Acknowledge receipt of Break in the Program and Extension Requests;

   (6)   Ensure that each Pathways Participant receives Orientation and On-boarding
         training;

   (7)   Participate in periodic USDA Pathways Programs training;

   (8)   Monitor Pathways Programs participant’s progress, maintain records and copies of
         approved extension requests forms, organize and analyze statistical data required
         for program review, administration, and evaluation.

g. Managers and Supervisors shall:

   (1)   Work effectively with all USDA Pathways participants;

   (2)   Authorize meetings between Pathways participants to provide performance
         feedback

   (3)   Ensure that each Pathways participant receives orientation and On-boarding
         training;

   (4)   Ensure that experienced employees are available to serve as mentors;

   (5)   Ensure that Pathways participants develop an IDP;

   (6)   Ensure that each USDA Pathways participant signs a USDA Pathways Programs
         Participant Agreement;

   (7)   Ensure the completion of the USDA Pathways Programs Training Plan;

   (8)   Participate in periodic USDA Pathways Programs training;

   (9)   Coordinate and support a 4-6 month rotational assignment for PMF’s;

   (10) Complete a performance management plan for all USDA Pathways participants;
        and

                                           7
   (11) Submit Break in Program and Extension Requests timely.

h. Human Resources Practitioners shall:

   (1)   Apply applicable veterans’ preference rules to all applicants;

   (2)   Adjudicate the applicant’s suitability and verify his or her qualifications;

   (3)   Work directly with the participants of the USDA Pathways Programs to offer
         assistance with HR services,

   (4)   Ensure that each Pathways participant receives orientation and on-boarding
         training;

   (5)   Implement the Agency’s USDA Pathways Programs in a fair and equal
         environment;

   (6)   Ensure that each Pathways participant signs a USDA Pathways Programs
         Participant Agreement;

   (7)   Acknowledge, sign, and date the Break in the Program and Extension Requests
         Forms as needed;

   (8)   Keep accurate records of the Agency’s Break in Program and Extension Requests;

   (9)   Participate in periodic USDA Pathways Programs training;

   (10) Publicly post all internship job opportunities, as outlined in 5 CFR 362.203; use
        the Schedule D hiring authority when hiring USDA Pathways Students and Recent
        Graduates; and ensure that applicants for intern positions meet the definition of a
        student, as specified in 5 CFR 362.202; and

   (11) Ensure compliance with applicable negotiated agreements regarding the Pathways
        Program and participants.

i. Executive Resources Board (ERB) shall:

    (1) Review current and proposed Presidential Management Fellow (PMF) policies for
        adequacy;

    (2) Ensure USDA PMF provisions are consistent with the Department’s mission and
        strategic planning objectives, priorities and goals established by the Secretary and
        law;


                                             8
      (3) Review and approve or disapprove agency requests for extension of a PMF’s
          appointment and PMF conversions. Review current and proposed PMF policies for
          adequacy.

  j. Mentors shall:

     (1)   Assist USDA Pathways participants in identifying, developing, and implementing
           mentoring goals;

     (2)   Provide a network for the USDA Pathways participant for accessing career
           guidance and growth opportunities;

     (3)   Meet regularly with Pathways participants, in person or by telephone, for the
           duration of the program;

     (4)   Provide constructive feedback;

     (5)   Recognize and validate signs of professional growth and development in the
           Pathways participant/protégé;

     (6)   Advise on relevant training needs and opportunities; and

     (7)   Share knowledge and insights and create opportunities for professional exposure.

  k. Civil Rights Office:

     The Civil Rights Office will assist supervisors and managers with outreach activities, in
     accordance with the USDA Pathways Programs Handbook and this directive.

8. THE USDA PATHWAYS PROGRAMS

  a. USDA Internship Program

     (1)   Agencies and Staff Offices may recruit and appoint individuals who meet the
           definition of a student in the Internship Program and all the qualifications and
           requirements of the position being filled. A student is an individual who is in high
           school, a home-school program, rehabilitation or vocation school, a 1-year full-
           time certificate program, or in an undergraduate or graduate school program. All
           interns will be referred to as "Student Trainees". Student Trainees are appointed as
           either Student Trainees with Not to Exceed (NTE) dates or Student Trainees
           without NTE dates. Agencies and Staff Offices should provide Student Trainees
           with meaningful developmental work related to the student's academic or career
           goals and appoint Student Trainees (with NTE dates) on a temporary basis. The
           Student Trainee's assignments may be labor intensive activities not requiring
           subject matter expertise. Student Trainees (without NTE dates) will be appointed

                                             9
      until graduation requirements are met and provided developmental assignments
      related to the student's academic or career goals. (See 5 CFR 362.203(d)(3)). Non-
      citizens may be appointed to Recent Graduate positions under provisions identified
      in the USDA Pathways Handbook. However, citizenship is required prior to
      conversion to a competitive service appointment.

(2)   A recruitment plan for the USDA Pathways Programs is vital to USDA’s
      workforce. The Department’s priorities of full utilization of hiring flexibilities and
      Cultural Transformation should be considered when filling positions in order to
      meet workforce diversity goals.

(3)   Agencies and Staff Offices will publicly post all internship opportunities in
      USAJOBS for a minimum of 5 business days and only hire individuals who meet
      the definition of “student”. The announcement must provide information on how
      to apply, position title, series and grade (career ladders have to be identified in the
      vacancy announcement), geographic location of the position, and provide a point
      of contact for those seeking more information about how to apply to Internship
      opportunities.

(4)   Outreach with local universities, state employment offices and disability and
      veterans’ service offices should also be completed.

(5)   Pathways participants whose positions are under the General Schedule (GS) or
      comparable pay plan must be classified as Student Trainees, in the -99 (i.e. 299,
      399, etc.) series of the appropriate occupational group. Pathways participants
      whose positions are under the Federal Wage System (FWS) will be classified as
      Student Trainees, in the -01 series of the appropriate occupational group.

(6)   USDA Agencies and Staff Offices must make appointments that adhere to the
      qualifications standard established by OPM for the Schedule D, Pathways
      Internship positions and grade level. Appointments may be made to any position
      for which the individual is qualified. The duties of the position to which the
      individual is appointed should be related to either the student trainees' academic or
      career goals. Student Trainees being considered for positions with a positive
      education requirement (e.g., biologist, geologist, etc.) must be directly enrolled in a
      related degree program. Veteran’s preference applies in the evaluation of qualified
      applicants for all USDA Pathways Program positions in accordance with the
      provisions of 5 CFR Part 302.

(7)   Agencies and Staff Offices must make appointments to the USDA Internship
      Program, pursuant to USDA’s Pathways Program MOU using the Schedule D
      excepted service appointing authority provided in 5 CFR 213.3402(a). Applicants
      will be evaluated and arranged in compliance with 5 CFR Part 302 excepted
      service appointments.


                                         10
(8)   A Student Trainee serving under a temporary appointment NTE 1 year, who has
      not completed 1 year of service, is in excepted service Tenure Group 0. An Intern
      serving under a temporary appointment NTE 1 year, who has completed 1 year of
      current, continuous service, is in excepted service Tenure Group III. (See 5 CFR
      362.205(a)(1)(ii) and (iii)).

(9)   A Student Trainee without NTE dates serving under an appointment for an initial
      period expected to last more than 1 year is in excepted service Tenure Group II for
      purposes of 5 CFR 362.205(a)(1) and afforded the same retention rights as other
      excepted service employees. Appointments are subject to all laws, regulations,
      and policies governing equal employment opportunity.

(10) A Pathways Program Participant Agreement must be signed by the Student Trainee
     and Agency designee. Participant agreements must be completed prior to the
     Student Trainee’s entrance-on duty (EOD) and signed by the student for each
     academic year. The agreement must describe the general description of duties;
     evaluation procedures that will be used for the participant; requirements for
     continuation and successful completion of the program; work schedules; minimum
     eligibility requirements for non-competitive conversion to term or permanent
     competitive service employment according to the requirements of the applicable
     Pathways Program; and the length of the appointment and termination date. (5
     CFR Part 362).

(11) An intermittent schedule is prohibited under the USDA Pathways Programs. A
     Student Trainee may work a full-time or part-time schedule. Supervisors are
     responsible for establishing a work schedule for Student Trainees in accordance
     with 5 CFR 610.121. The work schedule should not interfere with the Student
     Trainee’s academic schedule. Supervisors and Student Trainees should agree on a
     formally-arranged schedule of school and work so that:

      (a)   Work responsibilities do not interfere with academic performance;

      (b)   Completion of the educational program (awarding of
            diploma/certificate/degree) and the Internship Program is accomplished in a
            reasonable and appropriate timeframe;

      (c)   The Supervisor is informed and prepared for the student’s periods of
            employment; and

      (d)   Requirements for non-competitive conversion to term or permanent position
            in the competitive service are understood by all parties.

(12) Student Trainees may or may not be eligible for telework. For more information
     on Telework, see USDA DR 4080-811-002.


                                        11
(13) Student Trainees must serve a 2 year trial period. Prior Federal civilian service is
     credited toward the completion of the required trial period in the same manner as
     prescribed in 5 CFR 315.802.

(14) Student Trainees may be placed in a bargaining unit position and as such are
     included in the Local bargaining unit (BU). Orientations for student trainees
     identified as eligible bargaining unit employees will include any negotiated
     orientation requirements outlined in the applicable collective bargaining
     agreements. Hiring managers shall check with their HR Practitioner or Labor
     Relations staff for a determination on whether or not the position is a bargaining or
     non-bargaining position.

(15) Travel payments and reimbursements and lodging payments are subject to
     Agency/Mission Area regulations. Student Trainees are not eligible for relocation
     expenses upon initial appointment to the USDA Pathways Intern Program. At the
     discretion of the Agency/Mission Area, Student Trainees may or may not be
     eligible for a relocation allowance when assigned to a permanent position upon
     completion of their academic program.

(16) USDA on-boarding requirements require responsible stewardship of resources and
     accountability for the strategic management of human resources, including the
     successful acclimation of new employees into the workplace (USDA DR 4720-
     001). To achieve this goal, USDA has established a uniform framework for
     orienting new employees to the workplace. Agencies and Staff Offices will ensure
     that each Student Trainee receives on-boarding materials. It is the Agency/Staff
     Office’s responsibility to ensure that each Student Trainee receives orientation.
     The Agency’s Employee Orientation Program provides information on employee
     benefits, ethics, conduct, etc. The Student Trainee should be provided additional
     orientation in accordance with the participant agreement.

(17) IDPs are required for all Students who are expected to serve 90 days or more in a
     consecutive 12-month period. IDPs must be completed within 45 days of the
     employee’s appointment into the Pathways Program. The supervisor and
     employee meet annually to update the employee’s IDP.

(18) Supervisors are responsible for ensuring that a Mentor is assigned to the Student,
     within 90 days of appointment, provided a shadowing experience and a minimum
     of 40 hours of formal, interactive training over the duration of their internship.

(19) Student Trainees are eligible for federal health benefits in accordance with 5 CFR
     Part 890 and described in the USDA Pathways Handbook. Student Trainees are
     eligible for annual and sick leave when in a pay status in accordance with 5 CFR
     Part 630.



                                        12
(20) Prior to conversion to a term or career or career conditional appointment, Student
     Trainees must be a U.S. citizen and satisfactorily complete all training, 640 work
     hours, program and educational requirements, as prescribed in the USDA
     Pathways Handbook.

(21) Student Trainees with or without NTE dates are eligible for conversion to term,
     career or career conditional appointments if specified in the vacancy
     announcement to which they applied and upon meeting the program requirements.
     Student Trainees should be converted to the same line of work they were initially
     appointed to.

(22) Subject to any limits on conversion imposed by the OPM Director, USDA
     Agencies and Staff Offices may non-competitively convert an eligible Intern to a
     term or permanent competitive service position.

(23) A Student Trainee who is non-competitively converted to a competitive service
     term appointment may be subsequently converted non-competitively to a
     permanent competitive service position. Non-competitive conversion may be to a
     position within the same agency or any other agency within the Federal
     Government.

(24) Time spent serving as a Student Trainee counts towards career tenure when the
     individual is non-competitively converted to a permanent position in the
     competitive service upon completion of the program in accordance with 5 CFR
     315.802.

(25) Service in the Pathways Program confers no right to further employment in either
     the competitive or excepted service. An agency wishing to convert a student must
     therefore execute the required action to do so within 120 days of successful
     completion of the degree and program requirements.

(26) If for some reason other than poor performance, misconduct or suitability, the
     Agency/Staff Office is unable to place the participant, the employing unit should
     explore placement opportunities with other units or Federal agencies at least 90
     days prior to the end of the Intern’s eligibility period.

(27) A Student Trainee converted to a full-time career or career-conditional position in
     the competitive service under this section does not have to serve a probationary
     period and acquires competitive status immediately upon conversion. The
     probationary period for career/career conditional employees is one year per 5 CFR
     315.802. The entire period served under the Internship Program counts towards the
     probationary period. If the Intern works less than one year prior to conversion to
     the competitive service, they need to work the additional time after conversion to
     complete the probationary period. Time spent serving as a Pathways Programs
     participant counts towards career tenure when the individual is non-competitively

                                       13
     converted to a permanent position in the competitive service upon completion of
     the program, with or without an intervening term appointment, and without a break
     in service of one day.
(28) A Student Trainee whose appointment is converted to career or career conditional
     becomes a career employee upon completing the service requirement for career
     tenure or is excepted in accordance with 5 CFR 315.201.

(29) NTE Student Trainees may be extended in NTE 1 year increments (NTE 8 years),
     as long as the Intern NTE continues to meet the program eligibility requirements.
     (See 5 CFR 213.104(b)(3)(ii)). Supervisors must submit a request for an extension
     to their MAHRD, 45 days prior to the end of the initial NTE date.

(30) Student Trainee without a NTE date shall not exceed 8 years.

(31) In rare cases, Student Trainees and their respective supervisors may need to
     request a break in the program. A break in program is defined as a period of time
     when an Intern is working but is unable to go to school, or is neither attending
     classes nor working at the agency. The best interests of the student and the
     Department must be balanced in making these decisions. Therefore, a request for a
     break in the program must be sent to the USDA Pathways Programs Officer 45
     days prior to the break in the program. A copy of the Student Trainee’s
     Participation Agreement must be updated and filed in the Student Trainees’
     personnel file, if the request is approved.

(32) It is the intent of the USDA Intern Program that the Student Trainees are either
     attending classes or working at the agency, or both, at all times while employed
     under the program. Upon approval of a break in the program, the Student Trainee
     should be placed on Leave Without Pay (LWOP), if he/she is not working. A NTE
     Student Trainee must not be placed on LWOP for longer than 30 days if on an
     approved break in program.

(33) USDA Agencies and Staff Offices may pay all or part of the Student Trainee’s
     training expenses directly related to the employee’s official duties. Student
     Trainees are eligible for tuition/academic degree training reimbursement (5 CFR
     410.308). When the USDA Agencies and Staff Offices pay a Student Trainee’s
     tuition and related college expenses, the Student Trainee must sign an agreement to
     commit to work for a specified period as per the agreement.

(34) For all Student Trainee appointments over 90 days, performance elements,
     standards and measures must be established and provided to the employee within
     15 days of employment and must include standards and measures specific to
     developmental activities. Student Trainees must be on a performance plan for 90
     days, before a rating of record may be given. (See USDA DR 4040-430,
     Performance Management). Supervisors shall establish performance standards and
     conduct performance evaluations in accordance with USDA DR 4040-430.

                                       14
(35) USDA Agencies and Staff Offices may promote Student Trainees who meet the
     OPM qualification requirements for the position in accordance with 5 CFR
     362.203(c). Student Trainees with or without a NTE date are eligible for a career
     ladder promotion upon conversion, as identified in the original vacancy
     announcement for the Student Trainee’s internship position, upon meeting the
     USDA Pathways Program qualification standards and other eligibility
     requirements. The action to promote a NTE Student Trainee is processed as a
     conversion. Time-in-grade (TIG) restrictions apply only to competitive service
     positions; therefore, TIG does not apply to Student Trainee appointments. Student
     Trainees must meet specialized experience and/or the educational requirements of
     the grade as outlined in the OPM qualifications standards.

(36) NTE Student Trainees are not eligible for Within-Grade Increases (WGIs).

(37) Student Trainees without NTE dates appointed to a position lasting more than 1
     year, will be automatically advanced to the next higher rate of their grade at the
     beginning of the first applicable pay period following completion of the required
     waiting period, provided their performance is satisfactory and they have not
     received an equivalent increase in pay during their waiting period.

(38) Student Trainees appointed to Wage Grade positions regardless of type of
     appointment are entitled to WGIs. Student Trainees will be automatically
     advanced to the next higher rate of their grade at the beginning of the first
     applicable pay period following completion of the required waiting period,
     provided their performance in the position is satisfactory and they have not
     received an equivalent increase in pay during the waiting period.

(39) Student Trainees may be detailed to other positions within the competitive service,
     although it is not recommended.

(40) Student Trainees are covered by 5 CFR part 351, for purposes of Reduction-in-
     Force (RIF).

(41) USDA Agencies and Staff Offices must terminate Student Trainees who are not
     converted at the end of the program period. The end of the program period occurs
     120 days after completion of the designated academic course of study (unless the
     student trainee is converted) or upon expiration of the NTE internship
     appointment, whichever comes first.

(42) Student Trainees who fail to maintain the eligibility requirements of the USDA
     Pathways Program must be terminated from the program.



                                        15
   (43) Student Trainees are afforded the same retention rights as excepted service
        employees and maybe eligible for severance pay if involuntarily separated under 5
        CFR part 550, subpart G.

   (44) USDA Agencies and Staff Offices may terminate a Student Trainee for reasons
        related to misconduct, poor performance, suitability, or failure to meet the
        definition of a student. Agencies/Staff Offices are advised to consult their
        Employee Relations Branch prior to termination.

   (45) Student Trainees count against full-time equivalent (FTE) ceilings, pursuant to
        Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-11, Section 85.

   (46) USDA periodically requires USDA Agencies and Staff Offices to report USDA
        Pathways Program Internship hires.

   (47) Upon successful completion of the internship and having met eligibility
        requirements, the participant can be converted to a permanent or term position with
        a full performance level higher than that which he/she competed for the internship
        position.

b. USDA Recent Graduates Program

   (1) USDA Agencies and Staff Offices may recruit and appoint individuals who have
       recently graduated from qualifying institutions or programs such as community
       colleges, colleges and universities, trade schools, and career and technical
       education programs, under the USDA Recent Graduates Program. To be eligible
       for the USDA Recent Graduates Program, an individual must have completed
       within the last two years a qualifying associate’s, bachelor’s, master’s,
       professional, doctorate, vocational or technical degree, or certificate from an
       accredited educational institution.
        Veteran’s preference applies in the arrangement of qualified applicants for all
        USDA Pathways Programs positions (5 CFR 302.101(a)). A veteran who due to
        military service obligations was precluded from applying as a Recent Graduate
        during any portion of the 2 year eligibility period shall have a full 2 year period of
        eligibility upon discharge from active duty. In no event may the individual’s
        eligibility period be extended beyond 6 years from the date he/she completed the
        required academic course of study (5 CFR 362.302). USDA Agencies and Staff
        Offices must refer to the participants in the USDA Recent Graduates Program as
        “Recent Graduates” and place them in positions with progressively more
        responsible duties which provide career advancement opportunities. Non-citizens
        may be appointed to Recent Graduate positions under provisions identified in the
        USDA Pathways Handbook, Section 9.1c. Citizenship is however required prior
        to conversion to a competitive service appointment.


                                           16
(2)   Recruitment planning for the Recent Graduate must be executed in accordance
      with the Pathways Programs public notice requirements. The Department's
      priorities of full utilization of hiring flexibilities and Cultural Transformation
      should be considered when filling positions in order to meet workforce diversity
      goals.

(3)   Agencies will publicly post all Recent Graduate opportunities in USAJOBS for a
      minimum of 5 business days and only hire individuals who meet eligibility
      requirements identified for Recent Graduates. The announcement must provide
      information on how to apply, position title, series and grade (career ladders have to
      be identified in the vacancy announcement), geographic location of the position,
      and provide a point of contact for those seeking more information on how to apply
      to Recent Graduate opportunities.

(4)   Outreach with local universities, state employment offices and disability and
      veterans services offices should also be completed.

(5)   Classification of the position is based on the occupational series for which the
      Recent Graduate is hired. The grade level is set according to criteria in the
      appropriate General Schedule or Federal Wage System classification standard.

(6)   Candidates must be evaluated using the OPM qualification standards for the
      occupation and grade level of the position being filled. Applicants must also meet
      eligibility requirements. USDA Agencies and Staff Offices must make
      appointments that adhere to the qualifications standard established by OPM for the
      occupational series to be filled. Appointments may be made to any position for
      which the individual is qualified. The duties of the position to which the
      individual is appointed should be related to the student's academic or career goals.
      Initial appointments to scientific and professional research positions may be made
      at the GS-11 level for which the classification and qualification criteria for
      research positions apply, if the candidate possesses a master’s degree or equivalent
      graduate degree directly related to the position the agency is seeking to fill. If the
      candidate has a Ph.D. or equivalent doctoral degree, which is directly related to the
      position the agency is filling, the appointment may be made at the GS-12 level,
      provided that the recent graduate meets OPM’s qualification standards for the
      position.

(7)   Agencies and Staff Offices must make appointments to the Recent Graduate
      Program pursuant to the USDA Pathways MOU using the schedule D excepted
      service appointing authority provided in 5 CFR 213.3402(b). Applicants will be
      evaluated and arranged in compliance with 5 CFR 302.304 excepted service
      appointments.

(8)   Recent Graduates are appointed to Tenure Group II for purposes of 5 CFR 351.502
      and accorded the same retention rights as other excepted service employees.

                                         17
      Appointments are subject to all laws, regulations, and policies governing equal
      employment opportunity.

(9)   A Pathways Program Participant Agreement must be completed before the Recent
      Graduate's EOD and signed by the Recent Graduate. The agreement must provide
      a general description of the duties; evaluation procedures that will be used for the
      participant; requirements for continuation and successful completion of the
      program; work schedules; minimum eligibility requirements for noncompetitive
      conversion to term or permanent competitive service employment according to the
      requirements of the program, the length of appointment and termination date.

(10) An intermittent schedule is prohibited under the USDA Recent Graduate Program.
     A Recent Graduate may work a full or part time schedule. Supervisors are
     responsible for establishing a work schedule for the participant. Supervisors and
     Recent Graduates should agree on a formally arranged schedule. Recent Graduates
     may or may not be eligible for Telework (See USDA DR 4080-811-002).

(11) The duration of the Recent Graduate's appointment in the excepted service is the
     trial period. Prior Federal civilian service is credited toward the completion of the
     required trial period in the same manner as prescribed in 5 CFR 315.802.

(12) Travel payments and reimbursements and lodging payments are subject to
     Agency/Mission Area regulations. Recent Graduates are eligible for relocation
     expenses upon initial appointment to the Recent Graduate Program. At the
     discretion of the Agency/Mission Area, Recent Graduates are eligible for a
     relocation allowance when assigned to a permanent position upon completion of
     their college work.

(13) On-boarding requirements require responsible stewardship of resources and
     accountability for the strategic management of human resources, including the
     successful acclimation of new employees into the workplace (USDA DR 4720-
     001). To achieve this goal, a uniform framework for orienting new employees to
     the workplace has been established. Agencies and Staff Offices will ensure that
     each Recent Graduate receives on-boarding materials. It is the Agency/Staff
     Office’s responsibility to ensure that each Recent Graduate receives orientation.
     The Agency’s Employee Orientation Program provides information on employee
     benefits, ethics, conduct, etc. The Recent Graduate should be provided additional
     orientation in accordance with the participant agreement.

(14) Individual Development Plans (IDPs) are required for all USDA Recent Graduates.
     The supervisor and Recent Graduate must meet annually to update the Recent
     Graduate’s IDP – typically at the same time the Recent Graduate is placed on a
     performance plan – but can be adjusted as necessary throughout the year to address
     changing requirements and needs. IDPs must be established within 45 days of
     appointment and approved by his or her supervisor.

                                        18
(15) Recent Graduates must be assigned Mentors within 90 days of appointment. The
     Mentor should be someone from the appropriate level that is outside the Recent
     Graduate’s chain of command.

(16) Recent Graduates are eligible for federal health benefits in accordance with 5 CFR
     part 890 as described in the USDA Pathways Handbook. Recent Graduates are
     also eligible for annual and sick leave when in a pay status in accordance with 5
     CFR part 630.

(17) Recent Graduates must take at least 40 hours of formal interactive training per year
     that advances the goals and competencies outlined in each Recent Graduate’s IDP.
     Mandatory annual training, such as information security and ethics training, does
     not count towards the 40-hour requirement.

(18) Recent Graduates who satisfactorily complete the USDA Recent Graduates
     Program and meet all eligibility requirements for conversion as outlined in 5 CFR
     362.305 may be non-competitively converted to a term or permanent appointment
     in the competitive service under 5 CFR 315.713(a). Recent Graduates converted
     to term appointments may later be non-competitively converted to a permanent
     competitive service position. The conversion cannot be to a position that has a
     career ladder, unless it was identified in the original vacancy announcement.
     Program requirements include: U.S. citizenship; successful completion of all the
     requirements of the USDA Recent Graduates Program; demonstrated successful
     job performance; compliance with the OPM qualification standard for the
     occupational series to be filled.

(19) Recent Graduates converted to a full time position in the competitive service do
     not have to serve a probationary period and acquire competitive status immediately
     upon conversion. Time spent serving as a Recent Graduate counts toward career
     tenure when the individual is non-competitively converted to a permanent position
     in the competitive service upon completion of the program.

(20) Agencies and Staff Offices may extend the 1 year program period for up to an
     additional 120 days to cover rare and unusual circumstances. A request for
     extension must be approved by the Agency Human Resources Director within 45
     days of the request.

(21) Recent Graduates may apply for and accept a new Recent Graduates appointment
     with another USDA Agency or Staff Office or another Federal agency, as long as
     the agency meets all the requirements for participation in the Pathways Program.

(22) USDA Agencies and Staff Offices may pay all or part of the Recent Graduate's
     training expenses directly related to the employee’s official duties. Recent
     Graduates are eligible for tuition/academic degree training reimbursement (5 CFR

                                       19
     410.308). When the USDA Agencies and Staff Offices pay a Recent Graduate's
     tuition and related college expenses, the Recent Graduate must sign an agreement
     to commit to work for a specified period of time as per the agreement.

(23) For all Recent Graduate appointments performance elements, standards and
     measures must be established and provided to the employee within 15 days of
     employment and must include standards and measures specific to developmental
     activities. Recent Graduates must be on a performance plan for 90 days, before a
     rating of record may be given. (See USDA DR 4040-430, Performance
     Management). Supervisors shall establish performance standards and conduct
     performance evaluations in accordance with USDA DR 4040-430.

(24) Recent Graduates are eligible for a non-competitive career ladder promotion upon
     recommendation from supervisor, meeting qualification standards and other
     eligibility requirements, as appropriate, provided the career ladder was identified
     in the original vacancy announcement for the Recent Graduate position. Time-in-
     grade restrictions apply only to competitive service positions; therefore, time-in-
     grade does not apply to Recent Graduate appointments. However, one year of
     specialized experience at the next lower grade level applies.

(25) Recent Graduates are eligible for within grade increases (WGI). WGIs apply only
     to GS employees occupying permanent positions. "Permanent position" is defined
     in 5 CFR 531.403 as a position filled by an employee whose appointment is not
     designated as temporary and does not have a definite time limitation of 1 year or
     less. "Permanent position" includes a position to which an employee is promoted
     on a temporary or term basis for at least 1 year. The term does not include a
     position filled by an employee whose appointment is limited to 1 year or less and
     subsequently extended so that the total time of the appointment exceeds 1 year.

(26) In rare instances, Recent Graduates may be detailed to other positions within the
     competitive service. (See 5 CFR 300.301(c) and 5 U.S.C. 3341).

(27) Recent Graduates are covered by 5 CFR part 351 for purposes of RIF. Recent
     Graduates are in excepted service Tenure Group II for purposes of 5 CFR 362.306.

(28) The appointment of a Recent Graduate who is not converted to a career or career-
     conditional appointment automatically expires at the end of the program period, or
     upon expiration of the USDA Pathways Programs Officer’s approved extension, if
     applicable. (See 5 CFR 362.303).

(29) Recent Graduates may be terminated for reasons related to misconduct, poor
     performance, or suitability. Supervisors should contact their servicing Human
     Resources Management Office immediately for advice and assistance if
     performance or conduct problems occur with Recent Graduates. Whenever a
     Recent Graduate is discharged due to poor conduct or performance, officials must

                                       20
         prepare adequate documentation outlining the facts leading to discharge and all
         counseling efforts made prior to discharge.

   (30) Recent Graduates in the USDA Pathways Program count against full-time
        equivalent (FTE) ceilings, pursuant to Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
        Circular A-11, Section 85.

   (31) USDA periodically requires USDA Agencies and Staff Offices to report USDA
        Pathways Programs hiring data.

c. USDA Presidential Management Fellows Program

   (1)   USDA Agencies and Staff Offices may appoint only individuals who meet
         requirements set out in 5 CFR 213.3402(c). Individuals who completed an
         advanced degree from a qualifying educational institution within the 2 years
         preceding the OPM Program announcement or who are scheduled to complete an
         advanced degree prior to the date that PMF finalists are announced are eligible to
         apply for the Program. An individual may apply for the PMF Program more than
         once as long as he/she meets the eligibility criteria. Non-citizens may be
         appointed to PMF positions under provisions identified in the USDA Pathways
         Handbook. Citizenship is however required prior to conversion to a competitive
         service appointment

   (2)   All USDA PMFs are considered and selected from OPM's list of PMF finalists.

   (3)   The Agency is responsible for classifying all PMF position descriptions. The
         grade level is set according to criteria in the appropriate General Schedule
         classification standard.

   (4)   OPM will select PMF finalists based on an OPM evaluation of each candidate’s
         experience and accomplishments as stated in his or her application and the results
         of a rigorous structured assessment process. The Agency is responsible for
         verifying qualifications and eligibility upon appointment.

   (5)   Appointments are subject to all laws, regulations, and policies governing equal
         employment opportunity.

   (6)   Appointments to the USDA PMF Program are made in accordance with the
         Schedule D excepted service appointing authority provided in 5 CFR 213.3402(c).
         Appointments are subject to all the requirements and conditions governing term,
         career, or career-conditional employment, including investigation to establish an
         appointee’s qualifications and suitability.




                                           21
(7)   PMFs are appointed for an initial period of 2 years. The first 2 years of a Fellow’s
      appointment is a trial period. A PMF may be appointed at any time during the 12-
      month period beginning on the date OPM publishes the list of Fellows finalists.

(8)   PMF appointments may be made at the GS–09, GS–11, or GS–12 level or
      equivalent depending on the applicants’ qualifications.

(9)   PMFs are appointed to Tenure Group II for purposes of 5 CFR 315.201 and
      afforded the same retention rights as other excepted service employees.

(10) A USDA Pathways Programs Participant Agreement must be completed before the
     PMF’s EOD and signed by the participant. The agreement must provide a general
     description of the duties; evaluation procedures that will be used for the
     participant; requirements for continuation and successful completion of the
     program; work schedules; minimum eligibility requirements for non-competitive
     conversion to term or permanent competitive service employment according to the
     requirements of the applicable Pathways Program; and the length of the
     appointment and termination date.

(11) An intermittent schedule is prohibited for PMFs. A PMF may work a full-time or
     part-time schedule. Supervisors are responsible for establishing a work schedule
     for a PMF in accordance with 5 CFR 610.121. Supervisors and PMFs should
     agree on a formally arranged schedule.

(12) PMFs may or may not be eligible for telework. (See USDA DR 4080-811-002)

(13) The duration of the PMF’s appointment in the excepted service is the trial period.
     Prior Federal civilian service is credited toward the completion of the required trial
     or probationary period, as prescribed in 5 CFR 315.802.

(14) PMFs may be placed in a bargaining unit position and, if so, are included in the
     Local bargaining unit (BU). Orientations for PMFs identified as eligible
     bargaining unit employees will include any negotiated orientation requirements
     outlined in the applicable collective bargaining agreements.

(15) Travel payments and reimbursements are authorized expenses related to mandatory
      training, such as travel and transportation between duty station and training
      location. PMFs are eligible for a relocation allowance. (See the Federal Travel
      Regulation (FTR), 41 CFR parts 300-304, 5 U.S.C. 5723, and DR 2300-002.
http://www.ocio.usda.gov/document/departmental-regulation-2300-002



(16) On-boarding requirements require responsible stewardship of resources and
     accountability for the strategic management of human resources, including the

                                        22
     successful acclimation of new employees into the workplace. To achieve this goal,
     USDA has established a uniform framework for orienting new employees to the
     workplace. (See USDA DR 4720-001).

(17) OPM will provide an orientation program for each class or cohort of Fellows and
     will provide information on available training opportunities. Each Agency/Staff
     Office must ensure that each PMF receives orientation. The PMF should be
     provided additional orientation in accordance with the service agreement.

(18) Each Agency/Staff Office must ensure within 45 days of appointment, that each
     PMF has an IDP that is approved by his or her supervisor; and provide at least 80
     hours of formal interactive training per year that advances the goals and
     competencies outlined in each PMF’s IDP. Mandatory annual training, such as
     information security and ethics training, does not count towards the 80-hour
     requirement.

(19) Mentors must be assigned to the PMF within 90 days of appointment. The Mentor
     should be someone from the appropriate level that is outside the PMF’s chain of
     command.

(20) PMFs are eligible for federal health benefits in accordance with 5 CFR part 890
     and described in the USDA Pathways Handbook. PMFs are eligible for annual and
     sick leave when in a pay status in accordance with 5 CFR part 630.

(21) Promotions are made in accordance with 5 CFR 362.405(c) and the USDA
     Pathways Programs Handbook. PMFs are eligible for within-grade pay increases
     when they perform at the successful level and serve the required waiting period.
     The waiting periods are the same as for permanent employees.

(22) Supervisors must provide each PMF a minimum of 80 hours of interactive training
     per year, for 2 years, that addresses the competencies outlined in the IDP.
     Supervisors must provide each PMF with at least one rotational or developmental
     assignment with full-time management and/or technical responsibilities consistent
     with the PMF’s IDP and the following requirements:

     (a)   Each PMF must receive at least one developmental assignment of 4 to 6
           months in duration, with management and/or technical responsibilities
           consistent with the PMF’s IDP. However, as an alternative, a PMF may
           choose to participate in an agency-wide initiative or other Presidential or
           Administration initiative that will provide the PMF with the experience that
           would have gained through the 4-to-6-month developmental assignment.

     (b)   The developmental assignment may be within the PMF’s organization, in
           another component of the agency, or in another Federal agency.


                                       23
     (c)   In addition, the PMF may receive other short-term rotational assignments of
           1 to 6 months in duration, at the appointing agency’s discretion.

     (d)   Upon the request of OPM, USDA Agencies and Staff Offices must make
           PMFs available to assist in the assessment process for subsequent PMF
           classes. This may require travel on the part of the PMF to be paid for by the
           appointing Agency or Staff Office.

     (e)   Supervisors must ensure that an annual IDP is completed by the PMF.

     (f)   PMFs must complete 160 hours of mandatory Training, 80 hours of training
           per year for 2 years. The required courses will be taken in AgLearn.
           Completion of the required 160 hours of training is a prerequisite for
           conversion to a career or career-conditional appointment. Virtual University
           maintains oversight of all training and professional development for USDA
           Pathways participants. USDA Agencies and Staff Offices may require PMFs
           to take additional training. However, the additional training must not
           interfere with the required 160 hours of training outlined in the USDA
           Pathways Programs Training Plan. USDA Agencies and Staff Offices may
           use their training authority in 5 U.S.C. Chapter 41 and 5 CFR part 410 to pay
           all or part of the PMFs training expenses.

(23) Prior to conversion the following certification requirements must be met: the
     appointing Agency’s/Staff Office’s Executive Resources Board (ERB) must
     evaluate each PMF and determine whether it can certify in writing that participant
     has met all of the requirements of the program, including the performance and
     developmental expectations set forth in the individual’s performance plan and IDP.
     The ERB may consult the PMF’s mentor in reaching its determination. The ERB
     must notify the PMF of its decision regarding certification of successful
     completion. ERB certifications must be forwarded to OPM. If the ERB decides
     not to certify a PMF, the Fellow may request reconsideration of that determination
     by the Director. Such reconsideration must be requested in writing, with
     appropriate documentation and justification, within 15 calendar days of the date of
     the agency’s decision. The Director’s decision on reconsideration is not subject to
     appeal.

(24) A PMF who is a U.S. citizen may be non-competitively converted from the PMF
     Program to a term or permanent position in the competitive service when the PMF
     has: Successfully completed all the requirements of the USDA PMF Program;
     demonstrated successful job performance consistent with the applicable
     performance appraisal program established under the agency’s approved
     performance appraisal system that results in a rating of record (or summary rating)
     of at least Fully Successful or equivalent and a recommendation for conversion by
     the first-level supervisor; and met the OPM qualification standard for the
     competitive service position to which the PMF will be converted.

                                       24
(25) A PMF must complete the USDA PMF Program within 2 years or up to an
     additional 120 days on an approved extension by the USDA Pathways Programs
     Officer.

(26) As provided in 5 CFR 315.713(a), USDA Agencies and Staff Offices may convert,
     without a break in service, an ERB certified PMF to a term or permanent
     appointment in the competitive service. PMFs who are non-competitively
     converted to a competitive service term appointment may be subsequently
     converted non-competitively to a permanent competitive service position. Non-
     competitive conversion may be to a position within the same agency or any other
     agency within the Federal Government. The provisions of the career transition
     assistance programs in 5 CFR part 330, Subparts B, F, and G do not apply to
     conversions made under this part. A PMF’s appointment expires at the end of his
     or her 2-year initial appointment. Although PMFs are eligible for non-competitive
     conversion to the competitive service upon successful completion of their program
     requirements and any other applicable conversion requirements. Service in the
     USDA PMF Program confers no right to further employment in either the
     competitive or excepted service.

(27) A PMF converted to a full-time career or career-conditional position in the
     competitive service under this section does not have to serve a probationary period
     and acquires competitive status immediately upon conversion.

(28) Time spent serving as a PMF counts towards career tenure when the PMF is non-
     competitively converted to a permanent position in the competitive service upon
     completion of the program.

(29) A PMF whose appointment is converted, becomes a career-conditional employee
     when he/she completes the service requirements for career tenure or is excepted
     from it by 5 CFR 315.201(c).

(30) A PMF appointment may be extended up to 120 days to cover rare and unusual
     circumstances or situations. Extension requests for PMFs must be sent to the ERB,
     within 45 days of the request using the USDA Pathways Programs Extension
     Request Form (See 5 CFR 362.404).

(31) PMFs may apply for and accept a new PMF appointment with another Federal
     agency or USDA Agency or Staff Office, as long as the agency meets all the
     requirements for participation in the USDA PMF Program. (See 5 CFR 362.304
     Movement between agencies). To move to the new agency, the PMF must
     separate from the current employing agency. The new employing agency must
     appoint the PMF without a break in service.



                                       25
(32) Time served under the previous agency’s PMF Program is credited toward the 2-
     year requirement for non-competitive conversion eligibility to the competitive
     service. Because there is no break in service, the PMF does not begin a new
     period in the program upon moving to the new agency.

(33) PMFs may be eligible to participate in USDA’s Student Loan Repayment Program
     in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 5379 and 5 CFR part 537, Repayment of Student
     Loans. The repayments may be all or part of any outstanding federally insured
     student loan or loans previously taken out by the PMF who has been appointed to
     an internship or to retain a PMF. Student loan repayment is not an entitlement.
     Before any loan repayments may be made, PMF’s must sign a written agreement
     to complete a specified period of employment in the Agency/Staff Office and to
     reimburse the Agency/Staff Office for loan repayment benefits if the PMF is
     separated involuntarily due to misconduct or failure to maintain an acceptable level
     of performance, leaves the Agency/Staff Office voluntarily or violates any other
     condition of the agreement.

(34) USDA Agencies and Staff Offices may pay all or part of the PMF’s training
     expenses directly related to the PMF’s official duties in accordance with 5 CFR
     part 410.

(35) PMFs are eligible for tuition/academic degree training reimbursement (5 CFR
     410.308). When USDA pays a PMF’s tuition and related college expenses, such
     as in the agency’s Multicultural Workforce Strategic Initiatives, the PMF will be
     required to sign an agreement to commit to work for a specified period of time as
     per the agreement.

(36) Upon satisfactory completion of the PMF Program, the Agency/Staff Office may
     offer the PMF either a term, permanent career or a career-conditional appointment.
     If a PMF is unwilling to accept the offer of either a term, permanent career or a
     career-conditional appointment, the PMF shall be responsible for repayment of all
     tuition and related college expenses received as per the agreement. The payment
     agreed to under this section may not be required of a PMF who leaves the service
     of USDA to enter into the service of another agency in any branch of the
     Government, unless it is specified otherwise in the agreement. (5 U.S.C. 4108(b)).

(37) For all PMF appointments performance elements, standards and measures must be
     established and provided to the employee within 15 days of employment, and must
     include standards and measures specific to developmental activities. PMFs must
     be on a performance plan for 90 days, before a rating of record may be given. (See
     USDA DR 4040-430, Performance Management). Supervisors shall establish
     performance standards and conduct performance evaluations in accordance with
     USDA DR 4040-430. The rating is to include an evaluation of the PMFs success
     in completing developmental activities designed to prepare the PMF to meet the
     developmental and performance expectations described in his or her performance

                                       26
     plan. In addition to the formal evaluation, the Agency/Staff Office is expected to
     provide regular feedback concerning the PMF’s performance. If a PMF fails to
     meet expectations set forth in the performance plan with regard to his or her
     developmental progress or assignments, the Agency/Staff Office may take
     appropriate action.

(38) PMFs are eligible for awards and recognition in compliance with the USDA Guide
     for Employee Recognition. (See USDA DR 4040-451-1).

(39) PMFs are eligible for a non-competitive career ladder promotion upon
     recommendation from supervisor, meeting qualification standards and other
     eligibility requirements, as appropriate. Time-in-grade restrictions apply only to
     competitive service positions; therefore, time-in-grade does not apply to PMF
     appointments. However 1 year of specialized experience at the next lower grade
     level applies.

(40) PMFs are eligible for Within-Grade Increases since their initial appointment is for
     a 2-year period. PMFs will be automatically advanced to the next higher rate of
     the grade at the beginning of the first applicable pay period following completion
     of the required waiting period, provided their performance in the position is
     satisfactory and they have not received an equivalent increase in pay during the
     waiting period. An employee’s performance is satisfactory when he/she achieves
     or maintains a performance rating of satisfactory or better.

(41) PMFs appointed to Wage Grade positions regardless of type of appointment, are
     entitled to within-grade increases. PMFs will be automatically advanced to the
     next higher rate of the grade at the beginning of the first applicable pay period
     following completion of the required waiting period, provided the performance in
     the position is satisfactory and the PMF has not received an equivalent increase in
     pay during the waiting period. A PMF’s performance is satisfactory when he/she
     achieves or maintains a performance rating of satisfactory or better.

(42) PMFs may be detailed to other positions within the competitive service (See 5
     CFR 300.301(b) and 5 U.S.C. 3341).

(43) PMFs are covered by 5 CFR part 351 for purposes of RIF. PMFs are in excepted
     service Tenure Group II for purposes of 5 CFR 362.306.

(44) The appointment of a PMF who is not converted to a term, career or career-
     conditional appointment automatically expires at the end of the program period.
     USDA Agencies/Staff Offices must terminate PMFs who are not converted at the
     end of the 2-year program period unless an extension of no more than 120 days has
     been granted by the USDA Pathways Officer (See 5 CFR 362.303).



                                       27
     (45) USDA Agencies and Staff Offices may terminate a PMF for reasons related to
          misconduct, poor performance, or suitability. Supervisors should contact their
          servicing Human Resources Management office immediately for advice and
          assistance if performance or conduct problems occur with PMFs. Whenever a
          PMF is discharged due to poor conduct or performance, USDA Officials must
          prepare adequate documentation outlining the facts leading to discharge and all
          counseling efforts made prior to discharge.

     (46) A PMF may withdraw from the USDA PMF Program at any time. Such
          withdrawal will be treated as a resignation from the Federal service; however, any
          obligations established upon admission and appointment (for example, as a result
          of accepting a recruitment incentive under 5 CFR part 575, Subpart A) still apply.
          If the withdrawal occurs within the first 6 months of the Fellow's appointment,
          USDA Agencies and Staff Offices may request reimbursement of one-quarter of
          the placement fee. USDA Agencies and Staff Offices must notify the Provost of
          the USDA Virtual University in writing, within 30 days of the withdrawal, when a
          PMF withdraws from the USDA PMF Program.

     (47) A PMF who resigns at any time prior to completion of the USDA PMF Program
          does not have reinstatement eligibility for competitive service positions based on
          his or her appointment as a PMF.

     (48) If a PMF withdraws from the USDA PMF Program for reasons that are related to
          misconduct, poor performance, or suitability, as determined by the USDA
          Agency/Staff Office, the PMF will not be readmitted to the USDA PMF Program
          at any time.

     (49) PMFs in the USDA PMF Program count against full-time equivalent (FTE)
          ceilings, pursuant to Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-11,
          Section 85.

9. DEFINITIONS

  Agency - USDA Agency or Staff Office

  AgLearn-Learning Management System (LMS) - Software that automates the
  administration of training. The LMS allows for online submission and approval of training
  requests, tracks learners’ completed training in a learning history, and provides reports to
  management. The Department’s LMS is called AgLearn.

  Break in the Program - A break in the Program is defined as a period of time when an
  Intern is working but is unable to go to school, or is neither attending classes nor working at
  the agency.



                                              28
Individual Development Plan (IDP) - Individually tailored and described objectives and
activities for an employee’s career development.

Recent Graduate - An individual who recently graduated from a qualifying associate’s,
bachelor’s, master's, professional, doctorate, vocational or technical degree or certificate
from a qualifying educational institution, within the previous 2 years. A veteran, as defined
in 5 U.S.C. 2108, who, due to a military service obligation, was precluded from applying to
the Recent Graduates Program during any portion of the 2-year eligibility period, shall have
a full 2-year period of eligibility upon his or her release or discharge from active duty. In no
event, however, may the individual's eligibility period extend beyond 6 years from the date
on which the individual completed the requirements of an academic course of study.


Specialized Experience - Experience that has equipped an applicant with the knowledge,
skills, and ability to perform the job successfully.

Student - An individual accepted for enrollment or enrolled and seeking a degree (diploma,
certificate, etc.) in a qualifying, accredited educational institution, on a full-or
half-time basis (as defined by the institution in which the student is enrolled).

Tenure - After serving three years of substantially continuous creditable service, a career
conditional employee becomes a career employee and gains career tenure. Employees with
career tenure have permanent reinstatement eligibility and may be considered for positions
without having to take another competitive civil service examination. Substantially
continuous service means service without a break for more than 30 calendar days (i.e., the
break must be for less than or equal to 30 calendar days).

                                          -END-




                                            29
