                  UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                            WASHINGTON, DC. 20250


                                                             Number:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                      4740-003

                                                             Date:
SUBJECT:                                                     July 25, 2014
Executive Continual Learning Program                         OPI:
                                                             Office of Human Resources
                                                             Management



1.   PURPOSE

     This directive establishes policy and procedures, assigns responsibilities and provides
     guidance for the continuing professional development of the Department of Agriculture’s
     executive workforce.

2.   SCOPE

     This directive applies to all USDA Senior Executive Service (SES), Senior Level (SL), and
     Scientific (ST), Senior Science and Technology Service (SSTS), or Professional members
     pertaining to executive and professional development.

3.   BACKGROUND

     Training and development should not end once an individual becomes an
     executive. Executive applies to SES, SL, ST, and SSTS positions specifically intended for
     training purposes only. Continuing education is essential to ensure the executive remains
     relevant in today’s fast paced environment. Facing constant challenges, changing
     technologies and a fluid environment, executives must pursue ongoing professional
     executive development to succeed and grow. It is crucial that executives continue to
     strengthen and enhance their SES Executive Core Qualifications (ECQs) and SL/ST senior
     leadership competencies broaden their perspectives, and strengthen their performance. In
     addition, continual learning is a fundamental competency within the SES ECQs. The
     definition of the continual learning competency provided by the Office of Personnel
     Management (OPM) is, “Assesses and recognizes own strengths and weaknesses; pursues
     self-development.”

     Federal agencies are required by law (Title 5, U.S. C., Section 3396) to establish programs
     for the continuing development of executives. Executives are required to prepare,
     implement, and regularly update an Executive Development Plan (EDP) as specified by 5
                                               1
     CFR 412.401 on an annual basis. The EDP is a key tool to assist with continued
     development planning.

     There are many tools which will be used for Executive Continual Learning and
     Development. Below are some of the activities that can be utilized for further executive
     development.


     a.   360 Degree Feedback: 360 degree feedback is a widely used method and tool to assist
          in identifying strengths and developmental needs.

     b.   Formal Training: This includes classroom training focused on executive
          development. For example, OPM offers formal training for Federal executives at its
          Management Development Centers and the Federal Executive Institute.

     c.   Mentoring and Coaching: Mentoring and coaching are very effective tools for
          personal and leadership development. A mentoring program is an effective way to
          transfer knowledge and information.

     d.   Mobility Assignments: Executives have the option to participate in mobility
          assignments. These assignments consist of details, special/short-term assignments,
          transfers, projects, use of Intergovernmental Personnel Act authority, sabbaticals,
          formal training, and other creative ways to expose executives to challenges or
          otherwise expand their capacity to serve.

     e.   Other resources and tools include books, book summaries, AgLearn’s Leadership
          Development courses and webinars.

4.   AUTHORITIES

     a.   The Government Employees Training Act, Title 5, United States Code, Chapter 41
          and related guidance issued by the Office of Personnel Management;

     b.   Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 410, Training;

     c.   Title 5, CFR, Part 412, Executive, Management, and Supervisory Development;

     d.   Executive Order 12731, Principles of Ethical Conduct for Government Officers and
          Employees http://oge.gov/Laws-and-Regulations/Employee-Standards-of-
          Conduct/Employee-Standards-of-Conduct/;

     e.   Government Performance and Results Act of 1993
          http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-111publ352/pdf/PLAW-111publ352.pdf;




                                               2
5.   SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS

     This is a new policy.


6.   POLICY

     a.   The Office of Human Resources Management (OHRM) will monitor and track the
          development of its Executive workforce through the Executive Development Plan
          (EDP). The objective is to provide continuous, comprehensive, systematic, and cost-
          effective executive development and training that is transparent and consistent with
          merit system principles and Equal Employment Opportunity policies.

          As specified in 5 CFR 412.401, USDA SES, SL, ST, and SSTS will engage in
          learning activities to demonstrate continued professional development. Learning
          plans or activities will be documented on EDPs. EDPs will be reviewed and
          approved by the executives’ supervisor on or before December 31st each year.

     b.   All executive members will identify professional continual learning by using an EDP.
          It is recommended that the AgLearn’s IDP feature is used to identify executive career
          development and training needs and requirements. As an option, executives may use
          the format shown Appendix III to document their EDP.

     c.   Financial assistance for individual executive continuing learning and development
          activities is subject to availability of funds, and is not an executive entitlement.
          Funding for continuing executive development will be decentralized and funded by
          each agency or office. However, some development opportunities that are provided
          at minimal or no cost should be considered to foster continual learning.

     d.   Each executive with supervisory responsibilities will complete a 360 degree
          assessment at least once every three years to gather feedback from their supervisor,
          peers, and employees. The results of the 360 degree assessment will be used by the
          executive in planning development efforts.

7.   RESPONSIBILITIES

     a.   Agency Heads will:

          (1)   Develop their executive workforce through the Executive Continual Learning
                Program, which focuses on competencies identified as essential to ensuring
                effective performance and development at executive levels.

          (2)   Establish internal quality controls, standard operating procedures and delegate
                authority to monitor program compliance.

     b.   The Executive Resources Board (ERB) will:

                                               3
     (1)   Promote and support effective executive career development and training
           opportunities for USDA executives.

     (2)   Review annual reports of executive development.

     (3)   Propose or sponsor training to meet the developmental needs for executives.

     (4)   Promote executive participation in programs such as executive rotations,
           fellowships, details, and exchange programs as a means of continuous executive
           development and training.

c.   Mission Area, Agency, Staff Office, or Office Training Officer or designee will:

     (1)   Provide coordination, support, and guidance where appropriate.

     (2)   Validate training requests based on training program requirements.

     (3)   Provide information and reports to the USDA Virtual University on executive
           training and development.

d.   SES, SL, ST, and SSTS members will:

     (1)   Develop and maintain their EDP using AgLearn’s IDP feature at
           http://www.aglearn.usda.gov/ or alternatively the EDP format in Appendix III,
           by December 31st of each year and apply SES Executive Core Qualifications
           and SL/ST/SSTS senior leadership competencies acquired through training to
           the performance of their official duties.

     (2)   If using the format in Appendix III, submit a copy to the Virtual University at
           the ECLEDP@dm.usda.gov mailbox by December 31st of each year.

     (3)   Discuss and update performance and developmental needs and interests with
           their supervisor, assigned mentor, and/or coach.

     (4)   Ensure that training requests are consistent with their EDPs.

     (5)   Complete a leadership assessment and incorporate their assessment results into
           further developing and updating their EDP.

e.   The USDA Virtual University will:

     (1)   Assist with the development of the Executive Continual Learning Program by
           providing minimal or no cost development opportunities and assessment tools
           and resources to USDA executives.



                                          4
          (2)   Receive reports from Mission Area, Agency, or Staff Office training contacts
                and consolidate information to track and report program activities to the ERB
                and the Office of Personnel Management as required.

          (3)   Assign a Departmental Program Manager.

          (4)   Work with the ERB to promote executive participation in programs such as
                executive rotations, fellowships, details, and exchange programs as a means of
                continuous executive development and training.

          (5)   Evaluate the overall effectiveness and efficiency of USDA Executive Continual
                Learning programs annually.

          (6)   Manage, track and oversee Executive Development Program activities and
                EDPs and provide an annual report to the ERB no later than March 31st of each
                year.

     f.   The USDA Virtual University Program Manager will:

          (1)   Serve as the program liaison for the Virtual University.

          (2)   Provide administrative oversight and annual program reports for effectiveness
                and efficiency to the ERB.

          (3)   Serve as liaison to agencies to coordinate and administer the Executive
                Continual Learning Program.

8.   PROCEDURES

     In cases where executive development activities require funding, upon approval by the
     executive’s supervisor, an SF-182 form will be submitted through the executive’s agency
     financial office for further processing, program registration, and payment.

9.   DEFINITIONS

     a.   Competency: A behavior or set of behaviors that describes effective performance in a
          particular work context (e.g., job, role or group of jobs, function, or whole
          organization). Competencies can help ensure that individual and team performance
          aligns with the organization’s mission and strategic direction.

     b.   Executive Core Qualifications (ECQs): The five qualifications considered necessary
          for effective performance in any SES position and are the basis of a Qualifications
          Review Board        certification for career appointment to the SES. The ECQs are
          Leading Change, Leading People, Results Driven, Business Acumen, and Building
          Coalitions. There are 28 sub-level competencies associated with the ECQs, including
          the six cross-cutting fundamental competencies of Interpersonal skills, Oral
          Communication, Integrity/Honesty, Written Communication, Continual Learning,

                                               5
     and Public Service Motivation. More details regarding these competencies can be
     found on the OPM web site at: http://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/senior-
     executive-service/reference-materials/guidetosesquals_2012.pdf.

c.   Executive Development Plan (EDP): This plan functions as a detailed guide of
     learning experiences to support SES, SL, ST, and SSTS continued professional
     development. It outlines developmental opportunities and assignments to allow the
     individual to develop a broader agency and government-wide perspective. EDPs
     should define a senior executive's short-term and long-term developmental activities
     which will enhance the executive's performance. These activities should meet
     organizational needs for leadership, managerial improvement, and organizational
     results. EDPs should be reviewed annually and revised as appropriate by the
     executive participating in the program.

d.   Training: A planned, prepared, and coordinated program, course, curriculum or
     routine of instruction/education in a particular field or subject area which will
     improve individual and organizational performance and assist in achieving the
     agency’s mission and performance goals.

e.   Department Program Manager: A person within the Virtual University designated to
     administer this program across USDA, assists in implementing Departmental policy,
     serves as liaison to agencies, and monitors the Executive Continual Learning
     Program.

f.   360 Degree Assessment: A 360 degree assessment is a process where data is
     collected, reported, and used in a way that is intended to bring about increased
     effectiveness on the part of the participant in key leadership competencies and
     behaviors for their position. Data is collected through an efficient, computer-based
     survey designed to gather measurements about areas of individual competence from a
     variety of individuals, including supervisors, customers, peers, and direct reports. The
     resulting report helps the individual identify their strengths and developmental
     opportunities to support increased personal and organizational success. In the process,
     an individual evaluates their current leadership behaviors and makes plans for
     improvement.


                                       -END-




                                          6
                                                            Appendix A
                                                  Sample Executive Development Plan


The Executive Development Plan serves as the blueprint for all short-term and long-term developmental activities to enhance an executive’s
performance. Developmental activities should focus on developing the Executive Core Qualifications (ECQs), but may also cover development
in technical skills if the Executive assignment has recently changed. Plans shall be updated annually.
 ECQs for Executive Performance
 Leading Change: Creativity and Innovation, External Awareness, Flexibility, Resilience, Strategic Thinking, Vision
 Leading People: Conflict Management, Leveraging Diversity, Developing Others, Team Building
 Results Driven: Accountability, Customer Service, Decisiveness, Entrepreneurship, Problem Solving, Technical Credibility
 Business Acumen: Financial Management, Human Capital Management, Technology Management
 Building Coalitions: Partnering, Political Savvy, Influencing/Negotiating
a. Name:
b. Position Title:
c. Office:
d. Learning Goals                     e. Formal Training                       f. Informal Activities                    g. Developmental
 Developmental goals to support the     Courses, seminars, educational          Book clubs, speaker forums,                 Activities
 achievement of your Performance        programs, degree/certificate            conferences, inter-bureau initiatives,    Details/rotational
 Plan                                   programs                                peer coaching, leadership circles         assignments, task force,
                                                                                                                          inter-bureau/agency
                                                                                                                          initiatives




Executive signature:                                                                                                     Date:
Supervisor signature:                                                                                                    Date:


                                                                         A-1
                                   APPENDIX B

                  USDA Executive Development Plan Process

1. At the beginning of each fiscal year, all Executives (SES, SL, ST, and SSTS) will
   develop learning goals that may derive from the previous year’s Performance Plan,
   results from the 360 degree assessment, or other information, and include anticipated
   learning required to accomplish the forthcoming year’s Executive Development Plan.
2. The Executive Development Plan can consist of learning that is:
       a. Formal Training: Any course (classroom-based or e-learning) having an agenda,
          curriculum, and instructor (i.e., courses, seminars, educational programs, and
          degree/certification programs).
       b. Informal Training: Any learning activity that is not covered under formal training
          that may be unstructured such as details, rotational assignments, task force
          participation, inter-bureau/agency initiatives, supplemental reading, speaker
          forums, conferences, mentoring, peer coaching, web-based training, and
          leadership circles.
3. The completed EDP will be reviewed, approved, and signed by the Executive’s
   Supervisor. If the EDP is not completed using the recommended AgLearn IDP feature at
   http://www.aglearn.usda.gov/, a scanned copy of the signed EDP (Appendix III) should
   be completed and e-mailed to the Virtual University ECLEDP@dm.usda.gov mailbox by
   December 31st of each year for tracking purposes.

4. The Virtual University will manage, track and oversee all electronic submission to the
   Virtual University ECLEDP inbox and provide an annual report to the ERB office no
   later than March 31st of each year.




                                          B-1
