                      U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                            WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


                                                                          NUMBER:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                   5090-2
SUBJECT:                                           DATE:   July 1, 1998
ANNUAL PREFERENCE PROGRAM GOALS

                                                   OPI: Office of Small and
                                                   Disadvantaged Business
                                                   Utilization

1 PURPOSE

This regulation prescribes policies and procedures for
establishing procurement reference program goals and
monitoring achievements.

2 BACKGROUND AND REFERENCES

            a "15 U.S.C. 644(g)(2) requires the head of each
            Federal Agency, after consultation with the Small
            Business Administration, to establish realistic
            goals for the award of contracts to small
            business concerns owned and controlled by
            socially and economically disadvantaged
            individuals, and small business concerns owned
            and controlled by women. The Government-wide goal
            for participation by small business concerns is
            not less than 23 percent of the total value of
            all prime contract awards for each fiscal year.
            15 U.S.C. 644(g)(1). The Government-wide goal for
            participation for small business concerns owned
            and controlled by socially and economically
            disadvantaged individuals is not less than 5
            percent of the total value of all prime contracts
            and subcontract awards for each fiscal year. 15
            U.S.C. 644(g)(1). The Government-wide goal for
            the participation of small business concerns
            owned and controlled by women is not less than 5
            percent of the total value of all prime contract
            and subcontract awards for each fiscal year. 15
            U.S.C. 644(g)(1)."

            b The Department hereby establishes a goal of not
            less than 5 percent of the total value of prime
            contracts for each fiscal year to be awarded to
DR 5090-002                                              July 1, 1998


              participants in the Section 8(a) program of the
              Small Business Administration."

              The SBA will not accept individual agency goals
              until the mandatory government-wide goals stated
              above are established.

3 POLICY

It is the policy of the U.S. Department of Agriculture to
provide a fair portion of its contracting and
subcontracting opportunities to small, small disadvantaged,
and women-owned small businesses. To accomplish this,
agencies shall establish goals that meet or exceed the
Government-wide or Department-wide minimums. A decline in
an agency's fiscal year goals from an average of the
previous two years shall not be less than 5 percent.

4 DEFINITIONS

              a Cognizant Head of Contracting Activity (HCA)

                        (1) HCA means the official who has
                        overall responsibility for managing the
                        contracting activity (i.e., Chief FS,
                        Administrator, Agricultural Research
                        Service, etc.), or the individual
                        designated by such an official to carry
                        out the functions of the HCA.

     (2) The HCA is responsible for establishing and
reporting on small business preference goals for the
agency.

              b Agency Head

              The head of an agency or a staff office director
              that does not have procurement authority but
              whose office generates procurements and who
              receives procurement services from a Cognizant
              HCA.

              c Preference Program Area Categories

              The Small Business Administration has classified
              the following categories as preference program
              areas: 1) Small Businesses; 2) 8(a); 3) Small


                                 2
DR 5090-002                                              July 1, 1998


              Disadvantaged Businesses; 4) Women-owned Small
              Businesses: 5) Subcontracts Awarded to Small
              Businesses; 6) Subcontracts Awarded to Small
              Disadvantaged Businesses; and 7) Subcontracts
              Awarded to Women-owned Small Businesses.

              d Small Business Coordinator

              The HCA or a representative of the HCA shall
              designate in writing a small business coordinator
              in each contracting office. Supervisors of small
              business coordinators are encouraged to provide
              sufficient time for coordinators to carry out
              their small business program duties.
              Coordinators' duties are outlined in the AGAR
              419.201-71.

5 EXEMPTIONS

None

6 RESPONSIBILITIES

              a Cognizant HCA

                        (1) Prepare goals for each of the
                        procurement programs and establish time
                        frames for agency head(s)to submit
                        procurement goals.

                        (2) Assemble procurement goals, to
                        include the goals of the agency head(s)
                        who receive procurement services, and
                        submit to OSDBU by August 15th of the
                        reporting year.

                        (Note: Small Business Preference Goals
                        for the procurement of food commodities
                        shall be developed and submitted to
                        OSDBU by the Cognizant HCAs of the Farm
                        Service Agency and Agricultural
                        Marketing Service.)

                        (3) Provide quarterly assessments to
                        serviced agencies for the purpose of
                        providing an update as to where the
                        agency is in the accomplishment of


                                 3
DR 5090-002                                              July 1, 1998


                        their procurement preference goals.
                        This assessment should also identify
                        any potential problems   towards
                        meeting their goals.

                        (4) Ensure that sufficient contract
                        requirements are set-aside for
                        exclusive participation by small
                        business concerns in the preference
                        program categories to meet the goals
                        established by the Cognizant/HCA agency
                        head(s).

              b Agency Head

                        (1) Upon request from the Cognizant
                        HCA, prepare and submit goals for each
                        of the procurement preference program
                        areas by the designated time frames
                        established by the Cognizant HCA.

                        (2) Ensure that the procurement
                        preference goals are reflective of the
                        proposed projects listed in the annual
                        forecast.

              c Small Business Coordinator

                        (1) Coordinate, for the Cognizant HCA,
                        the annual procurement preference
                        program goals and provide feedback for
                        the quarterly assessment reports to the
                        Agency head(s).

                        (2) Ensure that the procurement
                        preference program area goals are
                        submitted in the format prescribed by
                        the Director, Office of Small and
                        Disadvantaged Business Utilization
                        (OSDBU). Goals shall be submitted to
                        the Director, OSDBU in both written and
                        electronic forms.

                        (3) Ensure that the procurement
                        preference goals are reflective of the
                        proposed projects listed in the annual
                        forecast.


                                 4
DR 5090-002                                              July 1, 1998


              d Director of OSDBU

                        (1) Ensure the Department's procurement
                        preference goals are assembled and
                        submitted to the Small Business
                        Administration (SBA)in accordance with
                        their regulations.

                        (2) Ensure that the procurement
                        preference program goals reflect the
                        maximum opportunity for small, small
                        disadvantaged business utilization and
                        women-owned small businesses.

                        (3) Provide quarterly assessments to
                        Cognizant HCAs, Under and Assistant
                        Secretaries. Quarterly assessments will
                        be given on January 30th, April 30th,
                        July 30th, and October 30th. The
                        assessment will provide an overview of
                        where each agency is in the
                        accomplishment of their goals and
                        identify potential problems.

                        (4) Reviews and approves all
                        procurement preference program goals by
                        September 30th.

7 PROCEDURE

In accordance with procedures set forth in Appendices A and
B to this regulation, HCA's and Agency Heads shall submit
to the Director, OSDBU, the following data no later than
August 15th each fiscal year:

              a an estimate of the total dollar amount of all
              prime contracts regardless of dollar value to be
              awarded during the fiscal year, including awards
              to non-profit organizations, educational
              institutions, all transportation services and
              real property leases, but excluding foreign
              military sales, non appropriated funds contracts,
              contracts to be awarded and performed entirely
              outside the United States and the mandatory
              sources of supplies and services as listed in the
              Federal Acquisition Regulations, Part 8, e.g.,
              Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Committee for


                                    5
DR 5090-002                                               July 1, 1998


              Purchase From People Who Are Blind or Severely
              Disabled, and Wholesale Supply Sources, such as
              stock programs of the Defense Logistics Agency,
              the Department of Veterans Affairs, and military
              inventory control points. See Special Instruction
              (2)for Federal Supply Service (FSS) Schedule
              awards. Purchases made With credit cards are
              exempt (see Special Instruction (6) Appendix A);

              b a goal for prime contract awards to be made to
              small business concerns during the fiscal year,
              expressed in numbers, dollars, and as a
              percentage of 7a above (Note: This dollar goal
              includes the dollar goals in 7c, 7d, and 7e
              below.):

              c a goal for prime contract awards to the Small
              Business Administration under the authority of
              Section 8(a) of the Small Business Act, as
              amended, expressed in numbers, dollars, and as a
              percentage of 7a above (see Special Instruction
              (4) Appendix A):

              d a goal for prime contract awards to be made to
              small business concerns owned and controlled by
              socially and economically disadvantaged
              individuals, other than 8(a), expressed in
              numbers, dollars, and as a percentage of 7a above
              (see Special Instruction (9) Appendix A):

              e a goal for prime contract awards to be made to
              small business concerns owned and controlled by
              women, expressed in numbers, dollars and as a
              percentage of 7a above;

              f an estimate of the total dollar amount of
              subcontracts to be awarded by all of an agency's
              "reporting prime contractors" (as identified in
              Standard Form 295) during the fiscal year;

              g a goal for subcontracts to be awarded by prime
              contractors to small business concerns, expressed
              in numbers, dollars and as a percentage of 7f
              above; (Note: This dollar amount includes dollar
              goals in 7h and 7i below.);




                                  6
DR 5090-002                                                            July 1, 1998


              h a goal for subcontracts to be awarded by prime
              contractors to small business concerns owned and
              controlled by socially and economically
              disadvantaged individuals, expressed in numbers,
              dollars and as a percentage of 7f above;

              i a goal for subcontracts to be awarded by prime
              contractors to small business concerns owned and
              controlled by women, expressed in numbers,
              dollars, and as a percentage of 7f above;

              j a detailed written presentation of the method
              used to establish the estimates and goals
              submitted pursuant to paragraphs 7a through 7i ,
              along with copies of the historical data upon
              which the estimates and goals are based.
              Information about the numbers of contracts
              involved in the estimates submitted pursuant to
              paragraphs 7b through 7i is required. This
              information is needed to evaluate the estimates
              and the goals related thereto. In establishing
              contracting goals, identification and
              justification should be provided for each class
              of contracts and the projected total value
              thereof determined by an agency to have little or
              no subcontract possibilities.



-END-




APPENDIX A

SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS

1. Fiscal Year goals are expected to reflect measurable improvement.



                                           7
DR 5090-002                                                                       July 1, 1998


2. Agencies may, at their option, include for items 7a through 7e above, Federal Supply
Service (FSS) Schedule contracting dollars. In line with the policy established in FY
1981, GSA will submit separate goals for the types of businesses with schedule awards in
effect during the fiscal year (i.e., small, small disadvantaged, 8(a), and women-owned).

3. All goals are expressed in terms of numbers, dollars, and percentages. However, if
there is any variance, up or down, from the projected base amounts upon which goals are
established, the percentage goal is the controlling factor and will be used to measure
actual attainment.

4. In an effort to broaden the distribution of 8(a) contracts with a special emphasis on
firms that have never received a contract, agencies are reminded to express the numbers
of 8(a) contracts as well as the dollars and percentages.

5. In the event of extraordinary circumstances such as unexpected budget cuts, requests
for revised goals will be considered by SBA if received by December 31st of the goaling
year.

6. Purchases paid with credit cards do not require the reporting of socio-economic status
of the supplier or vendor. Credit card purchases are exempt; however, if agencies do have
a system for tracking these transactions they may be included.

7. The close of fiscal year 1996 marked the first year the government-wide goal for
business concerns owned by women has been in place. With the extraordinary growth in
women-owned firms in the last few years, we believe that this goal has become even
more important and achievable and we ask that you redouble your commitment to
achieving this goal.

8. Reporting agencies are encouraged to coordinate goals required by Section 22 1 (g)
with the Minority Business Development Plans mandated by Executive Order 12432
dated July 14, 1983.

9 Consistent with the Department of Justice affirmative action proposal published in the
Federal Register small disadvantaged business (SDB) (prime and subcontracting) goals
may be adjusted in the latter part of the fiscal year, if appropriate, to reflect estimated
industry benchmarks.




APPENDIX B

Referrals to OFPP


                                             8
DR 5090-002                                                                     July 1, 1998


The Administrator of the Small Business Administration shall, within 30 days of receipt
of the agency goals, respond to each agency expressing agreement or indicating reasons
for disagreement. If interagency consultation fails to resolve differences, such cases of
disagreement shall be submitted by the Administrator of the Small Business
Administration to the Administrator of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy for final
determination.

Reports on Agency Achievements Against Established Goals

1 . The head of each Federal agency having procurement powers shall report to the
Administrator of the Small Business Administration on the extent of achievements
against the goals established in paragraphs 7b through 7i. With the exception of
subcontract goals, agency reports of goal achievements shall be based upon official SF-
279/SF281 data as recorded at the Federal Procurement Data Center. Agency reports of
goal achievements in subcontracting shall be based upon official SF-295 data. These
reports shall be submitted to the Small Business Administration no later than April
30th of the year after the goaling year. The reports shall contain appropriate
justification for failure to meet the goals established in the preceding paragraphs.

Section 503 of Public Law 100-656 also requires that the report to the President noted in
paragraph 2 below include the number and dollar value of contracts awarded to small
business concerns and small business concerns owned and controlled by socially and
economically disadvantaged individuals through noncompetitive negotiation, competition
restricted to small business concerns owned and controlled by socially and economically
disadvantaged individuals, competition restricted to small business concerns, and
unrestricted competition. The numbers for each of these categories should be as follows:
the number and dollar value of contracts awarded over $25,000, and the number and
dollar value of contracts awarded under $25,000. Please be prepared to provide this
information at the end of the current fiscal year. Include this information in two separate
tables--one for small business concerns, and one for small disadvantaged business
concerns. Each table must include information in all four categories listed above.

2. The Administrator of the SBA will analyze the reports submitted by the individual
agencies and submit a consolidated report to the President, as required by Section 503 of
Public Law 100-656.




                                            9
