                                U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                       WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250



                                                                       NUMBER:

     DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                           5023-002
SUBJECT:                                             DATE:
                                                     April 20, 2005
Biobased Products Procurement Program
                                                     OPI: Office of Procurement
                                                     and Property Management




           1   PURPOSE

               This Departmental Regulation sets forth the policy of the
               Department of Agriculture to increase the purchase and
               use of biobased products to the extent practicable.


           2   DEFINITION

               Biobased Product: A product determined by the Secretary
               of Agriculture to be a commercial or industrial product
               (other than food or feed) that is composed, in whole or
               in significant part, of biological products or renewable
               domestic agricultural materials (including plant,
               animal, and marine materials) or forestry materials.


           3   ABBREVIATIONS

               BBCC      Biobased Products and Bioenergy Coordination
                         Council
               BPLC      Biobased Products Leadership Council
               CAO/ASA   Chief Acquisition Officer/Assistant Secretary
                         for Administration
               FSRIA     Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002
                         (Pub. L. No. 107-171)
               USDA      Department of Agriculture
               OFPP      Office of Federal Procurement Policy
DR 5023-002                                         April 20, 2005


4 POLICY

   It shall be USDA policy to increase the acquisition and
   use of biobased products consistent with the actions
   ordered below.


5 BACKGROUND

   Section 9002 of the Farm Security and Rural Investment
   Act of 2002 (FSRIA)(7 U.S.C. 8102) requires USDA to
   develop and implement a biobased product procurement
   program designed to increase the purchase and use of
   biobased products, consistent with applicable provisions
   of Federal procurement law.


6 RESPONSIBILITIES

   a Secretary's Memorandum 1042-003 established the BPLC.
     The provisions of the Secretary's Memorandum are made
     a part of this Departmental Regulation as Appendix A.

   b The BPLC is chaired by the Deputy Secretary of
     Agriculture and is composed of Deputy Under
     Secretaries for Farm and Foreign Agricultural
     Services; Natural Resources and Environment; Research,
     Education and Economics; and Rural Development, with
     the CAO/ASA, Chief Economist and BBCC serving in
     advisory/support roles. The objective of the BPLC is
     to provide leadership in increasing the acquisition
     and use of biobased products by USDA agencies and
     offices.

   c The BPLC shall meet at least twice each fiscal year.

   d The BPLC, with support and guidance from the CAO/ASA,
     Chief Economist and BBCC, shall promote and further
     the objectives of the USDA-wide biobased procurement
     program applicable to all USDA organizations.

   e In addition to the items designated pursuant to FSRIA,
     the BPLC will promote the acquisition and use of
     undesignated biobased items/products, consistent with
     applicable Federal procurement law. Biobased products
     can be found at many web-based sites such as
     http://www.unitedsoybean.org/what_nu.htm


                             2
April 20, 2005                                          DR 5023-002


         http://lepton.marz.com/ncga/comm_dev_center/index_PG.as
         p and http://www.biobased.oce.usda.gov. (The
         commercial websites are list solely for instructive
         purposes. USDA does not endorse any specific
         commercial service.) Such products must satisfy
         agency requirements, meet applicable schedule/delivery
         requirements, and be available at a reasonable price.

     f The BPLC shall ensure actions to promote the USDA
       biobased product procurement begin during fiscal year
       2005. The program shall be reviewed annually by the
       BPLA. Actions shall be taken to correct weaknesses
       that impair the support the increased use and purchase
       of biobased products.

    g The CAO/ASA shall manage all USDA-wide procurement
      policy issuances related to biobased procurement
      consistent with Section 9002 of FSIRA, Federal
      procurement law and the decisions of the BPLC.

    h The Chief Economist shall manage policy issuances
      involving guidance and biobased product designation
      consistent with Section 9002 of FSRIA.

    i USDA agencies and offices shall provide the resources
      necessary to support the increased procurement and use
      of biobased products.


7 BIOBASED PROCUREMENT PROGRAM

    a The USDA biobased procurement program will consist of
      a biobased product preference program; a biobased
      product procurement promotion program; and annual
      review and monitoring of program effectiveness.

    b For a procurement preference to apply, the
      products/items must first be designated. Once
      designated, the products/items must be reasonably
      available, meet performance standards, and be
      reasonably priced. The preference may be stated in
      terms of minimum biobased content standards or on the
      basis of highest percentage of biobased products
      offered by a vendor.

     c    Consistent with agency needs and applicable federal
          procurement law, the acquisition of biobased products


                                 3
DR 5023-002                                          April 20, 2005


        may begin in advance of the actual designation of
        items.



8   ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

    Additional information on biobased products is available
    on the Office of the Chief Economist website at:
    http://www.biobased.oce.usda.gov. Points of contact
    include: Marvin Duncan, Office of the Chief Economist,
    (202) 401-0532 or marvin.duncan@usda.gov, or Mike Green,
    Departmental Administration, Office of Procurement and
    Property Management, at (202) 720-7921 or
    mike.green@usda.gov.



                               -END-




                               4
April 20, 2005                                                DR 5023-002
                                                              Appendix A

                                 Appendix A

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                     January 19, 2005

                 SECRETARY'S MEMORANDUM   1042-003


        ESTABLISHING THE USDA BIOBASED PRODUCTS PROCUREMENT
        PROGRAM


1       PURPOSE

        Section 9002 of the Farm Security and Rural Investment
        Act of 2002 (FSRIA)
        (7 U.S.C. 8102) requires the Department of Agriculture
        (USDA) to develop and implement a biobased product
        procurement program designed to increase the purchase
        and use of biobased products, consistent with
        applicable provisions of Federal procurement law.

        This memorandum sets forth the policy of the
        Department of Agriculture to increase the purchase and
        use of biobased products to the extent practicable,
        consistent with federal procurement law.


2       DEFINITION

        A biobased product is defined in Section 9002 as:

        A product determined by the Secretary [of Agriculture]
        to be a commercial or industrial product (other than
        food or feed) that is composed, in whole or in
        significant part, of biological products or renewable
        domestic agricultural materials (including plant,
        animal, and marine materials) or forestry materials.


3       BACKGROUND

        Promoting the increased purchase and use of biobased
        products is part of our overall mission responsibility


                                   A-1
DR 5023-002                                          April 20, 2005
Appendix A

       to provide leadership on agriculture, natural
       resources conservation, and related issues based on
       sound public policy, the best available science, and
       efficient management. Our commitment to biobased
       products is consistent with our vision to be a dynamic
       organization able to provide the integrated program
       delivery needed to lead a rapidly evolving agriculture
       system.

       Annually, USDA procures a broad range of products and
       services. Many of these products, and the products
       used in providing these services, can be produced from
       biobased materials and used in lieu of products
       derived from non-renewable resources.

       Increased USDA procurement and use of biobased
       products provides opportunities to: (1) boost domestic
       demand for many agricultural commodities to serve as
       feed-stocks for producing the products; (2) generate
       new investment, job formation, and income generation
       in Rural America; and, (3) benefit the environment by
       substituting biobased products for items made from
       less environmentally responsible materials.

       While Section 9002 of FSRIA contains government-wide
       responsibilities for USDA regarding biobased products,
       the focus of this Secretary’s Memorandum is on
       internal USDA action to boost the acquisition of these
       products.


4      ESTABLISHING A BIOBASED PRODUCTS LEADERSHIP COUNCIL

       This Secretary’s Memorandum establishes a new Biobased
       Products Leadership Council (BPLC) to provide
       additional emphasis, senior-level leadership, and
       coordination on increased USDA purchase and use of
       biobased products. This new council will work in
       conjunction with the USDA Biobased Products and
       Bioenergy Coordination Council (BBCC) established by
       Departmental Regulation 9600-002 (Among its duties,
       the BBCC has the responsibility to support acquisition
       of biobased products resulting from USDA research,
       development and technology transfer programs).

       Mission area Deputy Under Secretaries, working
       collaboratively with the BBCC, shall provide the


                              A-2
April 20, 2005                                                 DR 5023-002
                                                               Appendix A

        leadership required to expand the purchase and use of
        biobased products, through a Biobased Products
        Leadership Council, as ordered below. The Deputy
        Secretary of Agriculture shall chair this Council.
        The Chief Acquisition Officer (CAO)/Assistant
        Secretary for Administration (ASA) and the Chief
        Economist shall provide advice and support in their
        respective areas of expertise to the Council. The CAO
        has delegated responsibility for all USDA-wide
        procurement policy. Similarly, the Chief Economist
        has delegated responsibility to implement Section
        9002.   The CAO will provide staff support to the new
        council.


5       FEDERAL ACQUISITION REGULATION APPLICABILITY

        Consistent with applicable federal procurement law and
        regulation, the biobased procurement program shall be
        implemented through the Agricultural Acquisition
        Regulation (AGAR), AGAR Advisories (as appropriate),
        and other appropriate internal mission area issuances.


6       BIOBASED PROCUREMENT PROGRAM CONTENTS

        As required by FSRIA, the USDA biobased procurement
        program will contain the following:

        a        Biobased product preference program;
        b        Promotion program to promote the preference
                 program established in (1) above; and,
        c        Annual review and monitoring of program
                 effectiveness.

        Implementation of the actions ordered below are to be
        taken consistent with these and other relevant
        requirements of FSRIA Section 9002.

7       EFFECTIVE DATE

        The provisions of this memorandum are effective
        immediately.




                                    A-3
DR 5023-002                                             April 20, 2005
Appendix A

8      POLICY

       It shall be USDA’s policy to increase the acquisition
       and use of biobased products consistent with the
       actions ordered below. For a procurement preference
       to apply, the products/items must first be designated.
       Once designated, products/items must be reasonably
       available, meet performance standards, and be
       reasonably priced. The preference may be stated in
       terms of minimum biobased content standards or on the
       basis of highest percentage of biobased products
       offered by a vendor.


9       ACTIONS ORDERED

        The following actions are hereby ordered:

       a      A USDA Biobased Products Leadership Council is
              hereby established. The Council shall be
              composed of the following mission area Deputy
              Under Secretaries, with the CAO/ASA, Chief
              Economist and BBCC serving in advisory/support
              roles as described in Section 4, above:

              Farm and Foreign Agricultural Services;

              Natural Resources and Environment;

              Research, Education and Economics; and,

              Rural Development.

              The BBLC shall coordinate its efforts to increase
              the procurement and use of biobased products in
              USDA with the activities of the BBCC.

       b      All USDA agencies shall provide the resources
              necessary to support the increased procurement
              and use of biobased products.

       c      The Leadership Council shall meet at least twice
              each fiscal year.

       d      The Deputy Secretary of Agriculture shall chair
              the Leadership Council.



                                   A-4
April 20, 2005                                             DR 5023-002
                                                           Appendix A

        e        The Council, with support and guidance from the
                 CAO/ASA, Chief Economist, and BBCC, shall promote
                 and further the objectives of the USDA-wide
                 biobased procurement program applicable to all
                 USDA organizations. Consistent with agency needs
                 and applicable federal procurement law, the
                 acquisition of biobased products may begin in
                 advance of the actual designation of items.

        f        The CAO shall manage all USDA-wide procurement
                 policy issuances related to biobased procurement
                 consistent with the decisions of the Council and
                 will coordinate USDA's biobased procurement
                 preference program. Similarly, the Chief
                 Economist shall manage policy issuances involving
                 biobased product designation.

        g        In addition to the items designated pursuant to
                 Section 9002, the Council will promote the
                 acquisition and use of undesignated biobased
                 products, consistent with applicable federal
                 procurement law. Such products must satisfy
                 agency requirements, meet applicable
                 schedule/delivery requirements, and be available
                 at a reasonable price.

        h        The Council shall ensure actions to promote the
                 USDA biobased product procurement begin during
                 fiscal year 2005. The program shall be reviewed
                 annually, and if needed, these actions revised to
                 ensure that it continues to be relevant in
                 supporting the increased purchase and use of
                 biobased products in USDA.

        i        The Council members serve as “champions” to
                 promote and expand the purchase and use of
                 biobased products USDA-wide.



Ann M. Veneman
Secretary




                                   A-5
