                             U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                    WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


                                                                                 NUMBER:
    DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                      5090-001

SUBJECT:                                                         DATE:
USDA Small Business Programs - Full Small Business               June 14, 2007
Participation & Clearance Process for Contracts Not Set-aside
                                                                 OPI: Office of Small and
or Reserved for Small Business Participation
                                                                 Disadvantaged Business
                                                                 Utilization


1      PURPOSE

       All USDA employees involved in the acquisition planning, strategy, and
       execution phases must fully consider and utilize small businesses when
       identifying contractors that can meet USDA requirements to achieve USDA
       program goals. This regulation prescribes small business set-aside policies,
       responsibilities, and procedures for the clearance of contracts over the
       simplified acquisition threshold not set-aside or reserved for small business
       participation, including bundled contracts. Open market acquisitions of
       supplies and services over the micro-purchase amount and under the simplified
       acquisition threshold are statutorily reserved for small business concerns. This
       policy applies to all acquisitions, including those developed and executed outside
       the Washington, DC, metropolitan area.


2      CANCELLATIONS

       Departmental Regulation 5090-1, Clearance Process for Small Business Set Aside
       and Use of 8(a) Programs, dated November 13, 1997

       Departmental Regulation 5090-4, Rule of One Policy Under Simplified
       Acquisition Procedures, dated October 9, 1998


3      REFERENCES

       a      15 U.S.C. 631 (Small Business Act)

       b      15 U.S.C. 637(a)

       c      15 U.S.C. 644(a), (e), and (j)

       d      Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR)
DR 5090-001                                                                       June 14, 2007




4      FORMS

       AD-1205 - USDA Small Business Program – Procurement Request Review
       (Appendix A)


5      DEFINITIONS

       a      Acquisition Planning - Acquisition planning is the process by which the
              efforts of all personnel responsible for an acquisition are coordinated and
              integrated through a comprehensive plan for fulfilling the agency need in a
              timely manner and at a reasonable cost. It includes developing the overall
              strategy for managing the acquisition.

       b      Agency Head (within USDA) – The head of an USDA agency or staff
              office with ultimate authority for the actions of a major line or program
              organization of the Department who reports to the Secretary, Deputy
              Secretary, an Under or Assistant Secretary, or a General Officer.

       c      Agency Program Executive and/or Manager – The agency
              representative designated to lead and manage a program activity of a
              USDA agency or staff office, including the identification of programmatic
              requirements resulting in contracting actions.

       d      Agency Small Business Specialist/Coordinator (SBS) – The agency
              representative designated by the Head of the Contracting Activity (HCA)
              to ensure agency compliance with USDA small business programs.

       e      Bundling – Bundling is consolidating two or more requirements for
              supplies or services, previously provided or performed under separate
              smaller contracts, into a solicitation for a single contract that is likely to be
              unsuitable for award to a small business concern due to the diversity, size,
              or specialized nature of the elements of the performance specified; the
              aggregate dollar value of the anticipated award; the geographical
              dispersion of the contract performance sites; or any combination of the
              above criteria outlined above in this definition.

              (1)     “Separate smaller contract” as used in this definition means a
                      contract that has been performed by one or more small business
                      concerns or that was suitable for award to one or more small
                      business concerns.




                                             2
June 14, 2007                                                                    DR 5090-001


                (2)    “Single contract” as used in this definition includes:

                       (a)     multiple awards of “indefinite delivery indefinite quantity”
                               contracts under a single solicitation for the same or similar
                               supplies or services to two or more sources (see FAR
                               16.504(c)); and

                       (b)     an order placed against an “indefinite delivery indefinite
                               quantity” contract under 5e(2)(a):

                               1   Federal Supply Schedule contract; or

                               2   task-order contract or delivery-order contract awarded
                                   by another agency (i.e., Government-wide acquisition
                                   contract or multi-agency contract).

                NOTE: Contracting strategies that include bundling are subject to review
                by the Agency SBS, Agency HCA or Designee, Director of OSDBU, and
                the SBA Procurement Center Representative. This review should begin at
                the earliest planning stages when contract bundling is being considered as
                one of the contracting strategies.

        f       Head of Contracting Activity (HCA) or HCA Designee – The official
                who has overall responsibility for managing a contracting activity (i.e.,
                Chief, Forest Service; Administrator, Agricultural Research Service; etc.)
                and who is responsible for establishing and reporting on small business
                preference goals, or the individual designated by such an official to carry
                out the functions of the HCA.

        g       Micro-Purchase – An acquisition of supplies or services, the aggregate
                amount of which does not exceed the micro-purchase threshold (FAR
                2.101).

        h       SBA Procurement Center Representative (PCR) – The SBA
                representative designated to carry out the review of contract actions over
                the micro-purchase and simplified acquisition thresholds not set-aside for
                small business participation. The SBA PCR also reviews contracting
                actions to ensure that the bundling of procurement requirements does not
                adversely impact small businesses.

        i       Simplified Acquisition Threshold – The simplified acquisition threshold
                is $100,000, except for acquisitions of supplies or services that, as
                determined by the head of the agency, are to be used to support a
                contingency operation or to facilitate defense against or recovery from
                nuclear, biological, chemical, or radiological attack (41 U.S.C. 428a).




                                             3
DR 5090-001                                                                   June 14, 2007


       j      Small Business - The Small Business Act defines a small business
              concern as one that is independently owned and operated and not
              dominant in the field of operation in which it is bidding on government
              contracts. In addition, to qualify as a small business concern a firm must
              meet the size standards prescribed by the SBA for the field of operation.
              SBA's size standards define whether a business entity is small and, thus,
              eligible for Government programs and preferences reserved for “small
              business” concerns. Size standards have been established for types of
              economic activity, or industry, generally under the North American
              Industry Classification System (NAICS).

              (1)    Small Disadvantaged Business Concern. A small business
                     concern that is at least 51 percent owned by one or more
                     individuals who are both socially and economically disadvantaged.
                     This can include a publicly owned business that has at least 51
                     percent of its stock unconditionally owned by one or more socially
                     and economically disadvantaged individuals and whose
                     management and daily business is controlled by one or more such
                     individuals.

              (2)    8(a) Business Concern. A firm owned and operated by socially
                     and economically disadvantaged individuals and eligible to receive
                     federal contracts under the Small Business Administration’s
                     Section 8(a) Business Development Program.

              (3)    HUBZone Small Business Concern. A small business concern
                     that appears on the List of Qualified HUBZone Small Business
                     Concerns maintained by the Small Business Administration.
                     “HUBZone” means a historically underutilized business zone that
                     is in an area located within one or more qualified census tracts,
                     qualified nonmetropolitan counties, or lands within the external
                     boundaries of an Indian reservation.

              (4)    Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Business Concern.

                     (a)     A small business concern—

                             1       not less than 51 percent of which is owned by one
                                    or more service-disabled veterans or, in the case of
                                    any publicly owned business, not less than 51
                                    percent of the stock of which is owned by one or
                                    more service-disabled veterans; and




                                           4
June 14, 2007                                                                           DR 5090-001


                                          2       the management and daily business
                                          operations of which are controlled by one or more
                                          service-disabled veterans or, in the case of a
                                          service-disabled veteran with permanent and severe
                                          disability, the spouse or permanent caregiver of
                                          such veteran.

                         (b)     Service-disabled veteran means a veteran, as defined in 38
                                 U.S.C. 101(2), with a disability that is service-connected,
                                 as defined in 38 U.S.C. 101(16).

                (5)      Veteran-Owned Small Business Concern. A small business
                         concern—where not less than 51 percent of which is owned by one
                         or more veterans (as defined at 38 U.S.C. 101(2)) or, in the case of
                         any publicly owned business, not less than 51 percent of the stock
                         of which is owned by one or more veterans; and the management
                         and daily business operations of which are controlled by one or
                         more veterans.

                (6)      Women-Owned Small Business Concern. A small business
                         concern that is at least 51 percent owned by one or more women;
                         or, in the case of any publicly owned business, at least 51 percent
                         of the stock of which is owned by one or more women; and whose
                         management and daily business operations are controlled by one or
                         more women.


6       POLICY

        It is USDA policy to fully consider small businesses when conducting market
        research and acquisition planning, and to identify and utilize small business
        contractors to meet USDA requirements to the maximum extent practicable to
        achieve USDA program goals. Small business, as used herein, includes small,
        small disadvantaged, 8(a), HUBZone, Service Disabled Veteran-Owned, Veteran-
        Owned1, and Women-Owned small businesses.

        a       Micro-Purchases. Although not a mandatory requirement of the FAR,
                purchase cardholders should consider small businesses to the maximum
                extent practicable when making micro-purchases.

1
 There is no mandated Government-wide goal specifically for Veteran-Owned small business. Veteran-
Owned small business awards contribute to small business goal achievement.




                                                 5
DR 5090-001                                                                  June 14, 2007


       b      Simplified Acquisition Procedures. Every open market acquisition of
              supplies or services that has an anticipated dollar value exceeding the
              micro-purchase threshold but not over $100,000 is statutorily reserved
              exclusively for small business concerns (15 U.S.C. Section 644(j)). All
              unrestricted procurements over the micro-purchase threshold and under
              the simplified acquisition threshold not awarded to small business
              concerns must be justified and documented. The documentation is subject
              to review by the agency HCA or Designee, Director of OSDBU and SBA
              PCR (as applicable).

       c      Over the Simplified Acquisition Threshold ($100,000 and Above)

              (1)    All Sources. All unrestricted procurements over the simplified
                     acquisition threshold not already set-aside or reserved for
                     small business participation must be submitted to the Director of
                     OSDBU and SBA PCR for clearance not later than 15 working
                     days prior to synopsizing. Proposed contract actions shall be
                     reviewed and their proposed acquisition method approved or
                     disapproved as outlined in this directive.

              (2)    Multiple Award Contracts (Government-wide, USDA-wide,
                     and Agency-wide Acquisition Vehicles). While the small
                     business programs as described in FAR Part 19 are not mandatory
                     when using multiple award contracts, the requirement to consider
                     small businesses as sources of supply has not been waived. In
                     order to maximize opportunities for small business participation, if
                     the use of a multiple award contract is anticipated and the
                     contracting action will exceed $1 million and will not use a small
                     business acquisition method, the Head of the Contracting Activity
                     or Designee will notify the Director of OSDBU during the market
                     research phase.

              (3)    Federal Supply Schedule Contract Actions. Although the
                     mandatory preference programs of FAR Part 19 do not apply,
                     ordering activities may consider socio-economic status when
                     identifying contractor(s) for consideration or competition for
                     award of an order or blanket purchase agreement (BPA). In order
                     to maximize opportunities for small business participation, if the
                     use of a Federal Supply Schedule is anticipated and the contracting
                     action will exceed $1 million and will not use a small business
                     acquisition method, the HCA or Designee will notify the Director
                     of OSDBU during the market research phase.




                                           6
June 14, 2007                                                                   DR 5090-001


        d       Bundled Acquisitions. All acquisitions of $2 million or more that
                involve bundling, unless the order is entirely reserved or set-aside for
                small business under FAR Part 19, must be coordinated with the Agency
                SBS and HCA or Designee. Bundled contracts must be cleared by the
                Director of OSDBU and SBA PCR using the same clearance process
                outlined in this Departmental Regulation for contracts not set-aside for
                small business participation.


7       RESPONSIBILITIES

        a       Agency Heads, Deputy Administrators for Management (DAMS) or
                equivalent, and Designated Agency HCAs or Designees will ensure that
                all proposed contract actions over the simplified acquisition threshold
                not set-aside or reserved for small business participation are provided to
                the Director of OSDBU and SBA PCR for concurrence as outlined in the
                procedure sections of this directive. In addition, they will ensure that all
                unrestricted procurements over the micro-purchase threshold and under
                the simplified acquisition threshold not awarded to small business
                concerns are justified and adequately documented.

                Agency HCAs or Designees will:

                (1)    Effectively implement the small business programs within their
                       activities, including achieving program goals.

                (2)    Ensure that contracting and technical personnel maintain
                       knowledge of small business program requirements and take all
                       reasonable action to increase participation in their activities’
                       contracting processes by these businesses.

                (3)    Ensure agency review and concurrence of all planned contract
                       action strategies over the micro-purchase and over the simplified
                       acquisition thresholds that are not set-aside or reserved for small
                       business, including those using bundling strategies, are justified
                       and adequately documented.

        b       Program Executive and Managers will consult with the agency’s
                designated contracting officer, agency SBS or HCA, or OSDBU during
                the acquisition method and planning phases to ensure that their actions
                adhere to the requirements of the Small Business Act (Public Law 85-536
                and, as amended, Public Law 95-507), related legislation, FAR,
                Agricultural Acquisition Regulation (AGAR), and Departmental
                Regulations.




                                             7
DR 5090-001                                                                   June 14, 2007


       c      Contracting officers will:

              (1)    Provide advice and counsel to program executives and/or managers
                     during the acquisition planning and strategy phases to ensure they
                     are fully aware of small business requirements.

              (2)    Fully consider and utilize small business participation as required
                     by the Small Business Act and related legislation, FAR, AGAR,
                     and Departmental Regulations when conducting market research to
                     identify businesses to meet the requirements and goals of the
                     contracting action.

              (3)    Meet with the Agency SBS and OSDBU to discuss efforts to
                     identify small businesses that can meet USDA programmatic
                     requirements. For those actions not set-aside or reserved for small
                     business, meet with the Agency HCA or Designee to discuss and
                     gain concurrence or non-concurrence.

       d      Agency SBSs will review all planned contract action strategies over the
              micro-purchase and over the simplified acquisition thresholds that are not
              set-aside or reserved for small business, including those using bundling
              strategies. The Agency SBS should be involved at the earliest stages of
              the market research and acquisition planning phase to ensure full
              consideration for small business concerns.

       e      The Director of OSDBU will:

              (1)    Intervene at the earliest possible opportunity during the market
                     research and acquisition planning phases to ensure full
                     consideration of small businesses that can meet USDA
                     programmatic requirements.

              (2)    Review and approve/disapprove all Procurement Request Reviews,
                     via the AD-1205, over the simplified acquisition threshold not set-
                     aside or reserved for small businesses.

              (3)    Review contracting actions over the micro-purchase and under the
                     simplified acquisition threshold not set-aside or reserved for small
                     business, as applicable.

              (4)    Make recommendations as to whether a particular acquisition will
                     be awarded or set-aside for small business, as applicable.




                                           8
June 14, 2007                                                                    DR 5090-001


        f       The Secretary of Agriculture will make the final decision for those
                contracting actions appealed by the Small Business Administration.
                He/She will provide a justification to the SBA Administrator on set-aside
                appeals that cannot be resolved at the USDA agency/staff office level.


8       PROCEDURE – CONTRACTING ACTIONS OVER THE SIMPLIFIED
        ACQUISITION THRESHOLD NOT SET-ASIDE OR RESERVED FOR
        SMALL BUSINESSES, INCLUDING BUNDLED CONTRACTS

        For each contract requirement over the simplified acquisition threshold that has
        not been set-aside or reserved for small businesses, the following actions must
        take place prior to proceeding with the procurement action.

        a       Contracting Officers will prepare the form AD-1205 described in
                Appendix A and forward it with a copy of the review package through
                Agency internal clearance procedures to the contracting activity’s Agency
                HCA or Designee for concurrence or non-concurrence of acquisition
                method. If the Agency does not set aside or reserve the contracting action
                for small business, the Agency HCA or Designee will forward the
                clearance form, along with the review package, to the Director of
                OSDBU and SBA PCR for final clearance at least 15 working days in
                advance of synopsis.

                A complete review package must include:

                (1)      statement of work or complete solicitation,

                (2)      estimated cost of the contract and all options years, if any, and

                (3)      contracting officer’s justification for not setting aside or
                         reserving the requirement for small business. Justifications must
                         include at a minimum:

                         (a)   a description of the contracting office’s effort to identify
                               potential small businesses to participate in the requirement,
                               i.e., search of the Central Contractor Registration (CCR),
                               VetBiz.gov, advertising Sources Sought requests, and any
                               other type of market surveys; and

                         (b)   any other pertinent information used in making the
                               decision.




                                             9
DR 5090-001                                                                June 14, 2007


       b      The Director of OSDBU and SBA PCR will review each proposed
              action and respond to the Agency HCA or Designee within 15 working
              days of receipt of the complete review package.

              (1)     Concur. The clearance package will be returned to the Agency
                      HCA or Designee with no further clearance action required by
                      the contracting agency.

              (2)     Non-Concur. The clearance package will be returned to the
                      agency for action as described in paragraph c below.

              (3)     No Response. If the agency does not receive a response within
                      15 working days of receipt of the clearance package from the
                      Director of OSDBU and the SBA PCR, the Agency HCA or
                      Designee may proceed with the procurement.

       c      Once the Agency HCA or Designee has received the clearance package
              from OSDBU, the following actions will be taken:

              (1)     If OSDBU concurred, continue the procurement action.

              (2)     If OSDBU’s recommendation was to set the acquisition aside for
                      one of the small business programs, the Agency HCA or
                      Designee will take the following actions:

                      (a)    If the Agency HCA or Designee concurs with the
                             recommendation to set-aside or to partially set-aside, the
                             synopsis release and subsequent procurement actions may
                             proceed based on the revised acquisition method.

                      (b)    If the Agency HCA or Designee does not concur with
                             the recommendation of the Director of OSDBU, the
                             Contracting Officer will so document the contract file. A
                             copy of this justification (rejection) will be provided to
                             the Director of OSDBU within 2 working days of the date
                             the Agency HCA or Designee receives the Director’s
                             recommendation.

       d      Once the Agency HCA’s or Designee’s rejection of the Director of
              OSDBU’s recommendation is received, the Director of OSDBU will do
              one of the following:




                                        10
June 14, 2007                                                                  DR 5090-001




                (1)      If the Director of OSDBU concurs with the rejection, notify the
                         Agency HCA or Designee within 3 working days of receipt of
                         the Agency HCA or Designee’s rejection notice. Upon receipt of
                         the OSDBU concurrence with the Agency HCA’s or Designee’s
                         rejection decision, synopsis and subsequent procurement actions
                         may proceed.

                (2)      If the Director of OSDBU does not concur with the Agency
                         HCA’s or Designee’s rejection, the Director will request
                         consultation with the SBA PCR assigned to USDA.

                         OSDBU will conduct the SBA PCR consultation and advise the
                         Agency HCA or Designee of the SBA PCR’s position on the
                         acquisition method within 3 working days from the date of
                         receipt by OSDBU of the Agency HCA’s or Designee’s rejection
                         notice. Contracting action may not proceed until the consultation
                         process is complete or the 3 working day consultation period has
                         elapsed, whichever is first. Should the SBA PCR concur with
                         the recommendation of the Director of OSDBU, the SBA PCR
                         will make a recommendation to the Agency or Staff Office Head.
                         The Director of OSDBU will advise USDA’s Chief Acquisition
                         Officer regarding OSDBU’s recommendation.

                (3)      If the Director of OSDBU does not respond within 3 working
                         days, synopsis and subsequent procurement actions may proceed.

        e       The SBA PCR may appeal the Agency’s rejection to the Agency Head or
                Staff Office Head within 2 working days after receiving the notice. The
                Agency or Staff Office Head will render a decision in writing, and provide
                it to the SBA representative within 7 working days. Pending issuance of a
                decision to the SBA PCR, the Agency HCA or Designee shall suspend
                action on the acquisition.

                (1)      If the Agency or Staff Office Head agrees that the Agency
                         HCA’s or Designee’s rejection was appropriate –

                         (a)    within 1 working day, the SBA PCR may request the
                                Agency HCA or Designee to suspend action on the
                                acquisition until the SBA Administrator appeals to the
                                Secretary of Agriculture (FAR Part 19.505(f)); and

                         (b)    the SBA must be allowed 15 working days after making
                                such a written request, within which the Administrator of
                                SBA –




                                            11
DR 5090-001                                                                    June 14, 2007


                               1       may appeal to the Secretary of the Agriculture,
                                       and

                               2       must notify the Agency HCA or Designee
                                       whether the further appeal has, in fact, been taken.
                                       If notification is not received by the Agency HCA
                                       or Designee within the 15-day period, it is deemed
                                       that the SBA request to suspend the contract
                                       action has been withdrawn and that an appeal to
                                       the Secretary will not be forthcoming.

       f      When the Agency or Staff Office Head has been notified within the 15-
              day period that the SBA has appealed to the Secretary of Agriculture, the
              Agency Head will forward justification for its decision to the Secretary of
              Agriculture. The Agency HCA or Designee must notify the contracting
              officer to suspend contract action until notification is received that the
              SBA appeal has been settled.

       g      The Secretary of Agriculture will reply to the SBA within 30 working
              days after receiving the appeal. The decision of the Secretary will be
              final.

       h      A request to suspend action on an acquisition need not be honored if the
              Secretary determines that proceeding to contract award and performance is
              in the public interest. The contracting officer will include in the contract
              file a statement of the facts justifying the determination, and will promptly
              notify the SBA PCR of the determination and provide a copy of the
              justification.


9      PROCEDURE – MULTIPLE AWARD CONTRACT ACTIONS
       (GOVERNMENT—WIDE, USDA-WIDE, AND AGENCY-WIDE
       ACQUISITION VEHICLES)

       Ordering Activities, in accordance with FAR 7.105(b), in the conduct of
       acquisition planning and market research, should include consideration of small
       business, veteran-owned small business, service-disabled veteran-owned small
       business, HUBZone small business, small disadvantaged business, and women-
       owned small business concerns (FAR Part 19), and the impact of any bundling
       that might affect their participation in the acquisition (FAR 7.107). In those cases
       where the use of a multiple award contract is anticipated and the contracting
       action will exceed $1 million and will not use a small business acquisition
       method, the ordering activity must notify the Head of the Contracting Activity or
       Designee. The Head of the Contracting Activity or Designee will use form AD-
       1205 to notify the Director of OSDBU during the market research phase.




                                            12
June 14, 2007                                                                  DR 5090-001




10      PROCEDURE - FEDERAL SUPPLY SCHEDULE CONTRACT ACTIONS

        Ordering activities, should consider, if available, at least one small business,
        small disadvantaged business, HUBZone small business, service disabled veteran-
        owned small business, veteran-owned small business, or women-owned small
        business schedule contractor(s) in all Federal Supply Schedule contract actions.
        Orders placed against the schedules may be credited toward the ordering agency’s
        small business goals. In those cases where the use of the Federal Supply
        Schedule is anticipated and the contracting action will exceed $1 million and will
        not use a small business acquisition method, the ordering activity must notify the
        Head of the Contracting Activity or Designee. The Head of the Contracting
        Activity or Designee will use form AD-1205 to notify the Director of OSDBU
        during the market research phase.


11      PROCEDURE - HANDLING BUNDLED ACQUISITIONS

        When the proposed acquisition strategy involves bundling, Ordering Activities
        will:

        a       identify the incumbent contractors and contracts affected by the bundling,
                and

        b       address the extent and results of the market research and indicate their
                impact on the various elements of the plan (FAR Parts 2, 7, 10, and 19).

        If the strategy involves substantial bundling ($2 million or more), the Agency
        SBS and HCA or Designee will assist in identifying alternate strategies that would
        reduce or minimize the scope of bundling. Bundled contracts must be cleared by
        the Director of OSDBU and SBA PCR using the same clearance process outlined
        in this Departmental Regulation for contracts not set-aside for small business
        participation, including those contracting actions using multiple award contracts
        or the Federal Supply Schedule.


12      PROCEDURE - CLEARING FOOD AND COMMODITY PURCHASES

        Due to the perishable nature of food commodities and the special market
        conditions under which such items are procured, the timeframes specified above
        do not apply to the Agricultural Marketing Service and Farm Service Agency
        when making commodity purchases. Annual clearances must be reviewed by the
        Director of OSDBU for each commodity division for set-aside potential for the
        procurement cycle.




                                            13
                Appendix A                                  USDA Small Business Program – Procurement Request Review                                            AD-1205
Procurement Request Number:                                                                               Date submitted to OSDBU:



Description of Product or Service:




Contract History [ ] New                         [ ] Recompete              [ ] Contract Modification           Bundled Requirement (over $2 million)            [ ] Yes                 [ ] No

Estimated Dollar Value:                                                       Period of Performance:                                            Acquisition Schedule:

Base Period $ -------------------------------                                 Base Period:                                                      Synopsis Date: -------------------------------
                                                                              From --------------------     To ----------------
Total Estimated Value, including options                                                                                                        Sources Sought Date: ---------------------
                                                                              Option Periods:
$ -------------------------------                                             From --------------------     To ----------------                 Presolicitation Date: ---------------------------

                                                                                                                                                Solicitation Date (est.): --------------------------

                                                                                                                                                Contract Award Date (est.): --------------------

Contracting Office: -----------------------------------------------           Program Office: -----------------------------------------------   NAICS Code:

Contracting Specialist: -------------------------------------------           Program Manager: -------------------------------------------
                                                                                                                                                Size Standard:
Telephone Number: ----------------------------------------------              Telephone Number: ------------------------------------------
                                                                                                                                                Dollars: ----------------
Email Address: ----------------------------------------------------           Email Address: ------------------------------------------------   or
                                                                                                                                                No. of Employees ----------------
Mailing Address:---------------------------------------------------           Mailing Address: ----------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------------------------------------     ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Proposed Acquisition Method:                                                                               Non-Restricted Determination (attach justification, background information,
                                                                                                           and market research (list of potential small business vendors)):
YES          NO
[ ]         [ ]                Full & Open                                                                None of the Following Actions initiated because:
                                                                                                          [ ]       Sole Source or Proprietary
[ ]         [ ]                Circumstances Permitting Other Than Full and Open                          [ ]       Other (continue on separate sheet)
                                 Competition (FAR 6.302-2 thru 6.302-7)
                                                                                                          Total Small Business Set -Aside not considered:
[ ]         [ ]                Delivery/Task Order over $100,000 placed against a                         [ ]       No reasonable expectation of offers from at least two responsible SB
                                 mandatory agency contract                                                          firms offering products of SB firms, and that awards will not be at
                                                                                                                    reasonable prices; or
[ ]         [ ]                 GSA or Other Agency Contract (over $1 million) –                          [ ]       If R&D, no reasonable expectations of getting from SB the best
                               (Federal Supply Schedule or Multiple Award Schedule)                                 sources consistent with (continue on separate sheet).
                                -- Notification only; No approval required --
                                                                                                          Partial SB Set-Aside not considered:
[ ]         [ ]                Total Small Business Set-Aside                                             [ ]        Requirement not economically severable into lots
                                                                                                          [ ]        No SB firm has the technical competence or capacity
[ ]         [ ]                Partial Small Business Set-Aside               %                           [ ]        Other (continue on separate sheet)

[ ]         [ ]                8 (a) Program Set-Aside or Sole Source                                     8(a) award not considered:
                                                                                                          [ ]       No 8(a) firm with necessary skills or capacity
[ ]         [ ]                HUBZone Set-Aside or Sole Source                                           [ ]       Other (continue on separate sheet)

[ ]          [ ]               Service Disabled Veteran– Owned Set-Aside or Sole                          HUBZone award not considered:
                                 Source                                                                   [ ]     No HUBZone firm with necessary skills or capacity
                                                                                                          [ ]     Other (continue on separate sheet)
[ ]         [ ]                Small Business Competitiveness Demonstration
                                 Program                                                                  Service Disabled award not considered:
                                                                                                          [ ]        No Service Disabled firm with necessary skills or capacity
[ ]         [ ]                Federal Prison Industries (UNICOR) or AbilityOne                           [ ]        Other (continue on separate sheet)
                                 Program (Javits-Wagner-O’Day Act)

                                                                                       Clearance/Concurrence
1. Agency HCA or Designee:                     [ ] Concurs                     [ ] Rejects         2. Director of OSDBU:         [ ] Concurs                                    [ ] Rejects
                                                                                                   (If rejected, forward to HCA and Contracting Officer.)



Signature:                                                           Date:                                Signature:                                                Date:
3. SBA/PCR                                     [ ] Concurs                     [ ] Rejects                4. Agency HCA or Designee:
                                                                                                           [ ] Accepts Recommendation                       [ ] Rejects Recommendation
                                                                                                          (If rejected, the Agency may not proceed with the solicitation until consultation
                                                                                                          with the Director of OSDBU.)


Signature:                                                           Date:                       Signature:                                                            Date:
                                                                                      PREVIOUS EDITIONS NOT USABLE                                              June 2007

                                                                                                 A-1
