                                       U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                          Washington, D.C. 20250


                                                                                     NUMBER:
      DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                       5090-005
    SUBJECT:                                           DATE :
    USDA Small Business Programs –                      September 26, 2006
    Contracting with Service Disabled Veteran-
    Owned Small Businesses                             OPI:Office of Small and Disadvantaged
                                                       Business Utilization

1        PURPOSE

         This Departmental Regulation (DR) codifies the policy and roles and responsibilities set forth
         in Secretary’s Memorandum 5090-001, USDA Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small
         Business Strategic Initiative. Specifically, it addresses the requirements of Executive
         Order 13360 - Service-Disabled Veterans Executive Order; the USDA Service Disabled
         Veteran-Owned Small Business Strategic Initiative Plan (“the Initiative”) (available at
         http://www.va.gov/vetbiz/fpp/DAstrategy.pdf ); the Veterans Benefits Act of 2003
         (P.L. 108-183) and the Veterans’ Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development Act of
         1999 (P.L. 106-50); and the Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Business Procurement
         Program as required by the Federal Acquisition Regulation Subpart 19.14 to fully implement
         and attain or exceed the mandated 3 percent goal for prime contracts and subcontracts
         awarded to Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses. The collective involvement
         and support of all USDA agencies and staff offices are required to attain or exceed the
         mandated overall 3 percent goal and USDA’s 5 percent goal for information technology
         contracting actions for prime contracts and subcontracts awarded to Service Disabled
         Veteran-Owned Small Businesses.


2        CANCELLATION

         This Departmental Regulation replaces Secretary’s Memorandum 5090-001, USDA Service
         Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Business Strategic Initiative, dated July 12, 2005.


3        BACKGROUND

         President Bush signed Executive Order 13360 on October 20, 2004, to demonstrate the
         Nation’s appreciation for the services rendered by Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small
         Business owners, whose disabilities were incurred while serving in the Armed Forces. We
         are indebted to these men and women for their service to our country. One tangible method
         for expressing our gratitude to these individuals for their sacrifices is to provide Federal
         contracting opportunities to Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Business owners,
         enabling these businesses to expand their ability to grow their enterprises utilizing Federal
         contracting opportunities. The Executive Order requires Heads of Agencies to significantly
DR 5090-005                                                                      September 26, 2006


       increase the number of prime contracts and subcontracts awarded to Service Disabled
       Veteran-Owned Small Businesses and directs Federal agencies to develop strategies for
       implementing the policies set forth in the Order.


4      REFERENCES

       Executive Order 13360, Service-Disabled Veterans Executive Order

       P.L. 108-183, Veterans Benefits Act of 2003

       P.L. 106-50, Veterans Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development Act of 1999

       Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) Subpart 19.14, Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small
       Business Procurement Program


5      DEFINITIONS

       a      Acquisition Planning. The process by which the efforts of all personnel responsible
              for an acquisition are coordinated and integrated through a comprehensive plan for
              fulfilling the agency need in a timely manner and at a reasonable cost. It includes
              developing the overall strategy for managing the acquisition.

       b      Agency Head (within USDA). The head of a USDA agency or staff office with
              ultimate authority for the actions of a major line or program organization of the
              Department who reports to the Secretary, the Deputy Secretary, an Under or Assistant
              Secretary, or a General Officer.

       c      Agency Program Executive and/or Manager. The agency representative designated to
              lead and manage a program activity of a USDA agency or staff office, including the
              identification of programmatic requirements resulting in contracting actions.

       d      Agency Small Business Specialist/Coordinator (SBS). The agency representative
              designated by the Head of the Contracting Activity (HCA) to ensure agency
              compliance with USDA small business programs.

       e      Chief Acquisition Officer (CAO). The Assistant Secretary for Administration serves
              as USDA’s Chief Acquisition Officer (CAO). The position of the CAO was created
              by the Services Acquisition Reform Act, Section 1421 of P.L. 108-136. CAO
              responsibilities include evaluating the performance of acquisition programs and
              advising the agency head on business strategy; increasing competition and
              performance-based contracting; directing acquisition policy for the agency;
              developing agency acquisition career management programs; and addressing
              acquisition workforce needs and strategies as part of strategic planning and
              performance results processes.



                                                2
September 26, 2006                                                                          DR 5090-005


        f       Chief Information Officer (CIO). The position of the Chief Information Officer (CIO)
                was created by the Information Technology Management Reform Act of 1996, P.L.
                104-106, Division E. The CIO has primary responsibility for supervision and
                coordination within the Department of the design, acquisition, maintenance, use, and
                disposal of information technology by USDA agencies, and for monitoring the
                performance of USDA’s information technology programs and activities.

        g       Head of Contracting Activity (HCA) or HCA Designee. The official who has overall
                responsibility for managing a contracting activity (i.e., Chief, Forest Service;
                Administrator, Agricultural Research Service; etc.) and who is responsible for
                establishing and reporting on small business preference goals, or the individual
                designated by such an official to carry out the functions of the HCA.

        h       Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Business.

                (1) Means a small business concern—

                     (a) Not less than 51 percent of which is owned by one or more service-disabled
                         veterans or, in the case of any publicly owned business, not less than 51
                         percent of the stock of which is owned by one or more service-disabled
                         veterans; and

                     (b) The management and daily business operations of which are controlled by one
                         or more service-disabled veterans or, in the case of a service-disabled veteran
                         with permanent and severe disability, the spouse or permanent caregiver of
                         such veteran.

                (2) Service-disabled veteran means a veteran, as defined in 38 U.S.C. 101(2), with a
                    disability that is service-connected, as defined in 38 U.S.C. 101(16).


6       POLICY

        It is USDA policy to:

        a       Meet or exceed the mandatory Federal-wide 3 percent goal for prime contracts and
                subcontracts awarded to Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses;

        b       Meet or exceed USDA’s 5 percent goal for applicable information technology
                contracting actions for prime contracts and subcontracts awarded to Service Disabled
                Veteran-owned Small Businesses (NOTE: These dollars are included in USDA’s
                total for meeting its overall 3 percent Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small
                Business goal.);

        c       Fully implement the USDA Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Business
                Strategic Initiative; and



                                                    3
DR 5090-005                                                                         September 26, 2006




       d      Fully consider Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses when conducting
              market research and acquisition planning, and to identify and utilize Service Disabled
              Veteran-Owned Small Businesses to meet USDA requirements to the maximum extent
              practicable to achieve USDA program goals.


7      SERVICE DISABLED VETERAN-OWNED CONTRACTING GOALS AND
       OPPORTUNITIES

       The small business goals for Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Business of 3 percent
       overall and 5 percent for information technology apply to both prime contracting and
       subcontracting procurement actions. The below requirements are outlined in USDA’s Service
       Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Business Strategic Initiative Plan.

       a      Prime Contracting Opportunities

              USDA agencies and staff offices will:

              (1) Aggressively identify procurement opportunities to assist USDA to meet or exceed
                  the 3 percent overall mandated and 5 percent information technology goals for
                  contracting actions with Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses.

              (2) Identify/review, during the advance acquisition process and during the
                  development of the procurement forecast, new contracts that will be set aside
                  exclusively for Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses.

              (3) Ensure that at least one Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Business is
                  solicited (in situations where such vendors exist) whenever the acquisition strategy
                  does not involve a Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Business set-aside or a
                  sole source acquisition.

              (4) Provide consideration to Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses when
                  using Federal Supply Schedules.

       b      Subcontracting Opportunities

              USDA agencies and staff offices will:

              (1) Include Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses as a significant
                  evaluation factor in all applicable requests for proposals.

              (2) Include suggested subcontracting goals for Service Disabled Veteran-Owned
                  Small Business of at least 3 percent for in all applicable major acquisitions and of
                  at least 5 percent in all applicable information technology acquisitions.




                                                  4
September 26, 2006                                                                            DR 5090-005


8      RESPONSIBILITIES

        a       Assistant Secretary for Administration. The Assistant Secretary for Administration
                provides the executive leadership for the Initiative and is authorized by the Secretary
                of Agriculture to exercise all the responsibilities, authorities, and functions assigned to
                this effort. In compliance with Executive Order 13360, the Assistant Secretary for
                Administration has responsibility for implementing USDA’s Service Disabled
                Veteran-Owned Small Business Strategic Initiative which provides the formal
                direction and aggressive activities essential for implementing the provisions of the
                Order and for the Initiative. The Assistant Secretary for Administration will
                collaborate with each Under and Assistant Secretary to communicate the importance
                of the Initiative, obtain the support of agency program and contracting officials, and
                increase efforts and activities designed to locate and direct contracts to Service
                Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses.

        b       Director of the Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization. The
                responsibilities for management of the USDA Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small
                Business Strategic Initiative are assigned to the Office of Small and Disadvantaged
                Business Utilization and include the following:

                (1) Coordinate the Initiative with the Assistant Secretary for Administration and
                    USDA agencies and staff offices;

                (2) Implement, manage and monitor the Initiative with USDA Agencies and staff
                    offices; and

                (3) Identify and intervene, as appropriate, to ensure USDA agencies fully consider
                    Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses at the earliest stages of the
                    market research and acquisition planning phases.

        c       Chief Information Officer. The Chief Information Officer, as a key partner for
                expanding USDA’s ability to maximize information technology contracting
                opportunities for Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses, is responsible
                for providing expertise and consultation for developing strategies to achieve the
                5 percent goal for applicable information technology contracting actions.

        d       Under and Assistant Secretaries and Agency Heads are responsible for carrying out
                the requirements of Executive Order 13360 and those outlined in the USDA Service
                Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Business Strategic Initiative as follows:

                (1) Take actions necessary to increase the participation of Service Disabled Veteran-
                    Owned Small Businesses in USDA acquisitions for attaining or exceeding the
                    mandated 3 percent goal for both prime contracts and subcontracts awarded to
                    these concerns, including incorporating program implementation in performance
                    elements and standards.




                                                     5
DR 5090-005                                                                         September 26, 2006


              (2) Establish an aggregate goal of 5 percent of the dollar value for all applicable
                  information technology contract requirements. (NOTE: These dollars are
                  included in the agency’s total for meeting its overall 3 percent Service Disabled
                  Veteran-Owned Small Business goal.)

       e      Deputies for Administrative Management (DAMS) or equivalent, and designated
              HCAs or designees are responsible for carrying out the requirements of Executive
              Order 13360 and those outlined in the USDA Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small
              Business Strategic Initiative as follows:

              Agency HCAs will:

              (1) Take actions to effectively implement the Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small
                  Business programs within their activities;

              (2) Ensure that contracting and technical personnel maintain knowledge of the Service
                  Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Business program requirements and take all
                  reasonable action to increase participation in their activities’ contracting processes
                  by these businesses;

              (3) Ensure that Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses have been
                  considered for all non-exempt planned contract actions; and

              (4) Provide periodic goal achievement progress reports to Program Executives and
                  Managers, as appropriate.

       f      Agency CIOs are responsible for carrying out the requirements of Executive Order
              13360 and those outlined in the USDA Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small
              Business Strategic Initiative as follows:

              (1) Meet or exceed the Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Business goal of
                  5 percent of the dollar value for all applicable Information Technology contract
                  requirements (NOTE: These dollars are included in the agency’s total for meeting
                  its overall 3 percent Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Business goal.);

              (2) Fully consider Service Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses during market
                  research and acquisition planning activities; and

              (3) Meet information technology waiver conditions relating to the Service Disabled
                  Veteran-Owned Small Business requirement.




                                                  6
September 26, 2006                                                                        DR 5090-005


        g       Program Executives and Managers will consult with the agency’s designated
                contracting officer, agency Small Business Specialist, and/or USDA’s Office of Small
                and Disadvantaged Business Utilization during the acquisition strategy and planning
                phases to ensure that their actions adhere to the Small Business Act (P.L. 85-536) and
                related legislation, including legislation relating to Service Disabled Veteran-Owned
                Small Businesses, Federal Acquisition Regulation, Agricultural Acquisition
                Regulation, and Departmental Regulation requirements.

        h       Contracting Officers and Agency Small Business Specialists will ensure that Service
                Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses have been considered for all applicable
                nonexempt planned contract actions and take all reasonable actions to increase
                participation in their activities’ contracting processes by these businesses.




                                                   7
