                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                              NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                      DR 5100-003
 SUBJECT: Real Property Lease Contracting Officer             DATE:
 Warrant Program                                              November 18, 2024
                                                              EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of Property and Environmental Management
                                                              November 18, 2029



Section                                                                                 Page

1.   Purpose                                                                               1
2.   Scope                                                                                 1
3.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                    1
4.   Policy                                                                                2
5.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                            7
6.   Policy Exceptions                                                                     8
7.   Inquiries                                                                             8

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                 A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                 C-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of
     Agriculture’s (USDA) policy for its Real Property Lease Contracting Officer (LCO) Warrant
     program.


2. SCOPE

     This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices that seek to award
     real property leases using GSA delegated authority or who obtain independent authority from
     Congress.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     a.   This DR supersedes DR 5100-003, Real Property Leasing Officer Warrant System,
          dated June 6, 2023.
  b.   This DR is effective immediately when published.

  c.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their policies and procedures
       with this DR within 6 months of the publication date.

  d.   This DR will not be interpreted to conflict with the rights of an employee under the law,
       including:

       (1) The Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute (5 U.S.C. 7101 - 7135)

       (2) Applicable collective bargaining agreements;

       (3) Adverse actions (Title 5, Part 752);

       (4) Prohibited Personnel Practices (Whistleblower Protection Act), 5 U.S.C. 2302 b (8-
           9); and

       (5) Individual right of action in certain reprisal cases (Whistleblower Protection
           Enhancement Act), 5 U.S.C. 1221 (g).

  e.   This DR will not be interpreted to conflict with any rights accorded to a union
       representative under the Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute when
       communicating as a union representative.

  f.   The implementation of this DR may be subject to collective bargaining, the results of
       which may modify the policy and/or procedures stated or implied herein, as permitted by
       law.


4. POLICY

  a.   The Director of the Office of Property and Environmental Management (OPEM) is the
       Head of Contracting Activity (HCA) for the USDA real property lease contracting
       program.

  b.   The Director is the Appointing Official (AO) for USDA LCO warrants for the leasing of
       real property.

  c.   The Director appoints the USDA Acquisition Career Manager (ACM), who approves
       Real Property Leasing Certification Program (LCP) certifications.

  d.   The Agency Real Property Director (ARPD), ACM, Chief of the Property Management
       Division (PMD), and AO review and approve candidates.




                                               2
e.   Mission Areas, agencies, or staff offices are not permitted to issue their own LCO
     warrants.

f.   USDA Warrant Levels. USDA issues three levels of LCO warrants based on lease
     acquisition thresholds set forth in General Services Administration Acquisition Manual
     (GSAM) 501.603-1, General:

     (1) Simplified. LCOs with a simplified level warrant are limited to lease actions that
         do not exceed:

         (a) The Simplified Lease Acquisition Threshold (SLAT), and

         (b) The Intermediate Lease Acquisition Threshold (ILAT).

     (2) Intermediate. LCOs with an intermediate level warrant are limited to lease actions
         that do not exceed the ILAT.

     (3) Senior. LCOs with a senior level warrant are unlimited.

g.   Tenant improvements are excluded from the SLAT calculation if they are paid by lump
     sum to the lessor because USDA is paying those costs up front. Tenant improvements
     are included in the SLAT calculation if they are amortized into the lease.

h.   Each lease action (award, amendment, other) is considered separately when determining
     the warrant level needed to sign for it.

i.   USDA LCO warrants:

     (1) Do not have an expiration date;

     (2) Cannot be transferred to another person;

     (3) Remain active if an LCO transfers to another USDA agency or position that
         requires an LCO warrant, and

     (4) May be used to execute a real property lease action by an LCO until:

         (a) An LCO fails to maintain an active LCP certification;

         (b) An LCO moves to another USDA position that does not require an LCO
             warrant;

         (c) An LCO leaves USDA Federal service; or

         (d) The warrant is suspended or revoked.




                                            3
j.   The signature authority on LCO warrants also grants the authority to execute other real
     property instruments such as Occupancy Agreements, permits, and licenses if they:

     (1) Specifically relate to real property; and

     (2) Do not exceed the warrant authority for leases.

k.   LCO Warrant Nomination

     (1) LCO candidates must be LCP certified per GSA requirements (including mandatory
         education and experience) prior to nomination for a USDA LCO warrant.

     (2) USDA LCO warrants will only be issued to candidates in the Classification
         Standard for Realty Series, GS1170, issued by the Office of Personnel
         Management.

     (3) Nominations for a USDA LCO warrant include proof that the candidate’s LCP
         certification is active. The candidate’s active LCP certification is equal to or
         greater than the warrant level sought.

     (4) The Agency Real Property Director (ARPD), as defined in DR 5100-004, Real
         Property Management, signs the nomination.

     (5) Nominations document the business need to support the warrant level requested.
         The candidate can maintain a higher LCP certification, but that does not guarantee
         or justify a higher warrant level.

     (6) Nominations document the candidate’s educational qualifications showing either:

         (a)   A baccalaureate degree or higher; or

         (b) A minimum of 24 semester hours of business credits from an accredited
             college or university in the fields of accounting, business, finance, law,
             contracting, economics, industrial management, marketing, purchasing,
             quantitative methods, project management, or organization and management.

     (7) Nominations document the candidate’s years of real property lease contracting
         experience, depending on the warrant level sought:

         (a) Simplified level candidates have at least 2 years of leasing experience;

         (b) Intermediate level candidates have at least 3 years of leasing experience; or

         (c) Senior level candidates have at least 4 years of leasing experience.

     (8) The ARPD, ACM, Chief of PMD, and AO review and approve candidates.



                                             4
l.   LCO Warrant Maintenance

     (1) An LCO maintains the signature authority to use the LCO warrant by completing
         Continuous Learning Point (CLP) activities.

     (2) The ACM awards CLPs for the successful completion of CLP activities.

     (3) The ACM determines the CLP value of approved maintenance activities.

     (4) The LCO obtains 100 CLPs every 2 years from training and supplementary
         activities. A minimum of 40 of these CLPs come from core leasing training in the
         following areas:

         (a) Real property leasing;

         (b) Real property management;

         (c) Real estate;

         (d) Project management;

         (e) Construction contracting;

         (f) Acquisition; and

         (g) Leadership (a maximum of 20 CLPs in any CLP activity period)

     (5) The remaining 40 CLPs can be other training or higher education from the above
         listed areas or from the following supplementary real property related activities:

         (a) Work in professional organizations (a maximum of 20 CLP in any CLP
             activity period)

         (b) Publication of articles or policy (a maximum of 20 CLP in any CLP activity
             period); and

         (c) Experiential learning such as:

              1    Mentoring (a maximum of 20 CLP in any CLP activity period), and

              2    Details (a maximum of 40 CLP in any CLP activity period).

     (6) ARPDs ensure that the courses and supplementary real property activities being
         used to support a warrant application are approved prior to expending funds for
         them.



                                              5
     (7) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must consult with the ACM for an
         official determination if there is uncertainty about whether a course or
         supplementary real property activity will count toward warrant maintenance or a
         core leasing requirement.

m. LCO Warrant Suspension and Revocation

     (1) The AO or ARPD may temporarily suspend or permanently revoke a warrant.
         Notification must be in writing.

     (2) The ARPD must consider issuing progressive discipline to any LCO who has their
         warrant suspended or revoked in consultation with their Employee Relations
         Specialist.

     (3) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices may conduct their own internal review to
         determine if suspension or revocation is appropriate or they may submit a request to
         the ACM to conduct a review.

     (4) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will notify the ACM immediately if they
         suspend or revoke an LCO’s warrant.

     (5) Examples of reasons for warrant suspensions or revocations include, but are not
         limited to, if the LCO:

         (a) Fails to comply with applicable laws, regulations, and codes of conduct for
             Federal employees;

         (b) Fails to maintain an active LCP certification;

         (c) Fails to meet minimum performance standards for the position;

         (d) Is reassigned to a position that does not require a warrant;

         (e) No longer has an organizational need for the warrant; or

         (f) Separates from the service of USDA.

n.   LCOs will ensure that all actions executed using their LCO warrant do not exceed the
     limitations specified on the warrant or appointment letter.




                                            6
5. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Director, OPEM will:

       (1) Serve as the HCA for the USDA real property lease contracting program and the
           AO for USDA LCO warrants;

       (2) Appoint the ACM;

       (3) Review and approve candidates for an LCO warrant after receipt of an approved
           warrant nomination from the Chief, PMD; and

       (4) Suspend or revoke any USDA issued LCO warrant as appropriate.

  b.   The Chief, PMD, will:

       (1) Review and approve candidates for an LCO warrant after receipt of an approved
           warrant nomination from the ACM;

       (2) Submit approved warrant nominations to the AO; and

       (3) Respond to requests for exceptions to any policy set forth in this DR.

  c.   The ACM will:

       (1) Review CL requests and determine the CLP value of approved maintenance
           activities;

       (2) Review and approve LCP CL submissions and certifications; and

       (3) Review and approve candidates for an LCO warrant after receipt from an approved
           warrant nomination from the ARPD.

       (4) Submit approved warrant nominations to the Chief, PMD.

  d.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Heads will:

       (1) Consult with the ACM to determine what courses or activities will count towards
           warrant qualification or maintenance; and

       (2) Notify the ACM immediately if they suspend or revoke an LCO’s warrant.

  e.   ARPDs will:

       (1) Approve and sign all LCO warrant nominations requests and submit them to the
           ACM;



                                              7
       (2) Ensure that the courses and supplementary real property activities being used to
           support a warrant application are approved prior to expending funds for them; and

       (3) Suspend or revoke any USDA issued LCO warrant within their Mission Area,
           agency, or staff office, as appropriate.

       (4) Consider issuing progressive discipline to any LCO who has their warrant
           suspended or revoked.

  f.   LCOs will:

       (1) Maintain an active LCP certification for their signature authority to remain valid;
           and

       (2) Not exceed the limitations specified on their warrant or appointment letter.


6. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  Mission Area, agency, and staff office heads will submit requests for exceptions to any
  policy statement documented in this DR to the Chief, PMD, Office of Property and
  Environmental Management, USDA, 1400 Independence Avenue SW, Washington DC
  20250, or OPEM.RealProperty@usda.gov. Requests must include adequate documentation
  and a justification stating why the policy cannot be met as written.


7. INQUIRIES

  Mission Area, agency, and staff office heads will direct all inquiries about this DR to the
  Chief, PMD, Office of Property and Environmental Management, USDA, 1400
  Independence Avenue SW, Washington DC 20250, or 202-205-4008, or
  OPEM.RealProperty@usda.gov.



                                            -END-




                                               8
                            APPENDIX A

                ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


ACM     Acquisition Career Manager
AO      Appointing Official
ARPD    Agency Real Property Director
CLP     Continuous Learning Point
DR      Departmental Regulation
FAC-C   Federal Acquisition Certification in Contracting
FAR     Federal Acquisition Regulation
GSA     General Services Administration
GSAM    General Services Administration Manual
HCA     Head of Contracting Activity
ILAT    Intermediate Lease Acquisition Threshold
LCO     Lease Contracting Officer
LCP     Leasing Certification Program
OFPP    Office of Federal Procurement Policy
OMB     Office of Management and Budget
OPEM    Office of Property and Environmental Management
OPM     Office of Personnel Management
PMD     Property Management Division (within OPEM)
SLAT    Simplified Lease Acquisition Threshold
TLCV    Total Lease Contract Value
USDA    United States Department of Agriculture
WPA     Whistleblower Protection Act of 1989
WPEA    Whistleblower Protection Enhancement Act of 2012




                                 A-1
                                         APPENDIX B

                                         DEFINITIONS


Acquisition Career Manager (ACM). The one individual within USDA, appointed by the AO,
responsible for ensuring compliance with acquisition workforce certification policy,
implementation procedures, internal controls and conducting periodic reviews.

Appointing Official (AO). The Director of OPEM, or designee, is the AO and the only USDA
individual with the signatory authority to issue a warrant.

Agency Real Property Director (ARPD). The lowest level official in the Mission Area, agency,
or staff office with full responsibility over the Mission Area, agency, or staff office's real
property portfolio.

Continuous Learning Point (CLP). A numerical value assigned by the ACM to continuous
learning activities.

Head of Contracting Activity (HCA). The individual appointed through the authorities of the
Secretary of Agriculture responsible for establishing acquisition policies, procedures, and
guidance to the USDA acquisition workforce.

Intermediate Lease Acquisition Threshold (ILAT). The dollar amount set by the General
Services Administration (GSA) in GSAM 501.603-1 for intermediate level warrants. It is based
on Total Lease Contract Value (TLCV) as defined below.

Leasing Certification Program (LCP). GSA’s established set of instructions governing how the
federal agencies ensure that Lease Contracting Officers meet the requirements of the Office of
Federal Procurement Policy (OFPP) Memorandum, Revisions to the Federal Acquisition
Certification in Contracting (FAC-C).

Lease Contracting Officer (LCO). A USDA employee appointed by the Appointing Official or
designee, granted signatory power to execute, modify, or terminate lease contracts using
delegated authority through the Director, OPEM and the Secretary of Agriculture, in accordance
with Federal acquisition and property laws and regulations.

Prospectus Threshold. Annually adjusted limit to restrict appropriations on real property projects
over a certain amount. Refer to the GSA website for current threshold, Annual Prospectus
Thresholds.

Simplified Lease Acquisition Threshold (SLAT). The simplified acquisition threshold (see
Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) 2.101), when applied to the average annual rent for the
term of the lease, including option periods and excluding the cost of services. GSA further limits
simplified warrants to the Intermediate Lease Acquisition Threshold since it is possible to have a
lease that doesn’t exceed the SLAT, yet it does exceed the ILAT.



                                               B-1
Total Lease Contract Value (TLCV). The sum of rent payments to be paid during the term of the
lease including options, excluding operating costs and real estate taxes. For lease amendments,
the total lease contract value does not include the previously awarded lease amounts; it only
includes the dollar amount of the amendment.

Warrant. A delegation which defines the extent of authority vested in an individual to execute,
modify, and terminate leasehold interests in real property; specifically, the signatory authority of
an individual to obligate funds and contractually commit the Department.




                                                B-2
                                          APPENDIX C

                             AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Federal Labor Relations Authority, Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute (5
U.S.C. 7101 - 7135)

GSA, Leasing Certification Program (website)

GSA, General Services Acquisition Manual (GSAM)

OMB, Memorandum for Chief Acquisition Officers and Senior Procurement Executives:
Revisions to Federal Acquisition Certification in Contracting, May 7, 2014

OPM, Adverse Actions, Title 5, Part 752

OPM, Classification Standard for Realty Series, GS1170

OPM, Individual right of action in certain reprisal cases, 5 U.S.C. 1221 (g)

OPM, Prohibited Personnel Practices, 5 U.S.C. 2302 b (8-9)

USDA, DR 5100-004, Real Property Management, February 9, 2023




                                               C-1
