                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                 NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                         DR 5100-004
                                                                 DATE:
 SUBJECT: Real Property Management                               February 9, 2023
                                                                 EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Office of Property and Environmental Management
                                                                 February 9, 2028



Section                                                                                     Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                   1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                        1
3.   Scope                                                                                     2
4.   Policy                                                                                    2
5.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                               10
6.   Policy Exceptions                                                                        12
7.   Inquiries                                                                                12

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                      A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                     B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                      C-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of
     Agriculture’s (USDA) policy for the management, acquisition, and disposal of real property
     assets.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     a.   This regulation supersedes DR 5100-004, Real Property Management, dated April 1,
          2021.

     b.   This regulation is effective immediately when published.

     c.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will align their policies and procedures
          with this DR within 6 months of the publish date.
3. SCOPE

  a.   This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices.

  b.   The Federal Management Regulation (FMR) 102-71.20, What definitions apply to
       GSA’s real property policies, defines the term “real property.” As such, certain types of
       lands (e.g., public domain lands, lands reserved or dedicated for national forest
       purposes, easements) are excluded from the scope of this DR.


4. POLICY

  a.   Management

       (1) The Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA) serves as the USDA’s Senior
           Real Property Officer (SRPO). The Office of Property and Environmental
           Management (OPEM) oversees all of USDA’s real property management. The
           OPEM Property Management Division (PMD) Chief serves as the USDA Real
           Property Director (RPD). The lowest level official in the Mission Area, agency, or
           staff office with full responsibility over the Mission Area, agency, or staff office's
           real property portfolio serves as the Agency Real Property Director (ARPD).

       (2) Capital Plan (CP)

            (a) Annually, the SRPO will coordinate with the USDA Chief Financial Officer
                (CFO) and Budget Officer (BO) to implement USDA’s CP process as required
                by Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Memorandum M-20-03,
                Implementation of Agency-wide Real Property Capital Planning. This process
                covers all real property assets including leased buildings and facilities,
                Occupancy Agreements (OA), agreements, free space, owned buildings,
                structures, land, and land leases.

            (b) ARPDs will also take the lead within each USDA Mission Area, agency, or
                staff office to coordinate with the Mission Area, agency, or staff office’s CFO
                and BO to submit the Agency CP information to USDA.

       (3) Real Property Asset Data

            (a) Executive Order 13327, Federal Real Property Asset Management, mandated
                use of a centralized real property database known as the Federal Real Property
                Profile Management System (FRPP-MS). The Federal Real Property Council
                (FRPC) updates the real property reporting requirements for Federal agencies
                annually in the Federal Real Property Profile (FRPP) Data Dictionary (DD).
                The latest DD along with other guidance can be found in the FRPC Guidance
                Library.




                                               2
(b) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices track, manage, measure and report
    real property holdings in the Department’s Enterprise Asset Management
    System (EAMS). EAMS data feeds into FRPP-MS. The data will reflect
    accurate and complete information on all USDA real property assets including
    owned facilities and structures, land leases, office leases, OAs, agreements,
    free space, etc. Data will be updated in the system within 5 working days of
    signing a contract or agreement for acquisition, alteration, modification, or
    disposal of a real property asset.

(c) For collocated leases, the lead leasing agency (LLA) will enter collocation
    agreement data in the EAMS. For collocated property in USDA owned
    buildings, the owning agency will enter collocation agreement data in EAMS.

(d) Within the National Capitol Region (NCR), the USDA Office of Operations
    (OO) maintains the data in the EAMS, except for locations whereby there is
    mutual agreement between OO and the Mission Area, agency, or staff office
    for the Mission Area, agency, or staff office to maintain the data.

(e) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices utilize the EAMS rent reconciliation
    tool once per month to compare the rent and security charges that the General
    Services Administration (GSA) and Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
    have billed USDA with their OAs to ensure that GSA and DHS are billing
    USDA correctly.

    1    If data discrepancies are found, they will be resolved and corrected in the
         EAMS within 5 working days.

    2    If the information GSA has provided is incorrect, Mission Areas, agencies,
         and staff offices will contact GSA for resolution.

    3    If the Mission Area, agency, or staff office cannot resolve the issue with
         GSA or DHS directly within 20 working days, the Mission Area, agency,
         or staff office will submit a formal request for assistance to
         OPEM.RealProperty@usda.gov along with documentation of the issue.

(f) ARPDs will submit an annual certification to OPEM no later than September
    30 that affirms the integrity of their Mission Area, agency, or staff office’s
    reportable real property inventory data in the Department’s EAMS for that
    fiscal year. Certification means all data gaps, errors, inconsistencies, and
    anomalies have been corrected.

(g) Once a year, after each Mission Area, agency, or staff office has certified its
    data and the Chief, PMD has certified the data for the Department, USDA’s
    data will be submitted to GSA through FRPP-MS.




                                   3
(4) Annual Real Property Inventories

    (a) Designated Point of Contact.

         1    The designated point of contact for USDA for annual real property
              inventories is the Chief, PMD.

         2    Each USDA Mission Area, agency, or staff office will:

              a    Designate primary and alternate points of contact for their annual real
                   property inventories.

              b    Submit original and updated points of contact to
                   OPEM.RealProperty@usda.gov.

    (b) The Chief, PMD, will certify USDA’s annual real property inventory. The
        head of each Mission Area, agency, or staff office will also certify that the
        information in their real property inventory submission is accurate.

    (c) USDA uses its EAMS to submit real property inventory reports to GSA. No
        alternate or supplemental data management systems may be used within USDA
        Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices without the approval from the
        Director of OPEM.

    (d) All USDA owned and leased real property assets will be physically inspected
        and inventoried once every 5 years. The Department’s EAMS will be updated
        to certify that the inventories have been completed.

(5) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will ensure that all real property actions
    involving owned or leased land follow the sustainability and environmental
    management policy located in DR 1058-001, Sustainable Operations Council, and
    DR 5600-005, Environmental Management.

(6) Approval of Proposed Acquisition Projects

    (a) Acquisition includes the purchase, lease, transfer, exchange, donation, or gift
        of real property.

    (b) Unimproved Land. All projects regardless of dollar amount will be approved
        by the Director of OPEM when USDA is acquiring unimproved land.

    (c) Improved Land, Buildings, and Other Structures.

         1    All projects for acquiring improved land, buildings, or other structures
              which involve a total expenditure more than $1,500,000 will be approved
              by the Director of OPEM and the ASA when USDA is:



                                        4
         a    Acquiring land, buildings, or structures;

         b    Constructing new buildings, or structures;

         c    Altering existing buildings, or structures; and

         d    Leasing a facility that exceeds an average annual rental of $1.5
              million.

    2    Requests for review and approval for proposed acquisition projects that
         require review and approval from the OPEM Director and the ASA will be
         submitted to OPEM.RealProperty@usda.gov. Review requests will allow
         45 calendar days for OPEM and ASA approval.

    3    All projects for acquiring improved land, buildings, or other structures
         which involve a total expenditure less than or equal to $1,500,000 will be
         approved utilizing Mission Area, agency, or staff office procedures.

(d) Alterations under Lease.

    1    Projects Exceeding $750,000. All projects involving the alteration of a
         leased building or any part of a leased building which involve a total
         expenditure more than $750,000 will be approved by the ASA. Mission
         Areas, agencies, and staff offices will submit the proposed project to
         OPEM.RealProperty@usda.gov to obtain ASA approval. Review requests
         will allow 45 calendar days for OPEM and ASA approval.

    2     Projects at $750,000 or Under. All projects involving the alteration of a
         leased building or any part of a leased building which involve a total
         expenditure of $750,000 or less will be approved utilizing Mission Area,
         agency, or staff office procedures.

(e) If approved, OPEM will coordinate the submission of any project for which
    Congressional approval is required under 40 United States Code (U.S.C.) §
    3307, Congressional approval of proposed projects.

(f) If an acquisition is specifically authorized by Congress through appropriations
    or other laws, Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will submit the project
    to OPEM for review.

(g) Prior approval of the ASA is required before a USDA Mission Area, agency, or
    staff office may take any action or public announcement of the design,
    alteration, or construction of a USDA-owned facility, not specifically
    authorized by law, appropriations act, or reports accompanying an




                                   5
              appropriation act, when the estimated cost exceeds $1,500,000. Prior approval
              from the ASA is not required for appraisals.

         (h) Prospectus Threshold. For any acquisition or alteration project that exceeds
             the GSA Annual prospectus thresholds website, Mission Areas, agencies, and
             staff offices will submit prospectus information required by GSA to OPEM.
             OPEM will seek ASA approval. If approved, OPEM will coordinate the
             submission of the request to the GSA Administrator who will transmit it to
             Congress.

     (7) Congressional Notifications. When Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices are
         required to notify Congress for any real property action, they will also notify OPEM
         at the same time by submitting the notification to OPEM.RealProperty@usda.gov.

b.   Acquisition

     (1) When acquiring real property, USDA must have legal authority. All acquisition
         deeds should reference the applicable legal authority. Under 7 U.S.C. § 2268a,
         Acquisition of land; options, Mission area, agency, and staff office heads are
         delegated authority to acquire real property.

     (2) Acquisition of subsurface rights. The subsurface rights will be acquired or
         subordinated to the rights of the United States for those parcels on which the land to
         be acquired will be improved. In such acquisitions, the following clause will be
         included in all purchase contracts:

         “The vendor further agrees not to do, or suffer others to do, any act by which the
         value or title to said lands may be diminished or encumbered. It is further agreed
         that any loss or damage to the property occurring prior to the vesting of satisfactory
         title in the United States of America by reason of the unauthorized cutting or
         removal of products or the removal of minerals or other natural resources
         therefrom, or because of fire, or act of God, will be borne by the vendor; and that, in
         the event any such loss or damage occurs, the United States may refuse, without
         liability, to accept conveyance of said land, or it may elect to accept conveyance
         upon an equitable adjustment of the purchase price.”

     (3) Appraisals. When conducting appraisals of real property, USDA will follow the
         Uniform Appraisal Standards for Federal Land Acquisitions, as adopted, published,
         and amended by the Department of Justice (DOJ).

     (4) Transfers

         (a) Mission Area, agency, and staff office heads will request an exception to the
             100 percent reimbursement requirement by submitting a request to the OPEM
             Director.




                                             6
         (b) Transfers of real property between USDA agencies will be executed on an
             Agriculture Department (AD) 107 form, Report of Transfer or Other
             Disposition or Construction of Property. Transfers of real property with other
             Federal agencies will be executed on a GSA Form 1334, Request for Transfer
             of Excess Real and Related Personal Property.

     (5) Gifts of real property will comply with DR 5200-003, Gift Acceptance Policy.

     (6) Land Leases

         (a) USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will not locate permanent
             structures on land it does not own, except as prescribed by law or if:

                1   The lease term is equal to or less than the estimated life of the structure or
                    the need for the structure; and

                2   The lease includes the right to remove such structures within 90 calendar
                    days after termination of the use or right to the land.

         (b) Approval of the ASA is required when using 7 U.S.C. § 2250a, Erection of
             buildings and other structures on non-Federal lands; duration of use of such
             lands; removal of structures after termination of use; availability of funds for
             expenses of acquiring long-term leases or other agreements, authority to a
             locate permanent structure on land not owned by the Federal Government
             when the estimated market value of the land exceeds the Simplified Lease
             Acquisition Threshold, as defined by the General Services Acquisition Manual
             (GSAM) 570.102, Definitions.

         (c) Public Announcements. No public announcement will be made of proposed
             leases requiring approval of the ASA until such approval has been obtained.

c.   Disposal

     (1) Each Mission Area, agency, and staff office will retain real property assets
         necessary to carry out the mission of USDA. Excess real property assets will be
         disposed.

     (2) The Mission Area, agency, or staff office that executes their authority to dispose of
         USDA real property assets is considered the Disposal Agency.

     (3) Screening

         (a) The ARPD will submit a package to the Chief, PMD, at
             OPEM.RealProperty@usda.gov, for screening excess real property assets at the
             Departmental level to offer the asset to other USDA Mission Areas, agencies,




                                               7
         or staff offices. The following excess real property assets will be considered
         for Departmental screening:

         1    Land regardless of its value;

         2    Real property improvements valued $50,000 and over; and

         3    Real property improvements valued under $50,000 if the ARPD decides to
              submit for screening. The decision is based on:

              a   The condition of the asset; and

              b   The likelihood that another USDA Mission Area, agency, or staff
                  office might have a need for the asset.

    (b) PMD will screen this asset for 30 calendar days with other USDA Mission
        Areas, agencies, and staff offices to identify if another USDA Mission Area,
        agency, or staff office has a need for the asset. If no Mission Area, agency, or
        staff office expresses a need for the asset, then the screening notice will expire
        on a set date and the Mission Area, agency, or staff office can continue the
        disposal process.

(4) Homeless Assistance

    (a) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will comply with Title V of the
        McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act, 42 U.S.C § 11411, Use of
        unutilized and underutilized public buildings and real property to assist the
        homeless.

    (b) When reporting a suitable and available property for homeless assistance to the
        United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD),
        Mission Areas, agencies, or staff offices will provide a copy of the report to
        OPEM.RealProperty@usda.gov, unless the asset has been reported to GSA for
        disposal. In that situation, GSA is responsible for reporting the property to
        HUD.

(5) Mission Area, agency, and staff office heads are delegated authority to dispose of
    non-land real property assets valued under $50,000 if USDA sustainability and
    environmental management policies are followed.

(6) Report of Excess (ROE)

    (a) After screening, the following real property assets will be reported to GSA for
        excess, unless the Mission Area, agency, or staff office has independent
        statutory authority to dispose:




                                        8
         1   Land regardless of its value; and

         2   Real property improvements valued $50,000 and over.

    (b) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will submit ROE packages
        (including the Report Property Excess Forms listed on GSA’s Real Property
        Utilization and Disposal website) to the Chief, PMD at
        OPEM.Real.Property@usda.gov.

    (c) PMD will coordinate a review by the Environmental Management Division
        (EMD) and prepare the package for signature by the OPEM Director.

    (d) Once OPEM approval is obtained, PMD will submit the ROE into GSA’s ROE
        Portal.

(7) Independent Disposal Authority Authorized by Legislation

    (a) Occasionally Congress will authorize a specific Mission Area, agency, or staff
        office the authority to dispose of specific real property assets.

    (b) The Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices will follow the policy and
        procedures outlined in the legislation.

    (c) The Mission Area, agency, or staff office will provide a copy of the form AD-
        112, Report of Unserviceable, Lost, Stolen, Damaged, or Destroyed Property,
        for all disposals to OPEM.

    (d) Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must still comply with USDA
        sustainability and environmental management policy.

(8) Reassignment of real property by USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices.
    Prior to actions from other sources, USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
    offices will determine whether new requirements for property can be met by
    improved utilization of their existing property or reassignment of other Department
    property.

    (a) Land and buildings. OPEM will approve and reassign land and appurtenant
        structures and facilities between the Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices
        of the Department. Reassignment may be made without exchange of funds,
        except that reimbursement may be required for book value of real property
        under custody of the Commodity Credit Corporation. Request and supporting
        justification for reassignment of such real property will be submitted through
        the head of the requesting Mission Area, agency, or staff office to the OPEM
        Director at OPEM.RealProperty@usda.gov.




                                       9
           (b) Buildings and facilities without land. Buildings and other similar facilities or
               structures may be reassigned between Mission Areas, agencies, and staff
               offices without reimbursement, by agreement of the Mission Areas, agencies,
               or staff offices.

           (c) Permits. USDA Mission Area, agency, and staff office heads may issue a
               permit to another USDA Mission Area, agency, or staff office to allow the
               Mission Areas, agency, or staff office to use property that is not immediately
               needed by a Departmental Mission Area, agency, or staff office and not
               considered excess. Any operations and maintenance costs can be negotiated
               between the permitting Mission Area, agency, or staff office and the permittee.
               GSA alone can approve permitting other Government agencies outside the
               Department to use property that is not immediately needed by a Departmental
               Mission Area, agency, or staff office and not considered excess.


5. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The ASA will:

       (1) Serve as USDA’s SRPO;

       (2) Approve certain real property acquisition projects of improved land, buildings, or
           other structures which involve a total expenditure more than $1,500,000;

       (3) Approve acquisition projects involving the alteration of a leased building or any
           part of a leased building which involve a total expenditure more than $750,000;

       (4) Approve any action or public announcement of the design, alteration, or
           construction of a USDA-owned facility, as applicable; and

       (5) Approve the construction of permanent structures and the public announcement of
           such actions on leased land in certain situations as specified.

  b.   The Director, OPEM will:

       (1) Oversee the Department’s real property program;

       (2) Approve alternate or supplemental EAMS other than the system designated for use
           by the Department;

       (3) Approve proposed acquisition projects for which the ASA must approve and
           coordinate the submission of these projects to the ASA for approval;

       (4) Coordinate the submission of any project for which Congressional approval is
           required, as specified;



                                              10
     (5) Coordinate any prospectus level project with GSA;

     (6) Approve any exception to the 100 percent reimbursement requirement on transfers;

     (7) Approve of reassignment of real property land and buildings between USDA
         Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices and approves ROEs submitted by OPEM
         to GSA;

     (8) Approve of certain exchanges of real property for privately owned property; and

     (9) Approve the transfer of USDA owned real property to other Federal agencies.

c.   The Chief, PMD, OPEM will:

     (1) Serve as the USDA RPD;

     (2) Carry out wide-ranging real property asset and space management duties and
         responsibilities;

     (3) Certify the Department’s real property data annually and submit to FRPP-MS;

     (4) Serve as the Designated Point of Contact for USDA’s annual real property
         inventory;

     (5) Screen USDA surplus real property to other USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and
         staff offices to see if a need elsewhere in the Department exists; and

     (6) Review and approve any waivers of the policies outlined in this DR.

d.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office Heads will:

     (1) Implement this policy and align their policies and procedures with this DR within 6
         months of the publish date;

     (2) Coordinate direct Federal development projects with state and local units of
         government as applicable;

     (3) Perform actions required by the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act of
         1987; and

     (4) Issue permits for use by another USDA Mission Area, agency, or staff office if the
         real property is not immediately needed and not considered excess.

e.   Mission Area, Agency, and Staff Office ARPDs will:




                                           11
       (1) Coordinate with the Mission Area, agency, or staff office’s CFO and BO to submit
           the Agency Capital Planning information to OPEM;

       (2) Submit an annual certification to OPEM no later than September 30 that affirms the
           integrity of their Mission Area, agency, or staff office’s reportable real property
           inventory data in the Department’s EAMS for that fiscal year; and

       (3) Submit a disposal package to the Chief, PMD, for screening certain excess real
           property assets at the Departmental level.

  f.   LLAs will enter collocation agreement data in the EAMS for collocated office.

  g.   The Director of the OO will maintain the data for certain real property assets within the
       NCR.


6. POLICY EXCEPTIONS

  Unless specifically stated to submit exceptions elsewhere, requests for exceptions to any
  policy set forth in this DR will include supporting documentation and a justification stating
  why the policy cannot be met. Submit them to the Chief, PMD, OPEM, USDA, 1400
  Independence Avenue SW, Washington DC 20250 or to OPEM.RealProperty@usda.gov.


7. INQUIRIES

  Direct all inquiries about this DR to the Chief, PMD, OPEM, USDA, 1400 Independence
  Avenue SW, Washington DC 20250, or to OPEM.RealProperty@usda.gov.


                                            -END-




                                              12
                              APPENDIX A

                  ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AD        Agriculture Department (prefix for USDA Departmental form numbers)
ARPD      Agency Real Property Director
ASA       Assistant Secretary for Administration
BO        Budget Officer
CFR       Code of Federal Regulations
CFO       Chief Financial Officer
CP        Capital Plan
DHS       Department of Homeland Security
DOJ       Department of Justice
DD        Data Dictionary
DR        Departmental Regulation
EAMS      Enterprise Asset Management System
EMD       Environmental Management Division (OPEM component)
FMR       Federal Management Regulation
FRPC      Federal Real Property Council
FRPP      Federal Real Property Profile
FRPP-MS   Federal Real Property Profile – Management System
GSA       General Services Administration
GSAM      General Services Acquisition Manual
HUD       Housing and Urban Development
LLA       Lead Leasing Agency
NCR       National Capital Region
OA        Occupancy Agreement
OMB       Office of Management and Budget
OO        Office of Operations
OPEM      Office of Property and Environmental Management
PMD       Property Management Division (OPEM component)
ROE       Report of Excess
RPD       Real Property Director
SRPO      Senior Real Property Officer
U.S.C.    United States Code
USDA      United States Department of Agriculture




                                   A-1
                                           APPENDIX B

                                          DEFINITIONS


Collocation. The process of housing of two or more USDA Mission Areas, agencies, or staff
offices together in one complex. Collocated agencies can be housed contiguously or in several
noncontiguous spaces throughout several buildings in one complex or campus.

Collocation Agreement. This is the agreement on how to share resources within an office with
more than one USDA Mission Area, agency, or staff office present. It describes how many
people are present and how the shared space is divided up and paid for.

Direct Federal Development. Direct Federal development projects include planning and
construction of facilities and installations or other public works; the acquisition, use and disposal
of real property; and granting of licenses and permits.

Disposal Agency. The Mission Area, agency, or staff office of the Department whose official
executes their disposal authority to dispose of USDA real property assets.

Excess Real Property. Any real property under the control of the Department that is not required
for its mission and the discharge of its responsibilities as determined by OPEM or Mission Area,
agency, or staff office as applicable.

Fair Market Value. The price at which property would change hands between a willing buyer
and a willing seller, neither being under any compulsion to buy or to sell and both having
reasonable knowledge of relevant facts.

Prospectus. A request from the GSA Administrator to Congress for approval to appropriate
funds to construct, alter, or acquire buildings, or to lease space or alter leased space, when the
prospectus threshold is exceeded.

Prospectus Threshold. Annually adjusted limit to restrict appropriations on real property projects
over a certain amount. Refer to GSA website, Annual Prospectus Thresholds, for the current
threshold.

Public Announcement. Any formal press release or notice to the general public.

Public Building. A building, whether for single or multitenant occupancy, and its grounds,
approaches, and appurtenances, which is generally suitable for use as office or storage space or
both by one or more Federal agencies and mixed-ownership Government corporations. For
further clarification see 40 U.S.C. § 3301, Definitions and nonapplication.

Real Property. Real property is defined in FMR 102-71.20 as:




                                                 B-1
   a.   Any interest in land, together with the improvements, structures, and fixtures located
        thereon (including prefabricated movable structures, such as Butler-type storage
        warehouses and Quonset huts, and house trailers with or without undercarriages), and
        appurtenances thereto, under the control of any Federal agency, except:

        (1) The public domain;

        (2) Lands reserved or dedicated for national forest or national park purposes;

        (3) Minerals in lands or portions of lands withdrawn or reserved from the public
            domain that the Secretary of the Interior determines are suitable for disposition
            under the public land mining and mineral leasing laws;

        (4) Lands withdrawn or reserved from the public domain but not including lands or
            portions of lands so withdrawn or reserved that the Secretary of the Interior, with
            the concurrence of the Administrator of General Services, determines are not
            suitable for return to the public domain for disposition under the general public land
            laws because such lands are substantially changed in character by improvements or
            otherwise; and agency for disposition by severance and removal from the land.

   b.   Improvements of any kind, structures, and fixtures under the control of any Federal
        agency when designated by such agency for disposition without the underlying land
        (including such as may be located on the public domain, on lands withdrawn or reserved
        from the public domain, on lands reserved or dedicated for national forest or national
        park purposes, or on lands that are not owned by the United States) excluding, however,
        prefabricated movable structures, such as Butler-type storage warehouses and Quonset
        huts, and house trailers (with or without undercarriages).

   c.   Standing timber and embedded gravel, sand, or stone under the control of any Federal
        agency, whether designated by such agency for disposition with the land or by severance
        and removal from the land, excluding timber felled, and gravel, sand, or stone excavated
        by or for the Government prior to disposition.

Report of Excess. The official request from a Federal agency to GSA when the agency wants
GSA to dispose of excess Federal real property utilizing GSA’s disposal authority.

Subsurface Right. A landowner’s right over minerals and other substances found below a
property.




                                               B-2
                                         APPENDIX C

                             AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


7 U.S.C. § 2250a, Erection of buildings and other structures on non-Federal lands; duration of
use of such lands; removal of structures after termination of use; availability of funds for
expenses of acquiring long-term leases or other agreements

7 U.S.C. § 2268a, Acquisition of land; options

40 U.S.C. § 3301, Definitions and nonapplication

40 U.S.C. § 3307, Congressional approval of proposed projects

DOJ, Interagency Land Acquisition Conference, Uniform Appraisal Standards for Federal Land
Acquisitions, 2016

Executive Order 13327, Federal Real Property Asset Management, February 4, 2004

GSA, Annual Prospectus Thresholds website

GSA, Federal Management Regulation, 41 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 102, Subchapter
C, Real Property

GSA, FRPC, FRPC Guidance Library website

GSA, Federal Real Property Profile Management System website

GSA, General Services Acquisition Manual (GSAM) 570.102, Definitions

GSA, GSA Form 1334, Request for Transfer of Excess Real and Related Personal Property,
June 1977

GSA, Real Property Utilization and Disposal website

McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act, 42 U.S.C § 11411, Use of unutilized and
underutilized public buildings and real property to assist the homeless

OMB, Memorandum M-20-03, Implementation of Agency-wide Real Property Capital Planning,
November 6, 2019

Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act of 1987, Public Law 100-77, July 22, 1987

USDA, AD-107, Report of Transfer or Other Disposition or Construction of Property,
November 1989



                                                 C-1
USDA, AD-112, Report of Unserviceable, Lost, Stolen, Damaged, or Destroyed Property,
March 1994

USDA, Departmental Directives by Category website

USDA, DR 1058-001, Sustainable Operations Council, December 21, 2021

USDA, DR 5200-003, Gift Acceptance Policy, January 4, 2018

USDA, DR 5600-005, Environmental Management, February 28, 2022




                                           C-2
