                         U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                                                    Number:
          DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                   5160-003
SUBJECT:                                                DATE:
Identification Signs                                    September 3, 2014
                                                        OPI: Office of Procurement &
                                                        Property Management, Property
                                                        Management Division


   1.    PURPOSE

         The purpose of this regulation is to prescribe the policy and guidelines for the posting
         of identification signs.


   2.    SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATION

         a.    This regulation supersedes DR 5160-003, dated November 25, 2002.

         b.    This updates the Division name in (6), on the last page from “Design Center” to
               “Brand, Events, Exhibits, and Editorial Review Division (BEEERD).”

         c.   This replaces the sign design guide formerly identified as “Appendix A” with a
              “USDA Facility Signage Guide.” This is posted under “Guidance Documents” on
              the BEEERD web page.


   3.    POSTING AND EXCEPTIONS

         For the convenience of the public, the buildings, offices and stations of USDA will be
         marked by signs or lettering on the buildings and doors. Signs will be erected at the
         principal entrances of buildings, stations, etc. Principal buildings of such stations will
         also be identified.

         a.   Uniformity. Department signs will be uniform and conform to the standard
              design as shown in the USDA Facility Signage Guide. Existing signs need not be
              changed to conform to the standard design until it is necessary to replace them.
              When such replacements are made, they will be in accordance with the standard
              design. Contact the Director, BEEERD for more information.

         b.   USDA Signature Lockup. The Official USDA Symbol with the Department name
              will be included and used as the Department’s signature. It will be designated for
     display on signage as deemed appropriate. The USDA Seal has been withdrawn
     from use as the designated Departmental Identifier. The Seal will maintain a role
     within the Department’s information system. It will be relegated for use on legal
     documents, in the Office of the Secretary, and for other protocol functions as
     originally mandated by Congress.

c.   Associated Regulations. These regulations complement existing directives such
     as Departmental Regulation (DR) 5160-001, Official Symbol and Seal of the
     Department, and DR 1430-002 Use of Logos/Marks at the United States
     Department of Agriculture.

d.   Exceptions. The following exceptions to the standard sign are permitted.

     (1)    When local environment dictates a more appropriate type of sign, such as
            rustic signs in national forests, raised bronze or carved stone letters on
            buildings, etc. On such signs, however, if the name of an agency of the
            Department is used, it must follow the Department’s name, for example:
            “U.S. Department of Agriculture, Name of Agency”.

     (2)    Special purpose signs such as those intended to control, warn or direct, or
            those which identify physical features, etc., when the name of a
            Department or agency is not involved.

     (3)    For activities carried on cooperatively with another agency outside of the
            Department. However, on such signs where the name of the Department
            appears, the following words “U.S. Department of Agriculture, Name of
            Agency” must also appear.

     (4)    Individual buildings, where the principal entrance to a station of the
            Department is properly identified. Such buildings may carry only the
            name of the activity involved.

     (5)    Federal buildings occupied with other Government agencies or leased
            buildings where the Department is not the sole tenant. While exterior
            signs need not be displayed, appropriate office identification will be
            presented by door lettering and signs as follows:

            (a)    The words “U.S. Department of Agriculture” will come first in
                   letters not smaller or less conspicuous than those elsewhere in the
                   lettering, except in buildings devoted exclusively to activities of
                   the Department.

            (b)    If the name of the Department comes first it must be followed by
                   the Agency name in letters the same size or smaller than those used
                   in the name.
                                     2
           (c)    The display of decals or signs conforming to the standard
                  identification sign specified in the USDA Facility Signage Guide
                  will meet the requirements of this regulation.

    (6)    When clearly justified by special circumstance, the Director, Brand,
           Events, Exhibits, and Editorial Review Division (BEEERD), Office of
           Communications, may waive the requirements of this regulation in writing
           upon request by the Agency Head through the Director, Office of
           Procurement and Property Management. A detailed drawing or copy of
           the proposed sign should be submitted with the requesting memorandum
           from the Agency Head or designee.

    (7)    The Federally-owned USDA headquarters buildings in Washington, DC
           are exempt from these guidelines with regard to exterior building
           identification signage only. The General Services Administration,
           Commission of Fine Arts, and the National Capital Planning Commission
           dictate the exact format of exterior identification signs for these buildings.
           Contact the Director, Office of Operations, USDA, with questions
           regarding this exception or for additional information.

e   Building Directories. The words “U.S. Department of Agriculture” will precede
    agency listing in letters not smaller or less conspicuous than used in agency
    listing.

                                   -END-




                                     3
