 

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

 

ILE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

f NUMBER:
' ) DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION. 5200-1
Fe DATE: : -
ei April 9, 1984-
Personal Property Management OPE Asa]
ssistant Inspector General
inopentysbesscs Security and Special Operations
1 PURPOSE

The purpose of this regulation is to set forth procedures per-
taining to a new property pass form to be used for the authorized
removal of property from the USDA Headquarters complex. The new
form is designed to help USDA agency property officers account for,
audit, and control the removal of Property assigned to their
agency.

2 SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS AND DEFINITIONS

a Effective April 16, 1984, the new USDA Form AD-873, Property
Pass, (figure 1) will be used, in most instances, to record and
approve the removal of personal property from USDA premises.
The GSA Optional Form 7, Property Pass, will be used only on a
limited basis as set forth in section 6.

b This regulation does not apply to those shipments or movements
of furniture which are carried out under the supervision and
control of the Office of Operations.

3 POLICY

Agencies will control the removal of property from USDA premises

through the issuance of property passes by designated issuing

authorities and through the maintenance of records to support the
issuance of property passes, as outlined in this regulation.
4 RESPONSIBILITIES

a The Physical Security Branch, Office of Inspector General, will:

(1) Oversee the control and use of Property passes within USDA;

(2) Make random audits of logs and files maintained by agency
property officers and/or agency issuing authorities; and

(3) Receive originals of issued property passes from the
guards, file the originals by issuing agency, and return
them monthly to the appropriate Chief Property Officer.

DISTRIBUTION: 52

 
 

April 9, 1984

b Agency Chief Property Officers will:

(1)

(2)

Designate a property officer from their agency to monitor
the issuance of property passes and audit the property log
books of employees authorized to sign property passes; and

Notify the Physical Security Branch in writing concerning
any exceptions granted which allow use of the GSA Optional
Form 7 in lieu of the AD-873. See section 6a for
limitations.

c Designated Agency Property Officers will:

Q)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(7)

Ensure the agency Property Pass Issuing Authority list is
kept up to date (See appendix A.);

Establish and issue Property pass log books and
maintenance procedures to the agency individuals having
Property pass issuing authority;

Obtain and issue appropriate quantities of the AD-873 to
the agency individuals having property pass issuing
authority. Include property pass preparation and
distribution instructions;

Establish and maintain office files for the completed
green copies of the AD-873. A file should be established
for each agency individual having property pass issuing
authority. Also, when green copies are received, review
them for completeness, accuracy, and adherence to
established procedures and instructions;

Review the original (white) copy of the Property passes
returned from the Physical Security Branch, compare and

staple each original to the property office green copy,
and refile;

Review the yellow copy of passes pertaining to government
Property returned and make periodic spot checks to verify
that property has been returned as indicated. File the
yellow copy with the white and green copies, and when all
items on the pass are accounted for, the three copies may
be destroyed (See also section 8.);

Inspect each issuing authority's Jog book for adherence to
established procedures and instructions every thirty (30)

days and certify this inspection by signature and date of
inspection;

 

 
April 9, 1984
{ ) (8)

(9)

(10)

DR 5200-1

Perform a close out audit of his/her Property log whenever
an individual's Property pass issuing authority is
rescinded. Note the close out audit findings on the
inside cover of the Property log;

Maintain the log book for any government property still
out on loan by property pass issued by an individual no
longer involved as an issuing authority, until all
government property is returned or accounted for. At that
time, close out the log book as instructed; and

Report first to the Agency Chief Property Officer and then
to the Physical Security Branch any problems or violations
connected with the issuance of passes, maintenance of log
books, etc.

d Designated Property Pass Issuing Authorities will:

Q)

(2)

Prepare and issue an AD-873 for Property being legitimately
removed from USDA premises. This includes government
Property, personal property belonging to employees but
similar to government property in common use (pocket
calculators, typewriters, fans, lamps, framed paintings or
photographs of scenery, etc.), and equipment or tools
belonging to commercial firms working in the headquarters
complex for a USDA agency. (The agency that was being
serviced by the commercial firm will issue the pass.)

See figure 1 for a sample form and instructions for
Preparation of the AD-873. Block 11, Property Status,
will always indicate the ownership of property being
removed. In addition, when commercial firm employees
remove government property from USDA buildings, the reason
will be noted in block 8, the agency and room number from
which the property has been removed will be listed in

block 9, and the property status will be marked Government
in block 11.

Distribute the completed property pass, which is a
three-part carbon set form, as follows:

(a) The original (white) copy of the AD-873 is issued to
the individual requesting the removal of property from
a USDA building. The property holder will surrender
this copy to the guard upon leaving the building.

(b) The green copy is forwarded by the issuing authority
to the designated agency property officer for
accounting, audit, and control purposes.
DR 5200-1 April 9, 1984

(c) The yellow copy is retained by the issuing authority
for record and log book control -purposes until
Property is returned.

(3) Record issuances of Property passes in your log book.
Follow the instructions for maintaining log books in
appendix B. :

(4) Verify the identity and condition of government property
upon return by the property pass holder. Record your
verification in log book and on yellow copy of pass, and
forward the yellow copy to your property officer. (See
also section 8.)

(5) Notify your designated agency property officer whenever
you start a new property log and make note of this at the
very top of the inside cover of the new property log.
Example: Dennis Hall notified on 10/21/83 of start of log
book #2. Then sign your name and enter the number 2 over
the GSA NSN number on the cover.

e USDA employees, contract employees, and employees of commercial
Firms patos services for USDA agencies will obtain
Property passes from the approriate agency issuing authority
for property being removed from USDA Premises and will give the

pass to the guard on duty as they leave the building.

5 CENTRAL SUPPLY STORE PURCHASES

Central Supply Store purchases being taken from the South Building
will require an AD-873 for clearance by the security guards. For
example, agencies and offices located in the Auditors Buildings
and Cotton Annex will need to furnish their employees with an
AD-873, prepared as indicated below, when sending them to pick up
items at the Central Supply Store.

The items to be purchased will be listed in block 7 on the
AD-873. If more room is required, then make a notation SEE,
ATTACHED LIST" and staple to the AD-873 a list of the purchased
items. Upon leaving the building with the purchased items, the
bearer will give the security guard the AD-873 with attached list.

Since the property is coming into the agency, it does not have to
be recorded in the Property book. However, the issuing authority
should attach a copy of any purchase list and copy of bill of sale
receipt to the green and yellow file copies of the AD-873.

 
Hy
Soe

 

April 9, 1984

DR 5200-1

6 EXCEPTIONS FOR LIMITED USE OF GSA OPTIONAL FORM-7, PROPERTY PASS

a

Exceptions Requiring Notice of Approval. Publications, papers,
mail, and other expendable property may be removed from the
USDA building complex using the GSA Optional Form 7 provided
approval of the Chief Property Officer of the agency is
obtained. 7

The Chief Property Officer shall give written notification to
the Chief of the Physical Security Branch, Room 22E,
Administration Building, of exceptions authorized, the reason
therefor, the agency /office involved, and the person authorized
to issue property passes. These exceptions shall be listed in
each guards property book. An original and 20 copies of the
exception memorandum is required for posting at the guard
stations.

Agencies granted exceptions to use the GSA Optional Form 7 must
enter the agency code number in block 6 or the pass will not be
accepted by the security guards.

Property officers, when considering approval of an exception,
should keep in mind that one of the primary purposes of the
Property pass and property log book procedures is to establish
an audit trail for government property on loan or out for
repair. Exceptions shall not include nonexpendable government
property or computer tapes and new computer paper.

General Exceptions - No Notice Required,

(1) Non-USDA agencies housed within the USDA complex are not
required to use the AD-873. They will use the GSA
Optional Form 7 to release property from the complex.

(2) Employee personal belongings such as, potted plants and
Flowers, and personal effects of employees leaving USDA
employment or being transfered will continue to be
released from the USDA complex on the GSA Optional Form 7.
If any personal items may be confused with government
property, then an AD-873 will be used and the item(s) in
question will be recorded on the property log book.

(3) Special sale items periodically sold in the USDA comp lex
Will be released from the complex on the GSA Optional Form
7. This applies to nonperishable items such as paintings.

Foodstuffs sold in the complex do not require a property
pass for release.
DR 5200-1 April 9, 1984

RELATED PROPERTY ACCOUNTABILITY REQUIREMENTS )

When a property pass is issued for government property, the
issuing authority must ensure appropriate clearance and/or
documentation has been obtained from the designated agency
property officer or other accountable official. For example, it
is a requirement that all property officers maintain Personal
Custody Property Receipts (OF-130) in the issuance of government
property.

Employees who are authorized to issue property passes but are not
property officers shall be considered agency property officers and
shall be required to comply with property issuance requirements,
j.e., making out and maintaining OF-130 cards on all issuances of
government property.

The designated agency property officer who monitors and audits the
issuing authorities should make certain that those who are not
property officers are familiar with Department regulations on the
issuance of property.

RETURN OF GOVERNMENT PROPERTY

have the return verified by the issuing authority who shall check
the returned item as being the original item issued and in the
same condition as issued.

When government property is returned, the property holder must J
{

The issuing authority shall enter the return date and his/her
initials in the ownership column of the property log, date and
initial block 12 of the yellow copy of the property pass, and then
forward the yellow copy to the designated property officer who
shall attach it to the white and green copies. When all items on
the pass are accounted for, all three copies can be destroyed by
the property officer.

The designated property officer shall make spot checks to
determine if the item(s) have been returned as indicated by the
issuing authority. The inspecting agency property officer shall
then date and initial the description column of the property log
acknowledging the verification of the property return as notified
by the issuing authority.

-END-
 

BLOCK

BLOCK

BLOCK

BLOCK

BLOCK

i.

i.

12.

April 9, 1984 DR 5200-1
FIGURE 1

SAMPLE OF AND INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPLETING THE FORM AD-873, PROPERTY PASS

 

 

 

 

 

1 AGENCY CODEN. US. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE | PASE GOOD THIF BATE
: ont
‘2. PROPERTY PASS NO. PROPER PAS 4 LOG BOOK NO
PRINT ALL INFORMATION
ighed sag ninbta eine NS HOSTED ay TRONS Giom The BUTSING Ts TS BE BOSSI TS TFGSS
BgPec ang nanced to the guarc when leaving the Der Beery
5: NAME OF PROPERTY HOUSER ‘©: SUILBING PROPERTY BEING REMOVES FROM

 

 

7 DESERIFTION OF PROPERTY BEING REMOVED Gnclude seri number W OND

 

REASON FOR REMOVAL

9. PROPERTY BELONGS TO Vi. PROPERTY STATUS (Use XD

Decovennment Orrivare

 

ATURE OF Penson AUTHORIZING
}OVAL OF PROrERTY

 

Oocommencian

[}2. GOVERNMENT PROPERTY RETURN DATE

 

 

Form AD-873 (6/83)

Agency Code No.: Enter your agency code number.

Pess Good This Date Only: Enter the date pass is issued. Pass is only good on date
issued. Do not Post date Property passes.

Property Pass Number: Enter next consecutive number from log book, a dash, then calen—
dar year in which pass is issued (e.g. 0015-83).

Log Book Number: Enter LOG-BOOK number inscribed on the hard green cover of the log
book.

Name of Pass Holder: Clearly hand Print or type the full name of the pass holder. The
pess holder will be required to Produce identification to match the neme on the pass

Building Property Bein Removed From: Enter the name of the building the Property is
being removed from (e.g. South, Administration, Annex, Auditors, etc.).

Description of Property Bein Removed: Enter a clear, concise, explicit description,
including manufecturer, model, serial, or part numbers, colors, quantities, sizes, etc.

Beason for Removal: Enter the reason why Property is being removed from the building
(e.g. repair, training, return to Manufacturer, etc.).

Property Belongs To: Enter ownership of Property (e.g. Xerox, IBM, ASCS, FAS, or the
name of private Property pass holder).

+ Signature of Person Authorizin, Removal of Property: To be signed by individual whose

name is inscribed on hard green cover of the log book.

Property Status: Mark X in the applicable box.

Government Property Return Date: When applicable, enter the expected return date for
government property authorized for removal from a USDA building.

7
~ApriT 9, 1984 DR 5200- 1

')

f

APPENDIX A
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPLETING PROPERTY PASS ISSUING AUTHORITY LIST

GENERAL ;

Names of employees authorized to sign property passes are to be
shown on the property pass issuing authority list along with other
identifying information as described herein. (See figure A-1 for a
sample format.)

HEADING

a Buildings. Identify the USDA building(s) from which the agency
chief property officer will allow the listed issuing authority
to release property.

b Authorizing Agency. Enter the name of your agency or, if
applicable, the name of your servicing agency, e.g.,
Agricultural Marketing Service (AMS) services the following
other agencies: Federal Grain Inspection Service (FGIS), Office

of Transportation (OT), Agricultural Cooperative Service (ACS),
etc.

c Effective Date. Enter the date when the Property pass issuing
authority form is properly filled out and ready for use.

d Agency Code. Enter your agency's code number or the servicing
agency code, if applicable. For example, AMS has 02 as its
agency code number; FGIS, an agency being serviced by AMS, has
the number 36 as an agency code; so an issuing authority from
FGIS would list 02 as the agency code in the heading and 36 as
the agency code adjacent to his/her signature.

IDENTIFICATION OF ISSUING AUTHORITIES

For each issuing authority, the list will contain his/her name and
signature, the agency code number and initials (APHIS, FGIS, FSIS,
etc.), and his/her room number and telephone number.

SECTION FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Type in this section the chief agency property officer's full
name, title/position, agency, room number and telephone number.
Also enter the words Monitoring Property Officer and the full
name, title/position, agency, room number and telephone number of
the property officer designated to monitor and audit the listed
issuing authorities.

A-1

 
April 9, 1984

 

FIGURE A-1

SAMPLE FORMAT OF PROPERTY PASS ISSUING AUTHORITY LIST

DR 5200-1
Appendix A

 

PROPERTY PASS
ISSUING AUTHORITY

Buildings

 

Effective Date

 

 

parnortzing Agency Agency Code
Agency Organization Telephone
Name Signature Code and Room Number Number

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

)

 

es
or

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

For Official Use Only

=

 
April 9, 1984

1 GENERAL

DR 5200-1
APPENDIX B

INSTRUCTIONS FOR MAINTAINING PROPERTY PASS -LOG BOOKS

Individuals having property pass issuing authority are to maintain
a log book (GSA NSN .7530-00-222-3525) to record their issuances of
Property passes. If there are’a large number of issuances of
Property passes, GSA NSN-7530-286-8363 may be used.

2 IDENTIFICATION OF LOG BOOKS

Using a black felt pen, inscribe under the word RECORD on the hard
green cover the following information:

The

Description Sample Entry
Title: PROPERTY PASSES
Issuing authority number: LOG BOOK 001 V/2/
Agency initials: ASCS 7
Name of issuing authority: Joan C. Edwards
Sequential number: 1 3/

Date log book started: START 3-1-84

Date log book closed out: END 12-31-84

cover of the log book should appear as shown in figure B-1.

Vy

3/

This sequence identifies the issuing authority. If there
are five individuals in an agency with property pass
issuing authority, then there will be five log books as
follows: LOG BOOK 001, LOG BOOK 002, LOG BOOK 003, LOG
BOOK 004, and LOG BOOK 005.

When a replacement authority is appointed, they may use
the property log number of the person they have replaced,
but they shall be identified as a replacement by an
additional number sequence starting with the number 2 and
followed by the year. For example, the second person
assuming a property log number in 1983 would write their
property log number as 001-2-83. The first three numbers
are the property log numbers, the second number indicates
how many issuing authorities have used the particular
Property log number, and the last two numbers identify the
year. (The first issuing authority will use only the
basic log number.)

This sequence indicates the number of log books used by an
issuing authority. The first log book will be numbered 1
and when it becomes filled, the issuing authority will
start a new log book numbered 2, and so on.

B-1

 
DR 5200-1 avgize
Appendix B pry » 1984

3. LOG BOOK PAGES

Use only the front side of each lined page in the log book.
Number the pages in sequence at the top right hand corner. Do not
use or number the back side of the pages.

Divide the pages into five (5) columns headed as follows:

Property Date Name of Property
Pass No. Issued Pass Holder Property Description Owner.

See figure B-2 for sample format.

4 ENTRIES IN LOG BOOK

a Property Pass Numbers. Each time a property pass is issued, a
number must be assigned to the pass and recorded in the log.
This number includes sequential digits assigned by each agency
followed by the calendar year in which the pass was issued
(e.g. 001-83 then 002-83 and so on).

b Other Entries. Information for all other entries made to the
columns of the log book should be obtained from the
appropriate sections of the property pass.

5 DISPOSITION OF LOG BOOK WHEN FULL

When a log book is full, the log book shall be retained until all
the Government property out on property pass issuance is returned
or otherwise accounted for. Then the issuing authority shall
request that the completed property log be reviewed and audited by
the designated property officer. Each completed property log book
must have a signed and dated audit notation by the designated
property officer.

If the auditing property officer finds the log book in proper
order and all Government property accounted for, the property
officer shall note his/her findings on the blank back of the log
book cover, sign and date the log book's close out audit, and then
enter the close out date behind the words END on the front cover.
Only the designated agency property officer has the authority to
take a property book out of service and mark the END date.

While the issuing authority is waiting the return of government
property in a full property book, he/she may start the second
property log book to record new issuances but shall retain the
prior log book until all government property issued on the old log
book is returned or accounted for.

B-2

 

 
April 9, 1984

FIGURE B-1
SAMPLE FORMAT FOR COVER OF LOG BOOK

os
Bee

vee eRON
SPE

 

ex

i ay Rs
TALEO:
: a
SAA RN

DR 5200- 1
Appendix B

 

 
 

9, 1984

 

DR 5200-1
Appendix B
FIGURE B-2
SAMPLE FORMAT FOR LOG BOOK PAGES
Property Date Name of Property
Pass No. Issued Pass Holder Property Description Owner

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

B-4

 
