                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION NUMBER:
                         DR 5200-002
 SUBJECT: Central Receiving                                 DATE:
                                                            November 28, 2018
 OPI: Office of Operations, Materiel Management Service     EXPIRATION DATE:
 Center                                                     November 28, 2023



Section                                                                                Page

1. Purpose                                                                             1
2. Scope                                                                               1
3. Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                  2
4. Policy                                                                              2
5. References                                                                          2
6. Incoming Shipments                                                                  2
7. Disposal and Resource Recovery                                                      4
8. Loading Dock and Facility Security                                                  4
9. Reporting                                                                           4
10. Office Operation Information                                                       4
11. Roles and Responsibilities                                                         5
12. Inquiries                                                                          6
13. Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                         6



1. PURPOSE

   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the policy for receiving personal property,
   publications, and other supplies through the United States Department of Agriculture's
   (USDA) centralized receiving units hereafter referred to as "Central Receiving.”


2. SCOPE

   This DR applies to USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices located in the
   Washington, DC Headquarters facility and the George Washington Carver Center (GWCC)
   in Beltsville, Maryland.
3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This DR supersedes DR 5200-002, Central Shipping and Receiving, dated
       May 13, 1985. This revision updates the previous document to reflect organizational
       changes and operational processes.

  b.   Personal property refers to tangible items ranging from common products, such as office
       equipment and furniture, to specialized apparatuses, including scientific devices and
       heavy machinery.


4. POLICY

  a.   The Central Receiving staff provides accountability, security, and disposition control of
       personal property, publications, and other supplies and monitors the disposition of
       abandoned personal property for the Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices located in
       USDA’s Headquarters facility and the GWCC complexes.

  b.   The Headquarters Central Receiving facility is operated by a commercial contractor
       under the administrative management and supervision of the Office of Operations (OO),
       Materiel Management Service Center (MMSC). The GWCC Central Receiving Facility
       is operated by OO, MMSC Federal employees.


5. REFERENCES

  This policy is in accordance with Federal Management Regulations 41 Code of Federal
  Regulations (CFR) 101-26.8, Discrepancies in GSA or DOD Shipments, Material, or
  Billings, and 41 CFR 101- 40.7, Reporting and Adjusting Discrepancies in Government
  Shipments.


6. INCOMING SHIPMENTS

  Central Receiving personnel will:

  a.   Schedule the deliveries made by commercial carriers and receive the property from
       carrier personnel (truck drivers);

  b.   Inspect the property while it is in the carrier's vehicle or when the property is placed on
       the loading dock for evidence of pilferage, shortage, overage, and/or damage;

  c.   Receive all the property that is properly consigned on bills of lading or other shipping
       invoices. If the Central Receiving staff receive a shipment that is damaged, the
       contracting officer’s representative (COR)/supervisor must be notified to determine
       whether the shipment will be accepted or refused;

                                                  2
d.   Document the receipt of property on the carrier billing by annotating all visible
     discrepancies above signatures and retaining a copy of the applicable billing;

e.   Remove the property from the carrier vehicle tailgates or unloading dock and place the
     property into the temporary holding area;

f.   Notify the COR/supervisor without delay when the property received is marked
     “CONFIDENTIAL,” “TO BE OPENED BY ADDRESSEE ONLY,” “PROPOSAL,”
     “BID,” or any other marking indicating the contents may be of a controlled or sensitive
     nature;

g.   Notify the COR/supervisor who will arrange for off-loading of controlled substances
     and hazardous materials;

h.   Ensure proper storage and preservation of items placed in the holding area;

i.   Maintain the temporary holding area in a manner that permits easy access to and proper
     identification of each Mission Area, agency, or staff office's property;

j.   Notify Mission Area, agency, or staff office personnel of property arrivals and obtain
     appropriate signatures for the release of the property. Note: Unless other arrangements
     are made, property may remain in temporary holding up to 2 working days;

k.   Maintain a daily log of all the property received to include the Mission Area, agency, or
     staff office, the number of pieces received, and the weight of the items;

l.   Complete various types of receiving documents:

     (1) Receipt copies of purchase orders, Form Agriculture Department (AD) 838-7,
         Purchase Order;

     (2) Receipt copies (vendors) of telephone requisitions;

     (3) Receipt copies of documents for Federal Standard Requisitioning and Issue
         Procedures (FEDSTRIP) orders;

m. Furnish a copy of the delivery document to the appropriate Mission Area, agency, or
   staff office when the shipment is released;

n.   Initiate appropriate documents of notification and verification on shipments received
     with visible discrepancies; and

o.   Prepare the monthly statistical report to include information for the number of
     shipments, number of pieces, and the weight (in pounds) of all goods received by



                                               3
       Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices, and any pertinent information on shipment
       discrepancies.


7. DISPOSAL AND RESOURCE RECOVERY

  Central Receiving will:

  a.   Monitor trash container areas to ensure that valuable materials or Government property
       are not disposed of or removed in an unauthorized manner;

  b.   Perform daily hall/stairwell sweeps to remove abandoned personal property; and

  c.   Withhold questionable items of trash and salvage from disposal containers and refer
       them to the COR/supervisor for appropriate disposition instructions.


8. LOADING DOCK AND FACILITY SECURITY

  Central Receiving will:

  a.   Be responsible for the security during the loading and unloading of property in Court 4
       of the Headquarters facility and the GWCC loading dock;

  b.   Ensure that only vehicles that are delivering or obtaining personal property park at the
       Headquarters and GWCC dock areas;

  c.   Observe all security regulations established by USDA’s Office of Operations, Protective
       Operations Division for the Headquarters and GWCC facilities; and

  d.   Be accountable for loss, damage, and/or theft of property while in Central Receiving’s
       possession.


9. REPORTING

  Central Receiving staff will provide OO, MMSC management with a monthly statistical
  report on Central Receiving activity no later than the 15th of each month.


10. OFFICE OPERATION INFORMATION

  a.   Central Receiving for the Headquarters facility is located in the South Building, Room
       0466. Central Receiving for the GWCC facility is located at the main loading dock at
       GWCC.



                                                 4
  b.   Central Receiving will provide services at the Headquarters facility from 7:30 a.m. to
       6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and at the GWCC facility from 7:00 a.m. to
       5:00 p.m., except for Federal holidays.


11. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a. The Director, Office of Operations will:

       (1) Develop policy governing the use and management of the USDA Central Receiving
           operation at the Headquarters complex and GWCC;

       (2) Provide and maintain adequate space for Central Receiving; and

       (3) Comply with General Services Administration (GSA) and USDA property
           management rules and policies.

  b.   The Director, Materiel Management Service Center will:

       (1) Provide a COR to provide oversight of the Central Receiving operations at the
           Headquarters facility and a supervisor to provide oversight at the GWCC facility;

       (2) Provide a suitable work area for the Central Receiving processing requirements;

       (3) Provide space maintenance for areas occupied by the Central Receiving functions;

       (4) Maintain an appropriate operating budget for Central Receiving; and

       (5) Report agency usage (volume) to the Office of the Chief Financial Officer/Financial
           Management Division for appropriate Mission Area, agency, and staff office cost
           share computations.

  c.   The Contracting Officer, Procurement Operations Division will:

       (1) Provide a suitable contractor to perform the operational requirements of Central
           Receiving at the Headquarters Facility; and

       (2) Provide execution of proper contractual documents including penalties for deficient
           contractor performance and all other documentation pertinent to efficient execution
           of contract requirements.

  d.   Participating Mission Areas, Agencies, and Staff Offices will:

       (1) Utilize Central Receiving for the receipt of publications ordered by Mission Areas,
           agencies, and staff offices located at the USDA Headquarters and GWCC facilities;



                                                5
       (2) Utilize Central Receiving for the receipt of personal property and other supplies via
           the commercial transportation system; and

       (3) Utilize Central Receiving for shipment of excess personal property to the
           Centralized Excess Property Operation (CEPO).


12. INQUIRIES

   Questions pertaining to this DR should be directed to the Director, MMSC at
   (301) 394-0400 or emailed to cepo@dm.usda.gov.


13. ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

   AD            Agriculture Department
   CEPO          Centralized Excess Property Operation
   CFR           Code of Federal Regulations
   COR           Contracting Officer's Representative
   DR            Departmental Regulation
   FEDSTRIP      Federal Standard Requisitioning and Issue Procedures
   GSA           General Services Administration
   GWCC          George Washington Carver Center
   MMSC          Materiel Management Service Center
   OO            Office of Operations
   USDA          United States Department of Agriculture



                                              -END-




                                                6
