                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                   WASHINGTON, DC 20250

                                                               NUMBER:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                        DR 5200-003
                                                               DATE:
                                                               January 4, 2018
SUBJECT: Gift Acceptance Policy                                OPI:
                                                               Office of Procurement and
                                                               Property Management



Section                                                                        Page

1. Purpose                                                                      1
2. Special Instructions/Cancellations                                           1
3. Definitions                                                                  2
4. Policy                                                                       3
5. Roles and Responsibilities                                                   3
6. Prohibited Gifts                                                             5
7. Solicitation of Gifts                                                        6
8. Prudential Considerations                                                    7
9. Gift Acceptance Documentation and Procedures                                 7
10. Rejection of a Bequest or Devise                                            8
11. Reporting of Gifts                                                          8
12. Disposition of Gifts                                                        9

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                       A-1
Appendix B – Gift Acceptance Examples                                         B-1



1. PURPOSE

   This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of Agriculture
   (USDA) policy for the acceptance and solicitation of gifts of personal, real, and intellectual
   property. It does not apply to gifts of travel and subsistence accepted under 31 U.S.C. 1353,
   Acceptance of Travel and Related Expenses from Non-Federal Sources (see the Federal
   Travel Regulation, 41 CFR Part 304, Payment of Travel Expenses From a Non-Federal
   Source) or gifts of voluntary services (see DR 4230-001, Voluntary Programs).


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

   a.     Questions of an ethical nature should be referred to the Office of Ethics (OE). Questions
       of a legal nature should be referred to the Office of the General Counsel (OGC).

  b.   This policy supersedes DR 5200-003, Gift Acceptance Policy, dated April 18, 2003.

3. DEFINITIONS

  a.   Activities regulated by USDA means activities regulated under programs within the
       Food Safety and Marketing and Regulatory Programs mission areas of the Department.

  b.   Agency means an organizational unit of the Department, other than a staff office as
       defined in Section 3p, the head of which reports to an Under Secretary, Assistant
       Secretary, or Assistant to the Secretary.

  c.   Bequest means a gift (usually of personal property) made by a will.

  d.   Conditional gift means a gift, the acceptance of which is conditioned on adherence by
       the recipient to specific terms for use and disposition of the gift that are set by the donor.

  e.   Gift means property, whether personal or real, voluntarily transferred to the government
       without compensation or consideration, or for substantially less than market value, for
       the benefit of the Department or for the carrying out of any of its functions. For
       purposes of this DR, the term “gift” includes a bequest or devise, unless otherwise
       specifically noted.

  f.   Devise means a gift (usually of real property) made by a will.

  g.   Intangible Property means a right or possession of a nonphysical or abstract nature that
       has value, such as a copyright, patent, license, trademark, or goodwill of a business. It
       also refers to a financial asset having no intrinsic value but representing value, such as
       securities, notes, accounts receivable, etc.

  h.   Intellectual Property means a category of intangible rights protecting commercially
       valuable products of the human intellect, including patents, trademarks, and copyrights.

  i.   Mission Area means a group of agencies with related functions that report to the same
       Under or Assistant Secretary. Research, Education, and Economics (REE) is an
       example of a Mission Area.

  j.   Money means cash or currency.

  k.   Person means an individual, corporation and subsidiaries it controls, company,
       association, firm, partnership, society, joint stock company, or any other organization or
       institution, including any officer, director, trustee, general partner, employee, or agent of
       such person or entity. For purposes of this DR, a corporation will be deemed to control
       a subsidiary if it owns 50 percent or more of the subsidiary's voting securities. The term
       is all-inclusive and applies to commercial ventures and nonprofit organizations as well

                                                 2
         as to foreign, State, and local governments, including the Government of the District of
         Columbia. It does not include any agency or other entity of the Federal Government or
         any officer or employee thereof when acting in his official capacity on behalf of that
         agency or entity.

    l.   Personal property means property other than real property, and includes intellectual
         property, intangible property, and money.

    m. Property means any external thing over which the rights of possession, use, and
       enjoyment are exercised which can be either real or personal property.

    n.   Real property means any land or interests in land, including the improvements,
         structures, and fixtures located thereon.

    o.   Solicitation means a request made by an employee, made through personal contact or
         through the use of one's name or official position in correspondence, or a request made
         through another employee or person either at the requesting employee’s behest or under
         the requesting employee’s authority, that is intended to encourage the voluntary offer or
         tender by any person or persons of any form of gift. It includes the solicitation of
         property through the media, oral remarks, or the contemporaneous dispatch of like items
         of mass-produced correspondence.

    p.   Staff office means a Departmental administrative office, the head of which reports to
         any official within the Office of the Secretary (OSEC).

    q.   Unconditional gift means a gift for which the donor has established no specific terms for
         use or disposition by the recipient


4. POLICY

    Acceptance and solicitation of gifts of property by USDA staff offices and agencies under
    statutory gift acceptance authorities possessed by the Secretary, the Department, or agencies
    of the Department, shall be accomplished in accordance with the provisions of this
    regulation.


5   ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

    a.   General Applicability

         This section generally delegates responsibilities for the acceptance of gifts under
         statutory gift authorities enjoyed by the Department, except as otherwise provided for by
         law or under Section 6.

    b.   Unconditional Gifts of Personal Property

                                                3
     Agency and staff office heads or their designated representative(s) are authorized to
     accept, in the name of the Department, unconditional gifts of personal property.

c.   Conditional Gifts of Personal Property

     (1) Except for the Office of Inspector General (OIG), agencies and staff offices are
         required to obtain approval from the Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO)
         prior to accepting, in the name of the Department, conditional gifts of personal
         property. Agencies and staff offices may decline conditional gifts of personal
         property without approval from or consultation with OCFO.

     (2) The requirement for OCFO approval of gifts of conditional personal property does
         not apply to gifts of intellectual property. Procedures for the acceptance of gifts of
         intellectual property are set forth in Section 5d.

     (3) The requirement for OCFO approval of gifts of conditional personal property does
         not apply to grants from non-USDA entities to USDA agencies or staff offices.
         Agencies and staff offices may accept grants from non-USDA entities without
         approval from or consultation with OCFO.

d.   Conditional or Unconditional Gifts of Intellectual Property

     Except for OIG, in the case of both unconditional gifts of intellectual property accepted
     under Section 5b and conditional gifts of intellectual property under Section 5c, agencies
     and staff offices are required to obtain approval from the OGC prior to accepting gifts of
     intellectual property in the name of the Department,.

e.   Conditional or Unconditional Gifts of Real Property

     (1) For those agencies or staff offices authorized by statute to own land, the approval of
         the Assistant Secretary for Administration, or their designated representative(s), is
         required prior to commencing any action leading to the acceptance of a gift of real
         property when the total estimated fair market value of the land is $50,000 or more,
         or the land has a building with an estimated value of $500,000 or more (including
         fixtures). Agency and staff office heads approve gifts when the total estimated fair
         market value is less than the listed thresholds.

     (3) Gifts of real property to the Forest Service (FS) or the Natural Resources
         Conservation Service (NRCS), for or in connection with natural resource programs,
         shall be accepted in accordance with procedures established in the FS Manual or the
         NRCS General Manual, respectively, subject to the requirements of Sections 6, 7, 8
         and 9.




                                              4
6. PROHIBITED GIFTS

  a.   Departmentwide Prohibition

       Except as provided in Section 6c, no gift shall be accepted (to include the right to direct
       the offering or donation of property to a third party authorized by law to accept such
       gifts on behalf of a Federal agency) by USDA, or by any of its agencies or staff offices,
       from the following sources:

       (1) Any person who conducts activities regulated by USDA, or any of its agencies or
           staff offices;

       (2) Any organization where either:

           (a) A majority of its members are persons who conduct activities regulated by
               USDA, or any of its agencies or staff offices; or

           (b) A majority of its funding is provided by persons who conduct activities
               regulated by USDA, or any of its agencies or staff offices (see Appendix B,
               Example 1);

       (3) Any person or organization engaged in criminal, civil, or administrative litigation
           with USDA, with any agency or staff office of USDA, or with the United States of
           America, based on issues relating to the programs or operations of USDA, or any of
           its staff offices or agencies; or

       (4) Any person whose ability to participate in USDA programs, including loans, grants,
           contracts, etc., has been suspended or terminated for cause by USDA, or any of its
           agencies, or staff offices.

  b.   Additional Agency or Staff Office Prohibition

       (1) If not prohibited under Section 6a, a gift generally may be accepted by an agency or
           staff office unless the gift is from any person who is engaged with the staff office or
           agency, or the Department mission area of which the agency is a part, as a
           contractor or contract bidder, borrower, grantee, cooperator, lessee, permittee, or
           other program participant, or who is an applicant for a loan, grant, lease, or other
           program participation from the agency or staff office (see Appendix B, Examples
           2, 3, and 4).

       (2) The prohibition in Section 6b(1) also applies to any organization where either:

           (a) A majority of its members are persons covered by the prohibition in Section
               6b(1); or

           (b) A majority of its funding is provided by persons covered by the prohibition in

                                                5
              Section 6b(1) (see Appendix B, Example 5).

     (3) A gift that is prohibited under Section 6b(1) may be accepted under an exception in
         Section 6c below.

c.   Exceptions

     (1) Gifts from the sources identified in Sections 6a and 6b may be accepted if:

         (a) The gift is an item of a commemorative nature from other than a for-profit
             entity if it is intended that the item be used or displayed in an office setting;

         (b) The gift is from a State, local, tribal, or foreign government incidental to
             cooperation in carrying out a Federal program;

         (c) The gift is authorized by the express purpose of a statutory gift acceptance
             authority; or

         (d) Acceptance of the gift is in the public interest because the benefits relating to
             the acceptance or rejection of the gift substantially outweigh the appearance of
             loss of impartiality on the part of USDA in its dealings with the donor.

     (2) Gifts accepted under the exceptions in Section 6c(1) shall be accepted only as
         follows:

         (a) Any general officer, Under Secretary, or Assistant Secretary, or designee of
             such official at the deputy level, or agency or staff office head (upon prior
             notice to the Under or Assistant Secretary to which the agency head reports, or
             in the case of a staff office head, the Secretary), may accept a gift to their staff
             office or mission area under Sections 6c(1) (a) - (c) in an amount, or of a value,
             in excess of $1,000,000, after consultation with OGC. For gifts in an amount,
             or of a value, of $1,000,000 or less, general officers, Under Secretaries,
             Assistant Secretaries, and agency and staff office heads may delegate this
             authority to accept gifts to appropriate subordinate officials at lesser dollar
             thresholds as agency or staff office needs and prudence allow. An appraisal is
             not required to establish the value of the gift for the purpose of acceptance
             under this Section.

         (b) Only the Secretary and the Deputy Secretary, or any general officer, Under
             Secretary, Assistant Secretary, or agency head with respect to a gift to their
             mission area or staff office, may accept a gift under Section 6c(1)(d), after
             consultation with the OGC.




                                              6
7. SOLICITATION OF GIFTS

  a.   Agencies, and staff offices may solicit gifts for acceptance by the agency or staff office
       under this regulation unless prohibited by law or Section 7b.

  b.   Agencies and staff offices shall not solicit gifts that are prohibited under Section 6, even
       if the gift would fall within an exception under Section 6.

  c.   Agencies and staff offices may not solicit gifts in the following manner:

       (1) Through the use of direct mail appeals for contribution of money;

       (2) Through the direct conduct of fundraising events;

       (3) Through the hiring of development officers and staff; or

       (4) Through the conduct of any game of chance.


8. PRUDENTIAL CONSIDERATIONS

  In accepting gifts under the exceptions in Section 6c, officials shall ensure that multiple gifts
  from one source, or multiple or duplicate gifts from sources with identical interests, are not
  being made in order to affect the impartiality of USDA. Officials also should not solicit or
  accept multiple or duplicate gifts under this DR to create a substitute funding stream for
  routine operational expenses in lieu of appropriations. To these ends, officials should not
  accept multiple or duplicate gifts of office equipment, software and hardware, furniture, or
  office supplies.


9. GIFT ACCEPTANCE DOCUMENTATION AND PROCEDURES

  a.   Each gift (except for a bequest or devise) must be documented with a gift acceptance
       letter that is executed by the appropriate authorized Department official and
       communicated to the donor. The acceptance letter should state that such gifts shall in no
       way imply an endorsement of the gift or the giver, nor impose any obligation on the part
       of the recipient to provide anything to the donor, including data or information. The
       acceptance letter should not provide any estimated value of the gift, nor should agency
       officials otherwise provide the donor with an estimated value. Proper valuation of the
       gift for tax purposes is the responsibility of the donor.

  b.   Gifts of real property to the FS or NRCS shall be accepted only if they meet the
       requirements of the FS Manual or the NRCS General Manual, respectively and as may
       be later amended by the FS or NRCS. Gifts of real property to any other agency or staff
       office shall be accepted only if they meet the requirements for the acquisition of real
       property set forth in Chapter 102-73 of the Federal Management Regulation (FMR) and

                                                7
       the USDA supplement to the FMR (the Agriculture Property Management Regulations
       (AGPMR)).

  c.   For record-keeping purposes, agencies and staff offices, through their property units,
       shall also identify gifts of personal property for future reference in the manner required
       by the AGPMR and shall note any conditions attached to use or disposition of the gift.

  d.   Nothing in this DR shall affect the requirement that agencies and staff offices must
       secure title clearance for real property from OGC prior to acceptance.


10. REJECTION OF A BEQUEST OR DEVISE

  If a Mission Area, agency, or staff office chooses to reject a bequest or devise, the Mission
  Area, agency, or staff office shall communicate such rejection in writing to the executor or
  administrator of the estate.


11. REPORTING OF GIFTS

  a.   Agencies and staff offices shall file an annual report on all gifts having a value of $5,000
       or more accepted during each calendar year. The report shall be filed, no later than
       January 31 of the ensuing calendar year, with the Office of Procurement and Property
       Management (OPPM), with a copy provided to the OE. The report shall include the
       following information:

       (1) Date gift accepted;

       (2) Full name, address, and telephone number of the donor;

       (3) Name of accepting agency or staff office;

       (4) Name of accepting official;

       (5) Name and description of the gift, including gift type: real property (R), personal
           property (P), money (M), intellectual property (I);

       (6) Estimated value of gift and basis of estimate (an appraisal is not required); and

       (7) Provision of this DR under which the gift was accepted, and if a prohibited gift, the
           exception used to accept and basis for exception.

  b.   An alternative to the annual reporting requirement is for agencies and staff offices to
       submit a contemporaneous copy of each gift acceptance letter to both OPPM and OE.
       Under this option, agencies and staff offices shall submit an annual certification that
       copies of all its gift acceptance letters have been submitted. This certification is due no

                                                8
       later than January 31 of the ensuing calendar year.


12. DISPOSITION OF GIFTS

  a.   Accounting for Funds

       Any gift of money, or the net proceeds from the liquidation of any gift of property not
       used for its restoration, shall be deposited in the Treasury of the United States for credit
       into a receiving agency account. The Treasury Account Symbol for monetary gifts or
       gift proceeds is 12x8203 to be followed by agency codes (i.e., 03 for Agricultural
       Research Service (ARS), 11 for FS, etc.) and a three-digit accounting classification
       code. Each agency or staff office must establish an accounting classification code to be
       used for obligation of expenditures against the funds. Agencies and staff offices that
       have established such codes are the OSEC, ARS, and the Foreign Agricultural Service
       (FAS) (995), FS (939), the National Agricultural Library (NAL) (996), and the Food
       Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) (974). Agencies or staff offices without accounts
       need to contact the National Finance Center, Accounting Control Branch to establish
       their codes.

  b.   Disposition

       A gift of real or personal property no longer required for official use or for the purpose
       for which it was given shall be disposed of in accordance with the statutory authority
       under which the gift was accepted or, if a conditional gift, in accordance with the terms
       or any conditions placed on disposition of the property. If neither the statutory authority
       nor conditions attached to the gift specify any terms for disposition, the property shall be
       disposed of in accordance with the property disposition provisions of the FMR and
       AGPMR, or, in the case of real property donated to the FS or NRCS, the FS Manual or
       NRCS General Manual, respectively.


                                             -END-




                                                9
                  APPENDIX A

         ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS



AGPMR       Agriculture Property Management Regulations
CFR         Code of Federal Regulations
DR          Departmental Regulation
FMR         Federal Management Regulation
FS          Forest Service
NRCS        Natural Resources Conservation Service
OCFO        Office of the Chief Financial Officer
OE          Office of Ethics
OGC         Office of the General Counsel
OIG         Office of the Inspector General
OSEC        Office of the Secretary
REE         Research, Education, and Economics
U.S.C.      United States Code
USDA        United States Department of Agriculture




                       A-1
                                       APPENDIX B

                            GIFT ACCEPTANCE EXAMPLES


EXAMPLE 1

  A national association of fish processors wishes to make a donation to the Agricultural
  Research Service (ARS) for research regarding the use of byproducts generated by fish
  processing as fertilizer. Fish processing is not an activity regulated by USDA. However, due
  to industry consolidation the majority of funding of the association is provided by members
  of the meatpacking industry who do conduct activities regulated by the Food Safety
  Inspection Service (FSIS). Accordingly, acceptance of the gift is not permissible.

EXAMPLE 2

  The Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) has contracted with Acme
  Construction Co. to build a new runway at their fruit fly dispersal base in Texas. Acme
  Construction Co. wants to donate construction material to the Agricultural Marketing Service
  (AMS) in Idaho and $10,000 to the National Arboretum in Washington, D.C. Acceptance of
  the gift to AMS would not be permissible because it is in the Marketing and Regulatory
  mission area of the Department along with APHIS, for which Acme is a contractor. The gift
  to the National Arboretum may be accepted because it is an ARS facility within the
  Research, Education, and Economics (REE) mission area of the Department.

EXAMPLE 3

  A Western land-grant university wishes to make a gift of cattle to ARS for research. The
  cattle are grazed on a National Forest under a permit from the FS, which is in the Natural
  Resources and Environment mission area. ARS is in the REE mission area. Additionally,
  the land-grant university receives grant funds from the National Institute of Food and
  Agriculture (NIFA), which also is in the REE mission area. Acceptance of the gift would not
  be permissible. While the fact that the university has a permit with the FS does not bar
  acceptance of the gift, ARS could not accept a gift offered by a REE mission area grantee.

EXAMPLE 4

  A national supermarket chain is involved in litigation with the Department over mishandling
  of SNAP benefits. The chain wishes to make a gift to ARS to support human nutrition
  research and a gift to the Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) to support a child nutrition
  information campaign. Neither gift may be accepted. Since the supermarket chain is a
  retailer that accepts SNAP benefits, and thus is an FNS program participant, acceptance of
  the gift is not permissible. The gift to ARS, an agency outside of the Food and Nutrition
  mission area, would otherwise be permissible but for that fact that the chain is involved in
  litigation with USDA and thus acceptance of the gift is not permissible under Section 6a(3).



                                            B-1
EXAMPLE 5

A national conservation association wishes to make a gift of fire protection equipment to the
Boise National Forest. It has no relationship to either the FS or NRCS. The national
conservation association receives 75 percent of its funding from companies that harvest timber
from FS land. The gift may not be accepted.




                                              B-2
