                          Use of the Fleet Charge Card

                          and Alternative Payment

                          Methods




United States
Department of
Agriculture

Office of Procurement
And Property Management




DR 5400-006
DR 5400-006                                                             March 6, 2009




 USE OF THE FLEET CHARGE CARD AND ALTERNATIVE PAYMENT METHODS

                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS


Table of Contents                                                                   Page
1 Purpose                                                                           1
2 Cancellations/Revisions                                                           1
3 Acronyms                                                                          2
4 Definitions                                                                       3
5 Policy                                                                            6
6 Program Objective                                                                 6
7 Authorized Use of Fleet Charge Cards and Related Alternative Payment Methods      7
8 Agency Internal Control Requirements                                              7
9 Special Instructions                                                              8
10 Procedures                                                                       9
11 Roles and Responsibilities                                                       12
DR 5400-006                                                                   March 6, 2009




                                U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                       WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250




 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION 5400-006                                           Number:



                                             DATE: March 6, 2009
 SUBJECT:
 Use of the Fleet Charge Card and            OPI:
 Alternative Payment Methods                 Office of Procurement and Property
                                             Management


1. PURPOSE

   This regulation prescribes U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) policies, procedures, and
   responsibilities for use of the USDA fleet charge cards and alternative payment methods used
   to fuel and maintain USDA fleet vehicles (e.g., sedans, station wagons, and trucks), non-fleet
   vehicles (e.g., aircraft, motorcycles and boats), and non-fleet equipment (e.g., mowers,
   tractors, all-terrain vehicles, snow mobiles, chain saws, generators). Other fleet issues, such
   as use of alternative fuels, recycled products, safety, equipment, authorized vehicle uses, and
   delegation of authorities, are addressed in the Agriculture Property Management Regulations
   (AGPMR)– Aircraft Management 110-33 (available online at
   www.usda.gov/da/property/part10233.pdf ) and the AGPMR – Motor Vehicle Management
   110-34 (available online at www.usda.gov/da/pmd/AGPMR.pdf).


2. CANCELLATIONS/REVISIONS

   Department Regulation (DR) 5400-006 reflects issuance of the new USDA fleet charge cards
   resulting from the USDA Charge Card Service Center (CCSC) transition to the vendor’s
   Electronic Access System (EAS).

   a. Cancellations.

       (1)    This regulation cancels the previous DR 5400-006 dated August 25, 2006.
       (2)    USDA no longer uses the Voyager fleet card and the Purchase Card Management
              System (PCMS).

   b. Revisions. The new fleet charge cards are active for all USDA vehicles, aircraft, boats,
      and motorized equipment to purchase fuel and maintenance on November 30, 2008 at
      12:00 a.m. EST.




                                                1
DR 5400-006                                                         March 6, 2009




3. ACRONYMS

  Acronym     Definition
  AFV         Alternative Fuel Vehicle
  AFPC        Agency Fleet Program Coordinator
  AGAR        Agriculture Acquisition Regulations
  AGPMR       Agriculture Property Management Regulations
  AIR         Aviation Into-plane Reimbursement
  CCSC        Charge Card Service Center
              Corporate Financial Management Systems Configuration Control
  CFMSCCB
              Board
  CPAIS       Corporate Property Automated Information System
  DESC        Defense Energy Support Center
  DLA         Defense Logistics Agency
  DPM         Departmental Program Manager
  DR          Departmental Regulation
  EAS         Electronic Access System
  EMIS        Equipment Management Information System
  EO          Executive Order
  FAR         Federal Acquisition Regulations
  FAST        Federal Automotive Statistical Tool
  FMR         Federal Management Regulations
  FPMR        Federal Property Management Regulations
  GFC         Government Fuel Card
  GSA         General Services Administration
  LFPC        Local Fleet Program Coordinator
  OIG         Office of Inspector General
  OMB         Office of Management and Budget
  OPPM        Office of Procurement and Property Management




                                            2
DR 5400-006                                                                   March 6, 2009



  Acronym        Definition
  PCMS           Purchase Card Management System
  PIN            Personal Identification Number
  PMD            Property Management Division
  PMIS           Property Management Information System
  PMO            Program Management Office
  PROP           Personal Property System
  R/AFPC         Regional/Area Fleet Program Coordinator
  U.S.           United States
  USDA           United States Department of Agriculture



4. DEFINITIONS

   a. Abuse. Abuse is the unauthorized use of a fleet charge card for the purchase of any item
      other than fuel and maintenance services necessary to operate and maintain USDA
      vehicles, aircraft, boats, and motorized equipment. Abuse also includes the use of the
      fleet charge card to buy fuel and maintenance services, but at terms (e.g., price, quantity)
      that are excessive and/or for a questionable Government need. Examples include
      knowingly purchasing premium fuel rather than regular fuel for vehicles that do not
      require premium fuel; and using full-service pumps when fueling a vehicle rather than
      using a readily available self-service pump.

   b. Agriculture Acquisition Regulations (AGAR). The AGAR prescribes policies and
      procedures that implement and supplement the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR),
      which is the primary regulation for use by all Federal agencies in the acquisition of
      supplies and services with appropriated funds.

   c. Agency Fleet Program Coordinator (AFPC). The AFPC is responsible for the overall
      Fleet Charge Card Program in each agency and is the agency’s contact liaison to the
      Departmental Program Manager (DPM). AFPCs may appoint assistants, deputies, or
      Regional/Area Fleet Program Coordinators (R/AFPC) to assist with program
      management. AFPCs or their deputies are responsible for appointing Local Fleet Program
      Coordinators (LFPCs) to manage the day-to-day operations of their agencies’ Fleet
      Charge Card Program.

   d. Agriculture Property Management Regulations (AGPMR) - Management of Government
      Aircraft 110-33. This document is a supplement to the Federal Management Regulation




                                                3
DR 5400-006                                                                  March 6, 2009


       (FMR) 102-33 that includes USDA-specific policies and procedures for the management
       of aircraft.

   e. Agriculture Property Management Regulation (AGPMR) - Management of Government
      Motor Vehicles 110-34. This document is a supplement to the FMR 102-34 that includes
      USDA-specific policies and procedures for the management of motor vehicles.

   f. Alerts. Alerts are messages sent to the DPM and agency coordinators regarding
      questionable transactions and other events as defined by the DPM and agencies. Alerts
      are part of the USDA Fleet Charge Card Program’s oversight procedures.

   g. Alternative Payment Methods. These are payment methods available for use when the
      merchant does not accept the fleet charge card. These methods include pre-paid cards
      and declining balance cards. (Pre-paid and declining balance cards are also known as
      debit cards.) These alternative payment methods should only be used in emergency
      situations.

   h. Aviation Into-Plane Reimbursement (AIR) Card. This is the charge card that should be
      used to procure aviation fuel and related ground services. The Defense Logistics Agency
      (DLA)/ Defense Energy Support Center (DESC)/ Government Fuel Card Program
      Management Office (GFC PMO) is designated as the Program Management Office for
      the AIR card.

   i. Corporate Property Automated Information System (CPAIS). CPAIS is the web-based
      property management system which will replace the Property Management Information
      System (PMIS) Personal Property System (PROP) and the Forest Service’s Equipment
      Management Information System (EMIS). CPAIS will be used to administer, control and
      report motor vehicle inventory records.

   j. Daily Transactions Limit. The Daily Transactions Limit is the total number of times a
      fleet charge card can be used in one day to purchase fuel or maintenance.

   k. Departmental Program Manager (DPM). The DPM is responsible for overall
      management of the Fleet Charge Card Program at the Departmental level. This individual
      is the Chief of the Office of Procurement and Property Management (OPPM) Property
      Management Division (PMD).

   l. Defense Logistics Agency (DLA)/ Defense Energy Support Center (DESC)/ Government
      Fuel Card (GFC) Program Management Office (PMO). This is the PMO responsible for
      the AIR card.

   m. Electronic Access System (EAS). The EAS is the bank-owned and operated online
      electronic system used to manage the USDA fleet charge cards, the features of which
      includes but is not limited to ordering cards, disputing card transactions, reporting,
      closing accounts, and much more. This system replaces PCMS.




                                               4
DR 5400-006                                                                    March 6, 2009


   n. Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR). The FAR establishes uniform policies and
      procedures for acquisition by all executive agencies (FAR 1.101). The FAR is located in
      Title 48, Chapter 1 of the Code of Federal Regulations.

   o. Fleet Vehicle. A fleet vehicle refers to automobiles that utilize fuel such as sedans, station
      wagons, and trucks. Regulations require agencies to submit annual reports listing the
      vehicle type and location, the cost/amount of fuel consumed, and cost of
      maintenance/repairs via the Federal Automotive Statistical Tool (FAST).

   p. Fleet Charge Card User. This is the person who uses the fleet charge card, AIR card, or
      the Multi Service charge card to fuel or maintain any USDA vehicle, aircraft, boat, and
      motorized equipment.

   q. Federal Management Regulation (FMR). The FMR is the successor regulation to the
      Federal Property Management Regulation (FPMR). It contains updated regulatory
      policies originally found in the FPMR.

   r. Fraud. Fraud and fraudulent transactions are any acts of corruption or attempt to cheat
      the Government or corrupt the Government’s agents, including but not limited to, the use
      of Government charge cards to transact business that is not sanctioned, not authorized,
      not in one’s official Government capacity, not for the purpose for which the card was
      issued, or not as part of official Government business.

   s. Local Fleet Program Coordinator (LFPC). The LFPCs are appointed locally by the
      AFPCs or R/AFPCs. The LFPC is responsible for the day-to-day operations of the Fleet
      Charge Card Program at each site. This includes fleet charge card user training (e.g.,
      AGPMR, policy and procedures), oversight of fleet charge card transactions, review of
      card limits, activation/deactivation of fleet charge card accounts, and maintenance of log
      books.

   t. Micro-Purchase. Purchases at or below the micro-purchase threshold as defined in the
      FAR (FAR 2.101), or as otherwise provided by law.

   u. Misuse. Use of a fleet charge card for other than the official government purpose(s) for
      which it is intended.

   v. Monthly Purchase Limit. The maximum total dollar amount that can be charged on a
      fleet charge card within the 30-day billing cycle is the Monthly Purchase Limit. This
      limit is card-specific and is based on the card’s Single Purchase Limit times the Daily
      Transactions Limit times 30 (days in the billing cycle) [(Single Purchase Limit x Daily
      Transactions Limit) x 30-Day Billing Cycle]. For example, ($100 x 3) x 30 = $9,000.

   w. Non-Fleet Vehicles or Motorized Equipment. Non-fleet vehicles refer to aircraft, boats,
      motorcycles and all-terrain vehicles that utilize fuel. Non-fleet equipment refers to
      motorized equipment that uses fuel and includes equipment like mowers, tractors, snow
      mobiles, chain saws, and generators. Agencies must report fuel consumption (cost and



                                                5
DR 5400-006                                                                     March 6, 2009


       type) for non-fleet vehicles and motorized equipment via the Agency’s Annual Energy
       Report.

   x. Personal Identification Numbers (PINs). A PIN is a six-digit number assigned to a
      specific fleet charge card user or driver in order to link card transactions to card users.

   y. Regional/Area Fleet Program Coordinator (R/AFPC). The R/AFPC is assigned by an
      AFPC to manage the Fleet Charge Card Program in his/her area. This person reports to
      the AFPC on fleet charge card issues and oversees the LFPCs in his/her area.

   z. Single Purchase Limit. A Single Purchase Limit is the maximum dollar amount that can
      be charged on the fleet charge card for each transaction. It is card-specific and
      established at the agency-level.

   aa. Statistical Sampling. Statistical sampling is a process where fleet charge card
       transactions are randomly selected for verification of legitimacy. This process is
       instrumental to the oversight of the USDA Fleet Charge Card Program.

   bb. Waste. Any activity taken with respect to the fleet charge card that fosters, or results in,
       unnecessary costs or other program inefficiencies.

5. POLICY

   This DR establishes USDA policy and instructions for use of the USDA fleet charge card, as
   well as the AIR Card and the Multi Service charge card. These cards are to be used to
   procure fuel and maintenance services necessary to operate and maintain USDA fleet and
   non-fleet vehicles and motorized equipment. Fleet charge card users must obtain approval
   from their LFPC, R/AFPC, or AFPC as appropriate for maintenance/repair purchases over
   $3000. Additionally, these purchases must be approved by a warranted Contracting Officer
   following standard procurement rules and regulations.

   Fleet policies and procedures described in the AGPMR 110-33, AGPMR 110-34, Executive
   Order (EO) 13423 – Strengthening Federal Environmental, Energy, and Transportation
   Management must also be followed.


6. PROGRAM OBJECTIVE

   The USDA Fleet Charge Card Program allows agencies to reduce administrative costs and
   taxes through the use of fleet charge cards and alternative payment methods. In addition to
   reducing costs, the fleet charge card enables the collection of detailed fleet management
   information pertaining to fuel, maintenance and service.




                                                 6
DR 5400-006                                                                     March 6, 2009


7. AUTHORIZED USE OF FLEET CHARGE CARDS AND RELATED ALTERNATIVE
   PAYMENT METHODS

   a. Authorized Use. The fleet charge card and related alternative payment methods are
      authorized for use to procure fuel and services necessary to operate and maintain fleet
      and non-fleet vehicles and motorized equipment. The following are examples of
      authorized purchases:

       (1) Fuel (all types)
       (2) Transmission Fluids
       (3) Oil/Oil Changes
       (4) Windshield Wiper Blades
       (5) Windshield Washer Fluid
       (6) Anti-Freeze
       (7) Car Washes
       (8) Maintenance
       (9) Tires/Tire Repair
       (10) Tie-Down Fees
       (11) Landing Fees
       (12) De-Icing Services
       (13) Docking Fees
       (14) Auto Body Work
       (15) Roadside assistance (e.g., towing, lockout service, battery charging, tire changing,
            winching, fuel delivery,)

   b. Unauthorized Use. Use of the fleet charge card or alternative payment method is strictly
      prohibited for the following:

       (1)    To purchase food, beverages, or other miscellaneous personal items.
       (2)    To pay any State or local traffic or parking violations that are obtained while
              driving a motor vehicle owned or leased by the Government.

       Use of the cards for those types of purchases could result in disciplinary action.

   c. Use of a purchase card instead of an authorized fleet charge card to buy fuel or
      maintenance services for USDA fleet vehicles, non-fleet vehicles, and non-fleet
      equipment is prohibited, unless authorized by the Charge Card Program Office or Fleet
      Departmental Program Manager.


8. AGENCY INTERNAL CONTROL REQUIREMENTS

   In order to protect USDA’s interest, it is extremely important that agencies establish adequate
   internal controls to help ensure effective vehicle management and reduce waste, fraud, and
   abuse. This includes, but is not limited to:




                                                  7
DR 5400-006                                                                   March 6, 2009


   a. Ensuring only authorized employees use the fleet charge cards or alternative payment
      methods.

   b. Ensuring that employees are adequately trained in fleet charge card policies and
      procedures.

   c. Considering and imposing appropriate administrative and/or disciplinary actions for cases
      of fraud and other blatant abuses of the fleet charge card and/or related alternative
      payment methods.

   d. Implementing guidelines for sensitive and pilferable property items that are stored for
      future use (e.g., tires, windshield wipers, batteries,) that can be easily converted to
      personal use.

   e. Ensuring agency officials maintain Use Logs to capture fleet (e.g., vehicles, aircraft,
      boats, and motorized equipment) usage information. (See Section 10i. Use Log for
      detailed requirements.)


9. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS

   a. Fleet Charge Card for Official Use Only. The fleet charge card is for official
      Government business only. Under no circumstances is the card to be used for personal
      purchases or as identification for personal purchases.

   b. Transactions Greater Than $3000. Transactions for maintenance or repairs greater than
      $3000 must be approved by the agency’s LFPC, R/AFPC, or AFPC following agency
      specific policies and procedures and by a warranted Contracting Officer following the
      agency’s standard procurement rules and regulations. The fleet charge card should be
      used as the primary payment method to ensure proper tracking of the maintenance or
      repair of a USDA fleet or non-fleet vehicle and/or piece of motorized equipment through
      the bank’s EAS.

   c. Ethics Requirements. Office of Government Ethics Standards of Conduct for Executive
      Branch employees applies to fleet charge card use. All transactions must be for official
      Government business only. Fleet charge card users with questions regarding the
      propriety of a particular transaction should consult their LFPC or agency ethics officer
      for guidance and assistance prior to making the purchase

   d. Fleet Charge Card PINs. Agencies have the option to use PINs as an additional method of
      associating a fleet charge card user to a particular transaction. If an agency opts to use
      PINs, the following information must be entered and maintained in the EAS:

       (1)    Driver Number or PIN
       (2)    Driver Name
       (3)    Driver License Number



                                                8
DR 5400-006                                                                   March 6, 2009


   e. Business Size. Purchases not exceeding $3,000 may be made from any size business
      using the fleet charge card (FAR 13.003(b) (1)). However, it is USDA policy to increase
      opportunities for small, small-disadvantaged, and small women-owned businesses. Card
      users are, therefore, encouraged to acquire from these sources whenever possible.

   f. Regulatory Applicability. Use of the fleet card must be consistent with the FAR, AGAR,
      FMR, AGPMR, USDA Purchase Card and Alternative Payment Methods DR 5013-6,
      Office of Government Ethics Standards of Conduct for Executive Branch Employees, and
      the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-123, which establishes the
      regulations for the use and management of Government charge cards and agency
      regulations.

   g. Fueling Aircraft. USDA may use the mission-critical AIR Card instead of the fleet
      charge card to purchase fuel and maintenance for aircraft and boats. The AIR Card
      provides the Federal Government, state and local law enforcement agencies, and Foreign
      Governments a means to procure aviation fuel and related ground services. The AIR card
      may be used worldwide at commercial airports, as well as some military installations, to
      purchase aviation fuel for all USDA aircraft. The DLA/DESC/GFC PMO is designated
      as the program management office for the AIR card, and the AIR card is serviced by the
      Multi Service Corporation, a DESC contractor.

   Note: All regulations outlined in this DR for the fleet charge card are equally applicable to
   the AIR Card.


10. PROCEDURES

   a. Fleet Charge Card Issuance. Agencies are to issue only one fleet charge card for each
      fleet or non-fleet vehicle that requires fuel and maintenance. All fleet charge cards are
      ordered through the bank’s EAS and are shipped to the LFPC. Cards are normally
      received within seven to ten business days. In emergencies, cards are ordered through the
      EAS and express shipped by the bank. This usually takes two to three business days.

   b. Alternative Payment Methods. Alternative payment methods are only to be issued and
      used for emergencies, such as when an LFPC is awaiting a replacement card for one that
      was lost or stolen or during fire season to respond quickly to the situation.

   c. Pool Cards. Fleet charge cards may be sparingly issued as “pool” cards for emergency
      situations (e.g., pending receipt of a lost/stolen replacement card) and to accommodate
      agencies with multiple pieces of equipment, such as, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles,
      chainsaws, and lawn mowers housed at the same location. Pool cards may also be issued
      for use in situations where agencies have their own fueling stations to fuel the vehicles,
      but require a mechanism to procure maintenance and repairs services. A “pool” fleet
      charge card could be used under those types of circumstances.

   d. Card Receipt. All new or replacement cards are sent to the LFPC.



                                                9
DR 5400-006                                                                    March 6, 2009




       (1)    LFPCs must call the bank’s customer service number to activate all new fleet
              charge cards.
       (2)    Replacement cards do not require activation, but the LFPC must inform the bank
              via telephone confirmation to customer service that the cards were received.

  e.   Lost or Stolen Cards. If a fleet charge card is lost, stolen or damaged, immediately report
       it to the LFPC or the bank. The agency is responsible for all charges made until the card
       is reported as lost/stolen. Call Customer Service at 1-888-994-6722 to report lost or
       stolen cards. This will stop any further use of the card.

       The bank will immediately establish a new account number, reissue a card, and tie all
       transactions from the lost/stolen card to the new account number. The LFPC should then
       monitor transactions on the replacement card account for a month to assure that all
       charges are valid. Any fraudulent charge that is made after the card has been reported
       lost/stolen must be disputed through the EAS. LFPCs and offices responsible for
       oversight of fleet cards and motor vehicles should keep the telephone number on file to
       help ensure prompt reporting.

       If a lost fleet charge card is found, destroy the card, and then provide written
       documentation to the LFPC that the card was found and destroyed. The card should
       never be used after notifying the LFPC or the bank that it was lost or stolen.

  f.   Card Disposal. When a fleet charge card is no longer needed (e.g., the vehicle, aircraft,
       boat or other motorized equipment either has been sold or salvaged), the LFPC is
       responsible for canceling the card through the EAS and ensuring the card is destroyed.

  g.   Inquiries. Inquiries about fleet charge cards should be directed through agency channels -
       the LFPC or R/AFPC to the AFPC to the DPM.

  h.   Receipts. Users of the fleet charge cards or alternative payment methods must submit
       receipts for purchases. The LFPC, an accountable property official, or other management
       official responsible for the fleet and non-fleet vehicles and motorized equipment must
       keep all receipts for a minimum of one calendar year in order to maintain an adequate
       audit trail.

  i.   Use Logs. Agencies are required to keep a log of vehicle, boat, aircraft, and motorized
       equipment use to ensure a reasonable audit trail documenting vehicle/equipment use. At
       a minimum, the logs must capture the following information to be considered a
       “reasonable audit trail”:

       (1)    Date
       (2)    Driver or fleet card user name
       (3)    Odometer Reading before and after use
       (4)    Whether the vehicle was refueled (yes/no)
       (5)    Whether maintenance or repairs were performed (yes/no)



                                               10
DR 5400-006                                                                  March 6, 2009




  j.   Fleet Charge Card Oversight. Oversight of the USDA Fleet Charge Card Program is
       essential to ensure that Government funds are used appropriately by mitigating waste,
       fraud, and abuse and to ensure that the USDA Fleet is effectively managed through
       correct fuel purchase, regular maintenance, and cost-effective repairs. Usage monitoring
       and annual reporting are two mechanisms USDA employs as part of its oversight process.

       (1) Usage Monitoring. OMB Circular A-123 Appendix B, dated April 28, 2006, requires
           agencies to implement management controls, policies, and practices for ensuring
           appropriate charge card usage. USDA’s DPM and AFPC’s monitor fleet charge card
           transactions through the EAS and statistical sampling. Fleet charge card users must
           provide information to any request made by coordinators, the DPM, Office of the
           Inspector General (OIG), and/or any other duly authorized individual/organization
           regarding questionable transactions (e.g., amount of fuel purchased exceeds vehicle
           capacity, overly frequent maintenance or repairs on fleet and non-fleet vehicles and
           motorized equipment).

          LFPCs, R/AFPCs, and AFPCs are expected to routinely monitor (e.g., monthly, at a
          minimum quarterly) fleet charge card transactions within their agencies to identify
          questionable transactions. When questionable transactions are flagged, the
          coordinators will investigate these transactions and determine if there are any fraud,
          waste, or abuse issues that must be addressed. The coordinator should contact the
          individual’s supervisor and Human Resources and follow the guidance established in
          Appendix B of OMB Circular A-123 regarding charge card misuse or abuse.

          In addition to routinely monitoring fleet charge card and alternative payment usage,
          coordinators will also ensure LFPC or other appropriate agency officials maintain
          receipts and Fleet Use Logs or records. This will help ensure agencies maintain a
          reasonable audit trail of vehicle and fleet card use.

       (2) Annual Reporting. In addition to routinely monitoring fleet charge card usage,
           AFPCs will submit annual reports to the DPM about their agency’s Fleet Charge Card
           Program. (See the USDA Charge Card Service Center (CCSC) Website for the name
           and location of the DPM.) The following information should be included in the
           reports:

          (a) Total number of instances of inappropriate use of the fleet charge card or
              alternative payment methods, including actions taken by the agency in handling
              misuse or abuse cases.
          (b) Any suggestions the agency has on improving the USDA Fleet Charge Card
              Program.
          (c) Future EAS fixes or enhancements

          The DPM is responsible for forwarding agency reports to the USDA CCSC.




                                              11
DR 5400-006                                                                  March 6, 2009


  k.   Security. Fleet charge cards must be secured at all times. LFPCs and other appropriate
       agency officials must ensure that fleet cards are secure when not in use. Do not leave
       cards unattended in vehicles.

  l.   Training. Fleet program coordinators at all levels are required to become certified on the
       fleet charge card policy through US Bank’s web-based training (WBT), which includes a
       fleet policy module and certifying exam. Additionally, fleet coordinators are expected to
       participate in the bank’s EAS fleet training to ensure that they can perform the duties
       specified under their roles.

       AFPCs must report to the DPM that their fleet coordinators have been certified on the
       fleet policy and trained on the EAS. The CCSC will maintain these records as part of the
       OMB A-123, Appendix B, “Improving the Management of Government Charge Card
       Programs” training requirements.

11. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

   There are certain roles and responsibilities associated with managing USDA’s fleet charge
   cards starting at the Department level and working through the agency level to the individual
   fleet charge card user.

   a. OPPM. OPPM is responsible for the Fleet Charge Card Program. OPPM will:

       (1)    Establish the USDA CCSC to manage the USDA Charge Card Program.
       (2)    Issue Departmental policy and procedures on the USDA Charge Card Program.
       (3)    Promote standardization, centralization, and automation of the program throughout
              USDA.
       (4)    Submit reports as appropriate to the OMB on USDA’s fleet charge card.
       (5)    Assign the DPM to manage the Fleet Charge Card Program at the Departmental
              level.

   b. DPM. The Departmental Program Manager is responsible for overall management of the
      Fleet Charge Card Program at the USDA. The DPM will:

       (1)    Provide guidance and oversight for USDA’s Fleet Charge Card Program.
       (2)    Issue Departmental policy and procedures on the use of the fleet charge card and
              other alternative payment methods.
       (3)    Review on a semi-annual basis all merchant category codes (MCC) available on
              fleet charge cards; restrict, if necessary, any MCC not appropriate.
       (4)     Establish Department-wide operating limits for the fleet charge card.
       (5)    Submit an annual report on the overall status of the program to the USDA CCSC.

   c. Agency Heads. Agency Heads will ensure that Departmental policies and procedures on
      the use of the fleet charge card are adhered to within their respective agencies. Agencies
      must ensure their employees receive information on how the Fleet Charge Card Program
      operates and proper use of the fleet charge card. Agency Heads or their designees will:



                                               12
DR 5400-006                                                                      March 6, 2009




       (1)    Designate employee(s) and alternate(s) to act as AFPCs. These individuals will
              administer the Fleet Charge Card Program for their agency.
       (2)    Ensure AFPCs are trained and aware of their program responsibilities.
       (3)    Ensure that agency policies and procedures are in place for approving maintenance
              and repair purchases over $3000.

   d. AFPC. An AFPC is designated for each USDA agency or mission area and is
      responsible for managing the Fleet Charge Card Program for the specific agency/mission.
      The AFPC is the liaison between the agency and USDA’s DPM. AFPCs will:

       (1)  Provide oversight of the fleet charge card usage.
       (2)  Implement agency-unique fleet policies and procedures as needed.
       (3)  Participate in meetings with the DPM to address fleet charge card issues and/or
            problems.
       (4) Assign deputies and/or R/AFPCs as needed to support the program in their agency.
       (5) Assign LFPCs to handle the day-to-day fleet charge card operations.
       (6) Establish R/AFPCs and LFPCs in the EAS.
       (7) Ensure that LFPCs are certified on the policies and procedures associated with the
            Fleet Charge Card Program.
       (8) Ensure that LFPCs are trained on the EAS.
       (9) Ensure managers/offices/drivers maintain a use log or record for all fleet usage (See
            Section 10i. Use Logs for more information.).
       (10) Provide the DPM with an annual report that includes the information established in
            Section 10j.2. Annual Reporting of this regulation.
       (11) Ensure that agency policy and procedures are followed regarding purchases for
            maintenance or repairs valued over $3000.

   e. LFPC. The LFPC is responsible for managing the day-to-day operations of fleet charge
      card usage at his/her designated site. The LFPC works directly with the fleet charge card
      users, ensuring that they have adequate training on proper use of the fleet charge card.
      Additional LFPC duties include:

       (1)    Establish and update fleet charge cards in the EAS.
       (2)    Notify the bank immediately of any lost/stolen/damaged fleet charge cards.
       (3)    Notify the bank of any billing discrepancies (e.g., disputes,) regarding charges
              posted to an account.
       (4)    Monitor fleet charge card purchases for fraud, waste, or abuse.
       (5)    Ensure fleet charge card users are following agency policy and procedures for
              maintenance and repair purchases valued over $3000.
       (6)    Ensure managers/offices//drivers maintain a use log or record for all fleet usage.
              (See Section 10i. Use Logs for more information.).
       (7)    Report any misuse, fraud, or abuse of the fleet charge card to the appropriate
              official (e.g., a supervisor, R/AFPC, AFPC,).
       (8)    Ensure appropriate officials maintain receipts for all fleet charge card or alternative
              payment methods for a minimum of one calendar year.



                                                 13
DR 5400-006                                                                   March 6, 2009


       (9)    Submit an annual report to the AFPC that includes the information established in
              Section 10j.2. Annual Reporting of this regulation.

   f. Fleet Charge Card Users. The fleet charge card user must make all reasonable efforts to
      find the nearest location accepting the fleet charge card when purchasing fuel and
      maintenance on USDA vehicles and motorized equipment. In addition, the fleet charge
      card user must check to see if the vehicle is an Alternative Fuel Vehicle (AFV). When
      refueling an AFV, the card user should use an alternative fuel station that is “reasonably
      available”. Page three of Guidance: Documentation Requirements for Waiver Requests
      under EPACT 2005 Section 701, (available online at
      www.eere.energy.gov/femp/pdfs/701_guidance.pdf) defines ‘reasonably available’ to be
      within a 15-minute drive or five miles (one way). Charge cards users can go to the
      USDA CCSC website to access the link to the Alternative Fueling Station Locator to help
      locate alternative fueling stations.

       Fleet charge card users will:

       (1)    Enter an accurate odometer reading at the pump when prompted
       (2)    Submit a receipt for all purchases made with a fleet charge card or alternative
              payment method
       (3)    Provide the LFPC the following information if a receipt is not available:
              (a) Odometer reading
              (b) Number of gallons
              (c) Cost per gallon
              (d) Type of fuel
              (e) Total Cost
              (f) Description of the maintenance/repair
       (4)    Obtain approval for all maintenance and repair transactions over $3000 or your
              agency-specific dollar value

                                              -END-




                                            14
