                             U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                    WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


                                                                                    Number:
            DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                 5400-007
SUBJECT:                                                  DATE:
                                                          September 7, 2010
           Text Messaging While Driving
                                                          OPI:Office of Procurement and
                                                          Property Management,
                                                          Property Management Division


1.     PURPOSE

       This regulation establishes, as required by Executive Order (EO) 13513, “Federal
       Leadership on Reducing Text Messaging While Driving,” the policy of the
       Department of Agriculture (USDA) on text messaging by employees when
       driving Government owned, leased or rented vehicles (GOVs), when driving
       privately owned vehicles (POVs) on official Government business or when using
       electronic equipment supplied by the Government while driving. This regulation
       also implements the requirements of the EO that directs USDA to encourage
       federal contractors and subcontractors and recipients and subrecipients of grants
       and cooperative agreements to adopt and enforce policies that ban text messaging
       when driving company owned, leased or rented vehicles or GOVs, or when
       driving personally owned, leased or rented vehicles while on official Government
       business or when performing any work for or on behalf of the Government.


2.     SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS

       This regulation is effective upon issuance. For frequently asked questions
       regarding the EO, please see Appendix A.

       Implementation of this order with respect to employees represented by a labor
       organization is contingent upon completion of appropriate labor relations
       obligations.


3.     REFERENCES

       a.       Executive Order 13513, “Federal Leadership on Reducing Text Messaging
                While Driving,” dated October 1, 2009.
       b.       5 U.S.C. 7902(d) “Safety Programs.”

4.     SCOPE
     This regulation applies to all USDA employees:

     a.     driving a GOV, or driving a POV while on official Government business;
            or

     b.     using any electronic equipment supplied by the Government while
            operating any vehicle at any time.

     Voluntary compliance with this regulation is encouraged even when a Federal
     employee is utilizing a personal electronic device and driving a POV while off-
     duty.


5.   DEFINITIONS

     Motor vehicle means any vehicle, self-propelled or drawn by mechanical power,
     designed and operated principally for use on a local, state or federal roadway, but
     does not include a military design motor vehicle or any other vehicle excluded
     under Federal Management Regulation 102-34.20.

     Texting or text messaging means reading from or entering data into any handheld
     or other electronic device (including, but not limited to, cell phones, navigational
     tools, laptop computers or other electronic devices), including for the purpose of
     Short Message Service (SMS) texting, e-mailing, instant messaging, obtaining
     navigational information or engaging in any other form of electronic data retrieval
     or electronic data communication. The term does not include the use of a cell
     phone or other electronic device for the limited purpose of entering a telephone
     number to make an outgoing call or answer an incoming call, unless this practice
     is prohibited by state or local law. The term also does not include glancing at or
     listening to a navigational device that is secured in a commercially designed
     holder affixed to the vehicle, provided that the destination and route are
     programmed into the device either before driving or while stopped in a location
     off the roadway where it is safe and legal to remain stationary.

     Driving means operating a motor vehicle on a roadway, including while
     temporarily stationary because of traffic congestion, a traffic signal, a stop sign,
     another traffic control device, or otherwise. It does not include being in your
     vehicle (with or without the motor running) in a location off the roadway where it
     is safe and legal to remain stationary.

6.   BACKGROUND

     Executive Order 13513, “Federal Leadership on Reducing Text Messaging While
     Driving,” establishes a Federal Government-wide prohibition on the use of text
     messaging when driving a GOV, when driving a POV on official business or
                                          2
          when using Government-supplied equipment while driving any vehicle.
          Implementation of the EO will help save lives, reduce injuries, and set an example
          for State and local governments, private employers and individual drivers.
          Extending this policy to cover Federal contractors and grantees is designed to
          promote economy and efficiency in Federal procurement and grant
          implementation.


7.        POLICY

          It is USDA policy to:

          a.     ban any and all text messaging by all USDA employees and encourage
                 contractors to adopt policies that ban text messaging (1) when driving a
                 GOV, (2) when driving a POV while on official Government business;
                 and (3) using electronic equipment supplied by the Government when
                 driving any vehicle (even during off-duty hours);

          b.     take appropriate disciplinary action for violation of this mandatory ban on
                 texting, up to and including removal from Federal service, as outlined in
                 Section 9 of this regulation; and

          c.     encourage USDA employees and contractors and their families to refrain
                 from texting, or from engaging in any behavior that distracts attention
                 from driving safely, at any time.


     8.   OBJECTIVES

          The objectives of the mandatory ban on text messaging are to:

          a.     reduce injuries and fatalities resulting from traffic crashes involving
                 employees;

          b.     encourage Federal contractors and subcontractors and recipients and sub-
                 recipients of grants and cooperative agreements to establish workplace
                 safety policies to decrease crashes caused by distracted drivers; and

          c.     encourage agency employees and their families to voluntarily comply with
                 the text messaging policy while off duty.


9.        RESPONSIBILITIES

          a.     All USDA departmental and agency procurement offices shall, within 30
                 days of the effective date of this regulation, establish and disseminate to
                                               3
     all procurement offices, headquarters and field level contractual language
     to include in future contracts encouraging contractors and subcontractors
     to comply with the policies contained in this regulation.

b.   Each USDA agency head or appropriate designee shall, within 30 days of
     the effective date of this regulation, establish and disseminate to all
     relevant employees USDA-wide language to include in future grants and
     cooperative agreements encouraging recipients and subrecipients to
     comply with the policies contained in this regulation.

c.   USDA agency/office heads shall:

     (1)    require all employees to comply with the text messaging ban
            imposed by this regulation and encourage them to refrain from text
            messaging while driving in other circumstances not covered by the
            regulation;

     (2)    direct heads of procurement offices to:

            (a)     comply with requirements to implement the regulation and
                    encourage contractors and recipients and subrecipients of
                    grants and cooperative agreements to adopt and enforce on-
                    the-job policies banning text messaging for their employees
                    when driving GOVs, or when driving POVs while on
                    official Government business; and

            (b)     to comply with applicable federal procurement or grant
                    regulations that may be adopted to ban texting messaging;

     (3)    participate in and support promotional programs and activities on
            the safety risks associated with distracted driving and ensure that
            all employees take required training on this subject on an annual
            basis;

     (4)    issue a broadcast announcement to all employees and contractors
            reminding them of the provisions of this regulation at least
            annually;

     (5)    assign adequate personnel and resources to satisfy the requirements
            of this regulation;

     (6)    beginning on January 31, 2011, submit an annual report identifying
            all violations of this regulation that occurred during the previous
            12-month period and the disciplinary or corrective action imposed
            for each such violation to the Director, Office of Procurement and
            Property Management; and
                                  4
     (7)    determine whether there is any reason to exempt from the
            requirements of this regulation, in whole or in part, certain
            employees, devices, or vehicles that are engaged in or used for
            protective, law enforcement, or national security responsibilities or
            on the basis of other emergency conditions. If so, agencies must
            follow the process identified in Appendix B.

d.   USDA Managers and Supervisors shall:

     (1)    implement the requirements of this regulation;

     (2)    take prompt disciplinary or other appropriate action in accordance
            with agency policy and in consultation with their human resources
            office for violations of this regulation and report all violations to a
            designated point of contact;

     (3)    ensure that newly assigned personnel take required training and
            receive orientation briefings or educational information within 30
            working days of employment with USDA outlining the provisions
            of this regulation;

     (4)    periodically remind employees of this regulation and the
            ramifications and consequences of text messaging when driving a
            GOV, or when driving a POV while on official business or when
            using electronic equipment supplied by the Government while
            driving; and

     (5)    provide suggestions to their designated safety official, as
            appropriate, to promote and encourage employee and contractor
            compliance with this regulation.


e.   USDA employees shall be familiar and comply with Federal, State, local
     and USDA motor vehicle safety requirements and policies, including
     USDA’s mandatory ban on text messaging as outlined in this regulation.

f.   Procurement Offices shall, upon receipt of Federal Acquisition
     Regulation, Agriculture Acquisition Regulation, and applicable grant
     regulations, include contractual language as provided by the Federal
     procurement and grant regulations in future contracts, grants and
     cooperative agreements that require contractor and grantee personnel to
     comply with the policies contained in this regulation. Until such
     regulations banning text messaging are adopted, Procurement Offices shall
     encourage contractors and grantees to adopt text messaging bans
     substantively comparable to Executive Order 13513.
                                   5
10.   DISCIPLINARY AND CORRECTIVE ACTION

      a.   Failure to comply with this regulation may result in disciplinary action.
           Applicable consequences may include official reprimand, suspension from
           pay and duty, removal from Federal service, or other actions in accordance
           with law and agency policy. As appropriate, a progressive approach to
           discipline may be used to correct the behavior. For example, depending
           on the nature and seriousness of the specific instance of misconduct, a first
           offense may result in a written reprimand. For a second or third offense, a
           more severe penalty may be necessary to correct the behavior, such as a
           suspension or removal. As with any disciplinary action, the particular
           facts and circumstances will be considered in taking action. Such actions
           must be consistent with law, regulations, and any relevant collective
           bargaining agreement requirements.

      b.   Potential aggravating factors in determining an appropriate penalty for
           failure to comply with this regulation may include, but are not limited to,
           whether the offense:

           (1)    resulted in the injury or death of persons, such as the driver,
                  passengers, or other motorists;

           (2)    resulted in the loss and/or damage of government property or
                  equipment;

           (3)    occurred in a state or local jurisdiction or on a military installation
                  that prohibits text messaging while driving;

           (4)    included any other violations of rules governing the operation of a
                  GOV, or operation of a POV while on official government
                  business; or

           (5)    included any violations of state or local traffic laws or resulted in a
                  citation of the operator by local or state authorities.

      c.   As applicable, the minimum consequence to be considered when
           individuals demonstrate egregious misconduct or a pattern of behavior that
           is inconsistent with this regulation is prompt suspension of authority to
           drive a GOV, or to drive a POV on official business and/or to use
           Government-issued electronic equipment.

      d.   Alternative discipline may be used if it is determined this approach is
           sufficient to correct the behavior and prevent its reoccurrence, including,
           for example, attendance at training on the dangers of text messaging when

                                         6
           driving.


11.   GENERAL PROVISIONS

      a.   This regulation shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and
           subject to the availability of appropriations.

      b.   This regulation is not intended to, and does not; create any right or benefit,
           substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, by any party
           against the USDA, its agencies or entities, its officers, employees or
           agents, or any other person.




                                        -END-




                                         7
                                    APPENDIX A

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS ON E.O. 13513 “FEDERAL LEADERSHIP
       ON REDUCING TEXT MESSAGING WHILE DRIVING”

                                          FAQs

1) What is texting or text messaging?
2) Is entering a telephone number into a cell phone covered by the text messaging
prohibition?
3) Does the text messaging prohibition apply to the use of GPS car navigation systems?
4) Does the text messaging prohibition apply to employees driving Government owned,
leased or rented vehicles (GOVs) at all times?
5) Does the text messaging prohibition apply when an employee is driving his/her
privately owned vehicle (POV)?
6) Does the text messaging prohibition apply when a vehicle is temporarily stopped at a
traffic signal or stop sign?
7) Does the text messaging prohibition apply when a vehicle is stopped in a safe location
off the roadway?
8) Does the E.O. cover Federal employees who are working overseas?
9) Are Federal contractors and grantees bound by the E.O.?

1. What is texting or text messaging?

Texting or text messaging means reading from or entering data into any handheld or other
electronic device (including, but not limited to cell phones, navigational tools, laptop
computors or other electronic devices), including for the purpose of Short Message
Service (SMS) texting, e-mailing, instant messaging, obtaining navigational information
or engaging in any other form of electronic data retrieval or electronic data
communication.

2. Is entering a telephone number into a cell phone covered by the text messaging
prohibition?

No, entering a telephone number into a cell phone is not covered by the text messaging
prohibition.

3. Does the text messaging prohibition apply to the use of GPS car navigation
systems?

The texting ban applies to navigational capabilities built into cell phones or other hand-
held devices including hand-held GPS navigation systems. The ban does not apply,
however, to glancing at or listening to a navigation device that is secured in a
commercially designed holder affixed to the vehicle, provided that the destination and
route are programmed into the device either before driving or while stopped in a location
off the roadway where it is safe and legal to remain stationary.

                                           A-1
4. Does the text messaging prohibition apply to employees driving Government
owned, leased or rented vehicles (GOVs) at all times?

Yes, the text messaging prohibition applies to employees driving GOVs at any time.

5. Does the text messaging prohibition apply when an employee is driving his/her
privately owned vehicle (POV)?

The text messaging prohibition applies to an employee driving his/her POV (i) when the
employee is traveling on official Government business; (ii) when the employee is
performing work for or on behalf of the Government; or (iii) when the employee is
driving during off-duty hours but using electronic equipment supplied by the
Government.

6. Does the text messaging prohibition apply when a vehicle is temporarily stopped
at a traffic signal or stop sign?
.
Yes, the text messaging prohibition applies to the operation of a vehicle on a roadway,
including while temporarily stationary because of traffic congestion, a traffic signal, a
stop sign, another traffic control device, or otherwise.

7. Does the text messaging prohibition apply when a vehicle is stopped in a safe
location off the roadway?

No, the text messaging prohibition does not apply when a vehicle (with or without the
motor running) is stopped in a location off the roadway where it is safe and legal to
remain stationary.

8. Does the E.O. cover Federal employees who are working overseas?

Yes, the E.O. covers such employees.

9. Are Federal contractors and grantees bound by the E.O.?

While contractors and grantees are not bound by the E.O., they are strongly encouraged
to adopt and enforce policies that ban text messaging while driving. In addition, Federal
contractors and grantees are required to comply with all Federal requirements contained
in Federal contracts, grants or cooperative agreements, including any text messaging
prohibition, as well as agency requirements for use of Government vehicles or
equipment.




                                            2
                                       APPENDIX B

                 TEXTING WHILE DRIVING WAIVER PROCESS


If it has been determined that certain employees, devices or vehicles that are engaged in
or used for protective operations, law enforcement, or national security responsibilities or
on the basis of other emergency conditions, the process below will be used.

   a.   Agency Heads will:

           (1) Designate officials to sign requests for any waiver when it is determined
               that certain employees, devices, or vehicles are engaged in protective
               operations, law enforcement, national security, or other emergency needs
               and are exempt from the requirements of this DR.

           (2) Ensure that requests are justified and submitted to the Director, Office of
               Procurement and Property Management for review prior to submission to
               the Assistant Secretary for Administration for final approval. The waiver
               shall stipulate that the use of texting while driving is a tool of last resort.

           (3) Ensure that appropriate records, logs, and reports are maintained to
               substantiate the necessity for the waiver from texting while driving.

   b. Office of Procurement and Property Management (OPPM) will:

           (1) Coordinate, review and provide recommendations for approval to the
               Assistant Secretary for Administration for final approval.

           (2) Ensure that requests are adequately justified.

           (3) Return a signed copy of each approved waiver authorization to the
               requesting agency.




                                             B-1
