                                 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                        WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


                                                                                Number:
  DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                       5600-003
SUBJECT:                                               DATE:
USDA Roles in Market-Based Environmental               December 20, 2006
Stewardship                                            OPI:
                                                       Natural Resources Conservation Service


1 PURPOSE

   This regulation sets forth the policy of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)
   with regard to actions that enable the application of scientifically sound market based
   environmental stewardship approaches to improve environmental quality at a lower cost to
   society and to establish a departmental coordination council to facilitate activities necessary
   to implement this policy.


2 SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

   This Departmental Regulation will be in effect until superseded.


3 BACKGROUND

   Market-based environmental stewardship approaches provide market participants flexibility
   to undertake actions that have the lowest cost. Many market-based approaches have been
   shown to result in more cost-effective achievement of natural resource conservation and
   environmental goals compared to traditional regulatory approaches and to accelerate the rate
   of environmental improvements. Market-based approaches and voluntary reporting registries
   may include many environmental factors including greenhouse gases, water, air, wetlands,
   and wildlife habitat. Mechanisms may include credit trading, insurance, mitigation banking,
   competitive offer-based auctioning, and eco-labeling.


4 POLICY

   The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) seeks to broaden the use of private sector
   markets for environmental goods and services through emerging voluntary market
   mechanisms such as environmental credit trading and voluntary reporting registries. USDA
   believes market-based environmental stewardship can encourage competition, spur
   innovation, and achieve environmental benefits, while helping USDA constituents comply
   with environmental regulations.
DR 5600-003                                                                      December 20, 2006


   Effective private sector markets require consistent, well-defined, and quantifiable
   environmental goods and services. USDA actions should help to enable the application of
   scientifically sound market-based environmental stewardship approaches to improve
   environmental quality at a lower cost to society. This includes developing and evaluating
   tools and methods to encourage participation. Given this, USDA managers are encouraged
   to employ flexibility when addressing specific goals and objectives that can facilitate USDA
   constituents’ participation in private sector environmental market initiatives. Accordingly, it
   is the policy of USDA to:

   a   Cooperate with other Federal departments, as well as Tribal, State, and Local government
       and nongovernmental organizations in:

       (1)    Establishing a role for agriculture and forestry in providing environmental offsets
              and enhancements; and
       (2)    Developing accounting practices and procedures for quantifying environmental
              goods and services.

   b   Facilitate consistent, efficient, and effective agency level policies, programs, and
       activities to enable USDA constituents and partners to take advantage and promote
       awareness of environmental stewardship markets.

   c Promote use of environmental credit trading and voluntary reporting registries, as well as
     other environmental market-based stewardship approaches, to help fulfill USDA natural
     resource conservation missions and improve environmental quality within the scope of
     agency authorities.
   d Develop, test, and evaluate innovative tools and methods, including those for identifying
     and quantifying environmental impacts, which support market-based environmental
     stewardship.

   e   Encourage and conduct research and technology development to assess and improve the
       understanding and management of natural resources and conservation practices, and
       systems, and to ensure that policy and programs have a firm scientific basis.

   f   Conduct outreach, education, technology transfer, and partnership building activities with
       USDA constituents and others, using long established and proven institutional
       arrangements, as well as establishing new innovative partnerships to enlist the
       involvement of interested USDA constituents and others in market-based environmental
       stewardship.

   g   Foster knowledge within USDA agencies of environmental stewardship markets.

   This policy does not create any right or benefit, or trust responsibility, substantive or
   procedural, enforceable by a party against the United States, its agencies or instrumentalities,
   its officers or employees, or any other person. This policy does not alter or amend any
   requirement under statute, regulation, or Executive Order. This policy applies only to USDA




                                                2
December 20, 2006                                                                    DR 5600-003


   agencies and programs and does not affect State, Local or Tribal laws, procedures, or
   regulations.


5 USDA MARKET-BASED ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP COORDINATION
  COUNCIL

   This policy hereby establishes the USDA Market-Based Environmental Stewardship
   Coordination Council. The Council will be chaired by the Under Secretary for Natural
   Resources and Environment. Membership will be comprised of the Under Secretary for
   Research, Education, and Economics; Under Secretary for Farm and Foreign Agricultural
   Services; Under Secretary for Rural Development; the Chief Economist; the General
   Counsel; and other officers as may be deemed appropriate by the Council. The Council will
   facilitate Departmental activities necessary to implement the Department Policy as
   established by this memorandum. Council members may identify executive level designees.

   To carry out the activities identified and approved by the Council, the Council will establish
   a work group comprised of appropriate agencies and offices that they determine have roles in
   implementing this policy. The work group may include, but not be limited to, representatives
   from the following agencies and offices: Agricultural Research Service; Cooperative State
   Research, Education, and Extension Service; Economic Research Service; Forest Service;
   Farm Service Agency; Natural Resources Conservation Service; Office of the Chief
   Economist; and, Office of General Counsel. The work group will report to leadership within
   these agencies and offices respectively, as identified by the Council, and this leadership
   group will report to the Council.

   The member Mission Areas, Offices, and Agencies of the Council are to contribute
   personnel, administrative, and programmatic resources as needed, and determined by them
   consistent with their delegated authorities and appropriations, to carry out these duties.


                                             – END –




                                               3
