                                   U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                      Washington, D.C. 20250


                                                                                           Number:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                                   5600-001

SUBJECT: Departmental Gypsy Moth Policy                             DATE:
                                                                    June 1, 1990

                                                                    OPI: Forest Pest Management, S&PF,
                                                                    Forest Service



1     PURPOSE

            This regulation establishes Departmental gypsy moth policy. It assigns responsibilities to
            USDA agencies and defines agency roles to avoid unnecessary duplication and to provide
            maximum coordination of USDA activities dealing with the gypsy moth.




2     BACKGROUND

            The gypsy moth was introduced into this country in 1869. From 1869 to the 1950's, the
            moth spread throughout Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Rhode Island, and
            Connecticut. During the 1960's and 1970's, it moved into eastern Canada and Michigan
            and spread through New Jersey, much of New York, and Pennsylvania. In the early
            1980's, it infested Delaware, Maryland, and portions of Virginia, West Virginia, North
            Carolina, and Ohio. Isolated infestations have been found in many other states, including
            California and Oregon. This spread resulted from both natural dispersal and accidental
            transport of gypsy moth life stages on recreational and commercial vehicles and outdoor
            household articles.

            Gypsy moth damage and artificial spread of gypsy moth by people can be mitigated.
            USDA programs have been implemented for this purpose. Suppression programs are
            carried out to reduce gypsy moth damages, eradication projects are conducted to
            eliminate isolated infestations, and a quarantine is maintained to regulate the movement
            of gypsy moth by people. Research is underway to find better ways to cope with this
            insect. Extension and other education programs communicate essential information to the
            public.

            USDA began its role in gypsy moth control in 1906 after Connecticut and Massachusetts
            requested aid from the Federal Government. Over the years, several USDA agencies
            became involved in work on the gypsy moth. These agencies are the Animal and Plant
            Health Inspection Service (APHIS), the Agricultural Research Service (ARS), the
            Cooperative State Research Service (CSRS), the Extension Service (ES), and the Forest
            Service (FS). Each agency has a distinct role in delivering the Department's gypsy moth
            program.
DR 5600-001                                                                                  June 1, 1990


              The role of APHIS is to administer the regulatory aspects of the program, conduct
              surveys to detect isolated infestations that are remote from the area of the United States
              that is generally infested, and develop methods to eradicate isolated infestations. APHIS
              also assists States with projects to eradicate small isolated infestations on private land.
              Gypsy moth research is conducted by the ARS, CSRS, and the FS. The ES coordinates
              education programs and disseminates information about the gypsy moth. The role of the
              FS, in addition to conducting research, is in gypsy moth survey and control within the
              generally infested area, either directly on Federal lands or cooperatively with the States
              on non-Federal lands, and in eradicating isolated infestations that are on or contiguous
              with Federal lands and large isolated infestations on non-Federal lands.




3      POLICY

              It is the policy of the Department to:

              a       Provide a comprehensive program of gypsy moth management activities
              coordinated by a designated lead agency.

              b      Protect Federal lands and assist States in protecting non-Federal lands from
              gypsy moth damage.

              c        Prevent or reduce the artificial long-range spread of the gypsy moth.

              d        Develop effective gypsy moth eradication or suppression programs,

              e        In cooperation with the States, conduct uniform gypsy moth surveys and
              population assessment activities.

              f        Plan and conduct fundamental and applied research on the gypsy moth in
              partnership with the Agricultural Experiment Stations and other cooperators to support
              Federal/State extension, regulatory and action programs.

              g        Coordinate research planning and cooperation within the Department and with
              other Federal, State, and private agencies.

              h        Emphasize research deemed necessary by Federal and State cooperators from
              the research, extension and action communities,




4      RESPONSIBILITIES

              In carrying out Departmental gypsy moth programs, it is the primary responsibility of:

              a        The Forest Service to:

                                (1)       Serve as lead agency for Departmental gypsy moth program
                                activities.




                                                  2
DR 5600-001                                                                            June 1, 1990


                          (2)      Provide technical assistance to State agencies within the
                          generally infested area in gypsy moth detection, evaluation, and
                          suppression techniques.

                          (3)     Pilot test and transfer technology designed to improve gypsy
                          moth control and damage reduction practices.

                          (4)      Provide State and Federal agencies in the generally infested
                          area and in newly infested States financial assistance in suppressing
                          gypsy moth populations.

                          (5)      Provide financial and technical assistance to State and Federal
                          agencies to eradicate isolated gypsy moth infestations that are on or
                          contiguous with Federal lands, and large isolated infestations that are
                          on non-Federal lands.

                          (6)     Conduct research and develop the means to control gypsy
                          moth under forest conditions and to support agency action programs.

              b   The Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service to:

                          (1)      Coordinate, with the appropriate State agencies, a national
                          trapping program to detect isolated gypsy moth infestations.

                          (2)       Conduct methods development and technology transfer
                          activities to improve gypsy moth eradication and quarantine practices.

                          (3)      Maintain a national quarantine to prevent the artificial long-
                          range spread of the gypsy moth.

                          (4)      Provide financial and technical assistance to States to
                          eradicate small isolated gypsy moth infestations.

              c   The Agricultural Research Service to:

                          (1)   Develop the means to protect high-value trees for
                          homeowners, communities, parks and other non-forest environments.

                          (2)      Conduct research supporting the activities of gypsy moth
                          action agencies.

              d   The Cooperative State Research Service to:

                          (1)     Administer a research grants program, that includes gypsy
                          moth research, and cooperative planning through the State Agricultural
                          Experiment Station System.

              e   The Extension Service to:

                          (1)     Coordinate an information and education program carried out
                          by Departmental and appropriate State agencies on gypsy moth and
                          gypsy moth management practices.



                                              3
DR 5600-001       June 1, 1990




              4
