                                     U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                        Washington, D.C. 20250


                                                                                                Number:
        DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                                5700-001

SUBJECT: Patents                                                      DATE:
                                                                      January 10, 1983

                                                                      OPI:
                                                                      Office of the General Counsel

1     PURPOSE

              This regulation provides policies, procedures and responsibilities as to inventions made
             by Department employees or subject to Department control.




2     SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

             This regulation replaces Title 1 of the Administrative Regulations, Chapter 15 in its
             entirety.




3     POLICY

             a         Invention Ownership. Executive Order 10096, paragraphs 1(a)-(d), 36 F. R. 389,
             which pertains to ownership of inventions made by Government employees, shall be a
             condition of employment of all employees of the Department. Generally, the Order
             provides that the Government is entitled to ownership of any invention directly related to
             the official duties of the inventor.

             b         New Plants. The Department shall not apply for patents or plant variety
             certificates on any inventions on new plants made by Department employees who are
             privy to the files of the Plant Variety Protection Office or the plant patent division of the
             U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.




4     DEFINITIONS

             The term "invention", as used in this regulation, means any art, machine, manufacture,
             design, or composition of matter, or any new and useful improvement thereof, or any
             variety of plant, which is or may be patentable or protectible by plant variety certificate.
DR 5700-001                                                                               January 10, 1983


5      RESPONSIBILITIES

              a        Reporting Inventions

                                (1)      Employee-inventors shall promptly report their inventions to
                                their supervisors.

                                (2)      Supervisors shall promptly forward invention reports to the
                                patent operation in their respective agencies or in the Office of the
                                General Counsel.

              b          Publication of Inventions. If an invention is disclosed in a publication, or used
              for its intended purpose, prior to being prepared as a U. S. patent application, such facts
              shall be promptly made known to the patent operation which receives the invention
              report. Publications include, for example, articles in journals or newspapers, abstracts
              distributed at professional society meetings, and publicly available microfilm.

              c         Determination Not to Apply for a Patent. If an agency determines not to apply
              for a patent on an invention, such decision shall be reported to the patent operation in the
              Office of the General Counsel which shall thereafter seek approval of the agency's
              decision from the U. S. Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks, as required by Title
              37, part 100.8 (d), of the Code of Federal Regulations.

              d        Patent Preparation and Prosecution. The Office of the General Counsel is
              primarily responsible for preparing and prosecuting applications for patents and plant
              variety certificates. Other agencies may maintain patent operations to prepare and
              prosecute such applications: Provided, that the patent operation in the Office of the
              General Counsel shall review and approve such work, shall make amendments thereto
              where appropriate, and shall be primarily responsible for all transactions with the U.S.
              Patent and Trademark Office, or the Plant Variety Protection Office, in connection
              therewith.

              e        Administrative Functions. Administrative functions as to preparing and
              prosecuting applications for patents and plant variety certificates are assigned to the
              Office of the General Counsel. All other administrative functions pertaining to patents
              and plant variety certificates are assigned to the Agricultural Research Service. Such
              functions include, but are not limited to:

                                (1)       Advertising Department-owned inventions as available for
                                patent licensing;

                                (2)       Patent licensing of Department-owned inventions; and

                                (3)      Transferring custody of inventions to other Government
                                agencies for purposes of patent licensing.




6      EMPLOYEE OWNERSHIP OF INVENTIONS

              a       Determination of ownership. If employees believe they may be entitled to
              ownership of their inventions, they shall make their position known to the Office of the
              General Counsel which thereafter shall make a formal determination of ownership.



                                                  2
DR 5700-001                                                                              January 10, 1983


              b         Foreign Patents. When the Department is entitled to ownership of an employee's
              invention, but decides not to seek foreign patents on the invention, the inventor shall be
              entitled to seek such patents in accordance with Title 37, part 101.8, of the Code of
              Federal Regulations, except that the employee's foreign patents shall be subject to the
              following limitations:

                                (1)      The Government reserves a nonexclusive, irrevocable,
                                royalty-free license as provided in Title 37, part 101.8, of the Code of
                                Federal Regulations; and

                                (2)       Materials which are manufactured or otherwise produced
                                essentially in the United States shall not be barred, by means of any
                                foreign patents on the employee's invention, from being sold or used in
                                any foreign country. The employee, or anyone who obtains the
                                employee's rights in such patents, shall grant patent licenses therein, at
                                reasonable terms, to permit such sale or use: Provided, that the
                                employee, or anyone who obtains the employee's rights, shall not be
                                compelled to grant such licenses in any foreign country where said
                                materials are staple articles or commodities of commerce suitable for
                                substantial use other than in infringement of said patents.




7      AWARDS TO EMPLOYEE-INVENTORS

              a       Agency Awards. Department agencies are authorized to grant awards to
              employee-inventors, as set forth in the Federal Personnel Manual, Chapter 451,
              Subchapter 9.

              b         Awards from the Department of Commerce. An employee-inventor may be
              entitled to an award from the Department of Commerce if:

                                (1)    Custody of the employee's invention is transferred to the
                                Department of Commerce for purposes of licensing; and

                                (2)      The Department of Commerce licenses the invention on
                                royalty-bearing terms.




                                                 3
