                             U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                    WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


                                                                               NUMBER:
    DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                    9500-011
SUBJECT:                                                    DATE:
Coordination of Environmental Policy                        June 30. 2005
                                                            OPI:
                                                            Natural Resources Conservation
                                                            Service




1      PURPOSE

       A primary mission of the Department of Agriculture is to assist farmers in
       improving agricultural production while at the same time conserving our natural
       resources and protecting and improving the quality of the environment.
       Successful accomplishment of this mission requires the development of clear
       USDA policies on environmental issues and the coordinated implementation of
       programs to carry out those policies. The purpose of this regulation is to establish
       the necessary mechanisms to ensure effective policy and program coordination
       regarding all environmental matters including pesticides.



2      SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS

       Departmental Regulation 9500-011, April 20, 1994, is canceled and is replaced by
       this regulation.



3      ESTABLISHMENT

       There is hereby re-established the Agricultural Council on Environmental Quality
       (Council) which shall be responsible for coordination of all environmental
       policies and programs of the Department. Membership of the Council shall
       include the Secretary, the Deputy Secretary, the Under Secretary for Farm and
       Foreign Agricultural Services, the Under Secretary for Natural Resources and
       Environment, the Under Secretary for Research, Education, and Economics, the
       Under Secretary for Marketing and Regulatory Programs, the Under Secretary for
       Rural Development, the Assistant Secretary for Administration, the Chief
       Economist, and the Director of the Office of Agricultural Environmental Quality,
       if the Secretary has appointed one. The Under Secretary for Natural Resources
       and Environment is hereby designated as Chairman of the Council.
DR 9500-011                                                                  June 30, 2005




4      STAFF SUPPORT

       The Under Secretary for Natural Resources and Environment shall designate a
       person to serve as Director of the Council who shall provide staff support to the
       Council in promoting strong and effective intradepartmental coordination on
       environmental policy issues, improving policy formulation on environmental
       issues, and providing a focal point for USDA interaction on environmental issues
       with other federal agencies and external organizations. Additional staff support
       may be provided to the Council, as necessary, by appropriate USDA agencies and
       offices.



5      IMPLEMENTATION

       The provisions of this regulation shall be effective immediately.




                                            2
