                                     U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                        Washington, D.C. 20250



                                                                                             Number:
        DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                              9500-002

SUBJECT: USDA Participation in a National                             DATE:
Agricultural Pesticide Impact Assessment Program                      March 7, 1983

                                                                      OPI: Agricultural Research Service



1      PURPOSE

                       This regulation establishes a process for managing and coordinating
              USDA/State (Land Grant University, Extension and State Regulatory Agency) activities
              to develop information and analyze pesticide use and impacts of pesticide regulations on
              agricultural products, product prices, and environmental issues.

2      CANCELLATION

                      This regulation supersedes Secretary's Memorandum 9500-1, December 2, 1981.

3      POLICY

                       Pesticides are essential to meet the Nation's needs for food, natural fibers and
              wood products, to protect human health and manage natural resources and to carry out
              regulatory responsibilities. Chemical pesticides must be used wisely, safely, and in
              concert with other effective commodity protection practices. Also they must be used only
              within limits consistent with the maintenance of human health, food safety, and
              environmental quality. It is, therefore, the policy of the United States Department of
              Agriculture to facilitate informed decisions on pesticides that promote and protect
              agricultural productivity and benefit humans now and in the future without causing
              unreasonable adverse effects.

4      ABBREVIATIONS

              APHIS -          Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service

              ARS              -         Agricultural Research Service

              CSRS             -         Cooperative State Research Service

              ECOP             -         Extension Committee on Organization and Policy

              EPA              -         Environmental Protection Agency

              ERS              -         Economic Research Service

              ES               -         Extension Service
DR 9500-002                                                                               March 7, 1983


              ESCOP -           Experiment Station committee on Organization and Policy

              FAS               -        Foreign Agricultural Service

              FIFRA -           Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act

              FS                -        Forest Service

              NAPIAP            -        National Agricultural Pesticide Impact Assessment Program

              OGC               -        Office of General Counsel

              SCS               -        Soil Conservation Service

              TAG               -        Technical Advisory Group

              USDA              -        United States Department of Agriculture

5      BACKGROUND

                       Agriculture is confronted with important issues on the use of pesticides and pest
              control practices. The EPA must by law review all existing pesticide registrations to
              determine whether such registrations should be reregistered, modified, or canceled. EPA,
              as required by FIFRA, as amended, has established procedures to provide for detailed
              evaluation of all pesticides, including the risks and benefits from use. Under FIFRA and
              the Memorandum of Understanding with the EPA, the USDA has responsibilities for
              contributing to the EPA decisionmaking process on pesticide regulation. Valid scientific
              information, objective analyses and interpretations concerning benefits and risks of
              pesticides are required to meet these responsibilities.

6      PROGRAM

                       In the implementation of this policy on pesticides, the Department participates in
              a coordinated USDA/State National Agricultural Pesticide Impact Assessment Program.
              The NAPIAP is designed to provide the most accurate and objective data available for
              defining and evaluating the benefits and risks of selected pesticides having agricultural
              and/or forestry uses. This information is necessary to evaluate the effects of pesticide
              regulation and use on agricultural productivity as well as the quality and use of soil and
              water resources. Further, information is developed to determine the effectiveness of
              regulations and the opportunity to simplify or eliminate regulations. Some important
              aspects of the program include conducting research on exposure to pesticides and
              environmental fate as well as collection accurate pesticide use information. Analyses and
              evaluations rely on existing information and on review of environmental and human
              health assessments by EPA. Because of data deficiencies and constantly changing pest
              control options and problems, a continuing research program of biological effectiveness,
              exposure and equipment improvement, economic data collecting and analyses, and
              environmental risk and hazard assessment will be conducted by the USDA/States.

7      ORGANIZATION

                        A Steering Committee for USDA/State participation in NAPIAP is hereby
              reestablished, and will report to the Executive Committee of the Research and Education
              Committee of the Secretary's Policy and Coordination Council. Agency heads or their


                                                 2
DR 9500-002                                                                             March 7, 1983


              designated representatives from APHIS, ARS, CSRS, ERS, ES, FAS, FS, OGC, and SCS
              representatives, from ECOP and ESCOP, as well as the Executive Secretary, will be
              members. The Steering Committee will be served by a TAG composed of representatives
              named by member agencies.




8      COMMITTEE CHAIRMANSHIP DESIGNATION

                        The Chairman of the Steering Committee will be selected by the Steering
              Committee from among its membership and may be rotated among members as
              appropriate. On an annual basis recommendations for Steering Committee chairmanship
              will be forwarded for concurrence to the Chairman of the Research and Education
              Committee.

                      The TAG will be coordinated and chaired by the Department's Pesticide
              Assessment Coordinator. The Steering Committee may appoint ad hoc work groups as
              necessary to carry out special assignments.

9      RESPONSIBILITIES

                                       a       The Steering Committee will:

                                                                (1)      make all policy decisions
                                               concerning the organization and functioning of
                                               NAPIAP;

                                                                  (2)     address all policy issues
                                               on pesticides including approval of assessment
                                               reports and USDA's responses to EPA's proposed
                                               pesticide regulatory actions pursuant to section 6 of
                                               FIFRA;

                                                                  (3)      advise the assistant
                                               secretaries, under secretaries, and the secretary as is
                                               necessary on issues that warrant their concern,
                                               including budget issues;

                                                                 (4)      provide that appropriate
                                               cooperative working relationships continue to be
                                               maintained within the Department and between the
                                               Department and the State Agricultural Experiment
                                               Stations, State Extension Services, agricultural
                                               components of State governments, EPA and other
                                               concerned organizations;

                                                                 (5)      provide resources for
                                               conducting detailed assessments of specific pesticides
                                               and commodities, concur in the five year program
                                               plan and mutually decide on commitments required
                                               by each participating agency to implement those
                                               plans.




                                               3
DR 9500-002                                              March 7, 1983


              b   The TAG will:

                                 (1)      provide for the day-to-day
                  management and coordination of the NAPIAP;

                                    (2)     review all assessment
                  reports and other program outputs, EPA position
                  documents, proposed registration and policy
                  documents, and make policy recommendations to the
                  Steering Committee;

                                     (3)      determine which
                  pesticides, pesticide uses and commodities require
                  assessment by the Department;

                                     (4)     develop, and revise as
                  necessary, a five year program plan and identify
                  associated resource requirements;

                                  (5)        prepare draft responses to
                  EPA proposed actions;

                                     (6)     facilitate implementation
                  and coordination of assessment activities concerning
                  specific pesticides and commodities.

              c   The Pesticide Assessment Coordinator will:

                                    (1)     as Executive Secretary of
                  the Steering Committee, assure that policy issues are
                  brought before the Committee for resolution;

                                   (2)      as Chairman of the TAG
                  provide the forum for coordinating the day-to-day
                  management of the NAPIAP program;

                                    (3)      with the assistance of the
                  TAG, provide for the approval of assessment reports
                  and preparation of Departmental responses to EPA
                  proposed pesticide regulatory actions pursuant to
                  section 6 of FIFRA;

                                   (4)      with consensus of the
                  TAG, respond on behalf of the Department to EPA
                  proposed regulations pursuant to Section 25 of
                  FIFRA;

                                   (5)   serve as principal contact
                  between USDA and EPA on matters related to
                  NAPIAP and other EPA regulatory actions of a
                  Departmental nature;




                  4
DR 9500-002                                                                               March 7, 1983


                                                                  (6)     keep NAPIAP
                                                 components fully informed of regulatory activity
                                                 relating to NAPIAP responsibility.

                                        d        Regional Coordinators will:

                                                                    (1)       coordinate NAPIAP
                                                 research efforts in the States within their respective
                                                 regions;

                                                                    (2)      function as part of the
                                                 agricultural network, working with States in their
                                                 region to furnish pesticide data and to provide
                                                 comments on regulatory issues as requested by TAG.

                                        e        State Liaison representatives will:

                                                                   (1)       serve as the NAPIAP
                                                 Representative of their State to express State and
                                                 local concerns on pesticide issues and research needs;

                                                                   (2)       provide for the furnishing
                                                 of available biological, environmental, pesticide use,
                                                 and economic data requested by the TAG and/or
                                                 Steering Committee;

                                                                     (3)      provide a link in
                                                 facilitating the flow of information among the USDA
                                                 NAPIAP components and State pesticide interests.

10     DURATION

                        The NAPIAP requires a substantial amount of resources and it is important that
              the best possible use be made of currently available information, funds and personnel.
              The NAPIAP is essential because of the continuing need for effective and economical
              pest control in American agriculture. The program is expected to continue for many years
              based on this need and the continued regulation of pesticide use. Flexibility in the
              NAPIAP must be maintained to deal with changes in pest control technology as well as
              changes in EPA schedules and policy.




                                                5
