                                    U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                          Washington, D.C.


                                                                                       NUMBER:
     DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                         9500-004
SUBJECT:                                            DATE: April 28, 2008
Fish and Wildlife Policy
                                                    OPI:   Wildlife and Fisheries Staff,
                                                           Forest Service


1.   PURPOSE


     The purpose of this regulation is to state the policies of the U.S. Department of
     Agriculture with respect to management of fish and wildlife and their habitats and to
     prescribe specific actions to implement the policies.

     The Department's prime responsibility is to help maintain sufficient and efficient
     production capability of farm, forest, water, and rangeland resources for the public
     benefit, now and in the future, and to encourage and support proper use, management,
     and conservation of those natural resources. Programs to meet this mission are carried
     out through research, education, technical and financial assistance to landowners,
     managers, producers, and consumers, and through management of public land for
     which the Department is responsible, in cooperation with State and local agencies.

     These programs affect habitats and populations of fish and wildlife. Balancing the
     competing uses for habitats supporting fish and wildlife requires strong, clear policies,
     relevant programs, and effective actions to sustain and enhance fish and wildlife in
     desired locations and numbers. More than 2 billion acres of farm, forest, and rangelands
     in the United States, plus associated water and wetlands provide habitats for over 3,000
     species of birds, mammals, fishes, reptiles, and amphibians. Fish and wildlife are
     important economic, aesthetic, ecological, educational, recreational, and scientific
     resources. They provide opportunity for hunting, commercial and sport fishing,
     trapping, and the countless aesthetic rewards of outdoor experiences. Collectively these
     pursuits have created significant employment opportunity and have generated an
     important outdoor recreation industry. Fish and wildlife have inherent values as
     components and indicators of healthy ecosystems. They often demonstrate how altered
     environments may effect changes in quality of life for humans. The U.S. Department of
     Agriculture recognizes an important role in the stewardship of the Nation's heritage of
     fish and wildlife for present and future generations.
DR 9500-004                                                                     April 28, 2008




 2.   CANCELLATION


      This regulation supersedes Secretary's Memorandum No. 9500-4 dated August 22,
      1983.

 3.   POLICY


      It is the policy of the Department to assure that the values of fish and wildlife are
      recognized, and that their habitats, both terrestrial and aquatic, including wetlands,
      are recognized, and enhanced, where possible, as the Department carries out its
      overall missions.

      The Department will support research and management programs that respond to
      the economic, ecological, educational, recreational, scientific and aesthetic values
      of fish and wildlife. A goal of the Department is to improve, where needed, fish and
      wildlife habitats, and to ensure the presence of diverse, native and desired nonnative
      populations of wildlife, fish, and plant species, while fully considering other
      Department missions, resources, and services.

      a.      Lands Administered by the Department

              Lands administered by the Department include the National Forest System,
              managed by the Forest Service (FS), and relatively small experimental or
              research areas administered by FS, Agricultural Research Service (ARS), and
              Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS).

              Consideration will be given to fish and wildlife and their habitats in
              developing programs for these lands. Alternatives that maintain or enhance
              fish and wildlife habitat should be promoted. When compatible with use
              objectives for the area, management alternatives which improve habitat will
              be selected.

      b.      Private and Other Non-Federal Lands

              Departmental agencies will provide research, educational, technical, and
              financial assistance to inform, encourage and assist landowners to understand,
              apply, and improve management practices for fish and wildlife habitats on
              private and other non-Federal forest, range, and agricultural lands. Fish and
              wildlife are valuable products of agricultural, forestry, and range management
              activities on private lands. The Department will work to achieve such
              recognition by private landowners and users.




                                                 2
April 28, 2008                                                                        DR 9500-004




                 Within its authorities, the Department will assist with the improvement of
                 opportunities for recreational uses of fish and wildlife such as hunting, fishing,
                 trapping, and viewing and will seek to protect or enhance the economic,
                 ecological, educational, aesthetic, and scientific values of wildlife and fish on
                 private lands when compatible with the landowners' objectives and in
                 accordance with Federal, State, and local laws and ordinances.

       c.        Wildlife Jurisdiction and State Cooperation

                 The U.S. Department of Agriculture recognizes the rights of the individual
                 States to manage fish and wildlife populations under their jurisdictions.
                 Departmental agencies will utilize their respective authorities to manage
                 habitat on public lands, to assist landowners in managing habitat on private
                 lands, and to encourage and assist the States, territories, and other Federal
                 agencies in conducting resource inventories and evaluating the status and
                 potential of fish and wildlife habitat.

       d.        Threatened or Endangered Species

                 The Department will conduct its activities and programs to assist in the
                 identification and recovery of threatened and endangered plant and animal
                 species and to avoid actions which may cause a species to become threatened
                 or endangered. In cooperation with the States, critical habitat and other
                 habitats necessary for the conservation of threatened and endangered species
                 on lands administered by the Department will be evaluated and measures
                 prescribed to prevent its destruction or adverse modification. The Department
                 will consult as necessary with the Departments of the Interior and/or
                 Commerce on activities that may effect threatened and endangered species.

                 Agencies of the Department will not approve, fund or take any action that is
                 likely to jeopardize the continued existence of threatened and endangered
                 species or destroy any habitat necessary for their conservation unless
                 exemption is granted pursuant to subsection 7(h) of the Endangered Species
                 Act of 1973, as amended. The Department will cooperate with other Federal
                 and State agencies in carrying out this regulation and will coordinate with the
                 Secretaries of the Interior and Commerce in the administration of the
                 Endangered Species Act and the animal and plant quarantine laws. However,
                 nothing in this regulation shall be construed as superseding or limiting in any
                 manner the functions of the Department under the plant and animal quarantine
                 laws.




                                                      3
DR 9500-004                                                                      April 28, 2008




              The Department will enforce, to the fullest extent possible, the regulations,
              provisions, goals, and objectives of the Convention on International Trade in
              Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), the Convention on
              Nature Protection and Wildlife Preservation in the Western Hemisphere, and
              the Lacey Act, as amended, involving the importation and exportation of
              terrestrial plants.

      e.      Economic Losses From Plant and Animal Pests

              Programs of the Department will seek to alleviate damage by plant and animal
              pests to farm crops, livestock, poultry, forage, forest and urban trees, wildlife
              and their habitats. Departmental agencies, through management and research
              programs, will develop or assist in developing new techniques and
              methodologies for the prevention of damage to agricultural or forestry
              production. They also will strive to reduce potential depredation through
              improved management of USDA programs. Such techniques and
              considerations will be incorporated into appropriate management and
              education programs.

              One goal is to minimize actual or potential conflicts between predators and
              livestock. Another goal is to reduce depredation on crops, poultry, livestock,
              forests, wildlife, other resources, and threats to human health, under registered
              control methods. When control is necessary, the offending animals will be
              removed as humanely and efficiently as possible, provided such action does
              not threaten the continued existence of any species.

              On land administered by the Department, direct predator and rodent damage
              control programs will be coordinated with other Federal and State agencies.
              The Department will coordinate with appropriate agencies of the Department
              of the Interior and with the State agencies on predator-livestock research,
              extension-education programs, and on damage control activities. In
              accordance with Executive Order 112987 (Introduction of Exotic Species), the
              Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service of the Department will cooperate
              with the Department of the Interior in development and implementation of
              appropriate procedures to restrict the introduction of undesirable exotic
              species into natural ecosystems.

              The Department will promote the concept and use of integrated pest
              management practices in carrying out its responsibilities for pest control.




                                                  4
April 28, 2008                                                                       DR 9500-004




 4.    AUTHORITIES


       Implementation of this regulation will be developed in accordance with the
       processes established by the Farmland Protection Policy Act (7 U.S.C. 4201-
       4209), as added by the Agriculture and Food Act of 1981; the Forest and
       Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (RPA), as amended (16
       U.S.C. 1600-1614); the National Forest Management Act of 1976 (16 U.S.C.
       1600 et. seq.); the Soil and Water Resources Conservation Act of 1977 (RCA),
       as amended (16 U.S.C. 2001-2009); the Renewable Resources Extension Act of
       1978 (RREA) (16 U.S.C. 1671-1676); the Federal Land Policy and Management
       Act of 1976 (FLPMA) (43 U.S.C. 1701 et. seq.); the Multiple Use and Sustained
       Yield Act of 1960 (16 U.S.C. 528 et. seq.); National Environmental Policy Act
       of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4321 et. seq.); the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as
       amended, (16 U.S.C. 1531-1542); and other appropriate authorities.

 5.    RESPONSIBILITIES - IMPLEMENTATION AND COORDINATION

       a.        The Secretary of Agriculture is responsible for:

                 (1)   Resolving issues and acting on recommendations raised to the
                       Secretary's Policy and Coordination Council by the Department
                       committees.

                 (2)   Raising unresolved issues and recommending actions to the
                       appropriate Cabinet Council.

       b.        The Natural Resources and Environment Committee (NRE) will:

                 (1)   Coordinate efforts supportive of the objectives of this regulation.

                 (2)   Utilize the USDA Food and Agriculture Councils in each State to
                       ensure participation of State fish and wildlife agencies and other
                       local interests.

                 (3)   Schedule reviews of each agency's procedure for implementation of
                       the policies.

                 (4)   Establish a USDA Fisheries and Wildlife Issues Working Group to
                       provide multi-agency coordination and assist the Committee, as
                       directed, in carrying out this regulation. The working group will
                       include representatives from each of the following agencies: Animal
                       and Plant Health Inspection Service, Agricultural Stabilization and
                       Conservation Service, Agricultural Research Service, Cooperative
                       State Research Service, Economic Research Service, Extension


                                                      5
DR 9500-004                                                                     April 28, 2008


                    Service, Farmers Home Administration, Forest Service, Rural
                    Electrification Administration, Natural Resource Conservation
                    Service, Office of the General Counsel, and Office of Budget,
                    Planning and Analysis. The working group will be cochaired by the
                    representatives of the Forest Service and the Extension Service. The
                    Forest Service will provide core staff support for the work group.

      c.      The Fisheries and Wildlife Issues Working Group will:

              (1)   Monitor implementation of this regulation, report inconsistencies and
                    make recommendations to the NRE Committee on how to more
                    efficiently carry out policy and improve agency coordination.

              (2)   Coordinate with other Federal and State agencies in carrying out
                    direction of the NRE Committee on issues addressed and maintain
                    liaison with interest groups.

      d.      Each USDA agency will review programs that will be affected by this
              regulation annually, and make the necessary administrative changes to
              bring agency programs into compliance with its provisions.

      e.      Each USDA agency having programs that will be affected by this
              regulation shall develop implementing procedures, consistent with any
              guidelines provided by the NRE Committee, and shall provide, to all
              offices of the agency, copies of this regulation, Departmental guidelines,
              and agency procedures to implement the regulation.




                                                  6
