                                    U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                       Washington, D.C. 20250



                                                                                            Number:
DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                                     9500-005

SUBJECT: Policy on Range                                             DATE:
                                                                     April 21, 1988

                                                                     OPI: Ecological Sciences, SCS


1     PURPOSE

             This regulation sets forth Departmental Policy relating to range resources and
             coordination of range activities among agencies of the USDA and other executive
             agencies, organizations, and individuals. It is in furtherance of USDA responsibilities
             mandated by the legislation identified in Section 7a. Agencies of the Department affected
             by this regulation include APHIS, ARS, ASCS, CSRS, ERS, ES, FMHA, FS, OICD,
             SCS, and NASS.

             Range is a major agricultural resource. Range also provides essential food and habitat for
             wildlife and unique economic and recreational opportunities for people and for
             communities. Range watersheds must be carefully managed to protect soil and water
             resources on which all other values and uses ultimately depend.

             USDA is vitally interested in the maintenance, enhancement and wise use of the
             Nations's range resources. The Department has played and will continue to play an active
             role in developing, demonstrating and applying the essential science, technology and
             stewardship necessary to effectively manage range resources in this nation and
             throughout the world.

2     BACKGROUND

             The Nation's range resource include nearly 800 million acres of range in the 50 States.
             The USDA managers more than 100 million acres of publicly-owned range and USDA
             programs influence the use and management of over 400 million acres of nonfederal
             range. The remaining public range which is primarily managed by USDI and DOD is also
             influenced by USDA programs.

             Range provides a major source of forage for livestock on thousands of American farms
             and ranches. As human populations increase and demand for food and energy expands,
             the need for forage and other range resources will grow.

             Range provides forage, water, recreation, wildlife and fish habitat and cover, as well as
             minerals and archaeological, historical, cultural, and visual amenities.

3     CANCELLATIONS

             This regulation cancels Departmental Regulation, 9500-5 dated December 15, 1983,
             "Policy on Range."
DR 9500-005                                                                              April 21, 1988


4      POLICY

              It is USDA policy to undertake activities and implement programs to:

                               a        Protect, enhance, and wisely use range ecosystems.

                               b      Contribute to the social and economic well-being of people
                               and communities that depend on range for their livelihoods.

                               c         Improve the productivity of soil, water, plant, livestock, and
                               wildlife resources of the Nation's ranges and provide continuing
                               education and other technology transfer programs to accomplish these
                               goals.

                               d       Support and strengthen national and international cooperation
                               designed to improve range condition and productivity.

                               e         Provide continuing research and technology developments to
                               enhance range conservation and productivity and to make optimum use
                               of all range resources.

                               f        Promote and facilitate cooperation and coordination among
                               public agencies, private organizations, and individuals in planning and
                               implementing range programs while minimizing duplication and
                               overlap of duties in reaching interagency goals affecting range.

                               g        Provide technical, managerial, education, and other assistance
                               programs for range owners, operators, and other users that will
                               encourage the adoption and use of conservation and management
                               practices that protect, enhance, and permit wise use of range resources.

                               h        Provide periodic range resource inventories compatible among
                               agencies, and based upon sound ecological principles, containing data
                               identifying multiple-use opportunities, and useful for protecting,
                               enhancing, and wisely using range resources at the local, regional, and
                               national levels.

                               i        Manage the range resources of the National Forest System in
                               an economically and ecologically sound manner, for multiple use, and
                               for development and demonstration of effective range management.

                               j        Throughout all programs, recognize and emphasize the current
                               and future full income potentials of the nation's range resources created
                               by varied and changing public values, expectations and demands.

5      ABBREVIATIONS

              USDA     -       U.S. Department of Agriculture

              NR&E     -       Natural Resources and Environment

              FS       -       Forest Service



                                                2
DR 9500-005                                                                             April 21, 1988


              SCS      -       Soil Conservation Service

              APHIS - Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service

              FmHA - Farmers Home Administration

              ASCS - Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service

              ARS      -       Agricultural Research Service

              CSRS - Cooperative State Research Service

              ERS      -       Economic Research Service

              ES       -       Extension Service

              NASS - National Agricultural Statistics Service

              OICD - Office of International Cooperation and Development

6      DEFINITIONS

                               a        Range embraces rangelands and also many forest lands which
                               support an understory or periodic cover of herbaceous or shrubby
                               vegetation amenable to certain range management principles or
                               practices.

                               b        Rangeland is land on which the native vegetation (climax or
                               natural potential) is predominantly grasses, grass-like plants, forbs or
                               shrubs suitable for grazing or browsing use. Rangelands include natural
                               grassland, savannas, most deserts, tundra, alpine plant communities,
                               coastal marshes, wet meadows and introduced plan communities
                               managed like rangeland.

7      RESPONSIBILITIES

                               a        Plans of action to implement the policies of this regulation
                               will be developed by affected agencies and will be subject to review by
                               the NR&E Committee of the Secretary's Policy and Coordination
                               Council. These plans will be prepared in accordance with directions of
                               the Forest and Rangelands Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974
                               (PL 93-378), as amended; the Soil and Water Resources Conservation
                               Act of 1977 (PL 95-192), as amended; the Renewable Resources
                               Extension Act of 1978 (PL 95-306; Subtitle M, Rangeland Research, of
                               the Agriculture and Food Act of 1981 (PL 97-98); the Public
                               Rangelands Improvement Act of 1978 (PL 95-514); and the Federal
                               Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (PL 94-579; and the Food
                               Security Act of 1985 (PL 99-198).

                               bThe NR&E Committee will provide Department leadership through a
                               Range Issues Working Group to help implement its range
                               responsibilities.



                                                3
DR 9500-005                                                            April 21, 1988


              c       The NR&E Committee will:

                               (1)   Coordinate the range policies of affected
                               USDA agencies.

                               (2)      Provide a forum for formulating and
                               assessing alternative range policies and procedures to
                               serve the missions of the various agencies within
                               USDA and those of other executive agencies.

                               (3)      Encourage and assist USDA agencies to
                               develop liaison, as needed, with other executive
                               agencies, public interest organizations, and
                               professional societies.

                               (4)      As appropriate, provide the Secretary with
                               reports of range issues under consideration,
                               opportunities for improvement, and progress toward
                               resolution.

              d       Agency Compliance

              Each agency of USDA will maintain its policies and program direction
              in compliance with this regulation. Agency heads will assure that
              current range program activities are delineated and that range programs
              of each agency are known to the NR&E Committee.




                               4
