                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                   WASHINGTON, DC 20250

                                                                NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION DR 9500-007
                                                                DATE:
 SUBJECT: USDA Nonpoint Source Water Quality                    December 16, 2020
                                                                EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Natural Resources Conservation Service
                                                                December 16, 2025



Section                                                                                      Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                 1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                      1
3.   Scope                                                                                   2
4.   Background                                                                              2
5.   Policy                                                                                  3
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                              4
7.   Inquiries                                                                               5

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                      A-1
Appendix B – Definitions                                                                     B-1
Appendix C – Authorities and References                                                      C-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) provides United States Department of Agriculture
     (USDA) policy regarding nonpoint source water quality activities and programs.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     a.   This revision supersedes DR 9500-007, USDA Nonpoint Source Water Quality Policy,
          dated December 5, 1986.

     b.   This policy is effective immediately and remains in effect until it is superseded or
          expires.
3. SCOPE

  This DR applies to USDA Mission Areas, agencies, and personnel responsible for activities
  related to the nonpoint source water quality.


4. BACKGROUND

  Many federal laws deal with water quality. National water quality goals were established by
  the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (Clean Water Act) and its amendments (33 U.S.C.
  1251 et seq.). The objectives of this Act are the restoration and maintenance of the chemical,
  physical, and biological integrity of the Nation's surface waters. Similar goals for
  groundwater were established by the Safe Drinking Water Act and its amendments (42 U.S.C.
  311f et seq.).

  The Department has long been involved in management programs directed toward
  conservation of the Nation's soil and water resources that serve national, state, and local
  water quality goals. Conservation practices and conservation management systems have
  been developed and implemented under various authorities on both private and public lands.
  On private lands, practices have been instituted through educational, technical, and financial
  assistance programs.

  Initial governmental water pollution control efforts were directed toward "point sources"
  (pollution from well-defined and discrete sources) through extensive federal funding of the
  construction grants program for publicity owned treatment works. As progress was made in
  control of point sources, it became evident that additional emphasis was needed for
  "nonpoint sources" (pollution from not well-defined and diffuse sources) control programs.
  Effective control programs for point sources have been developed based on treatment and
  controlled release of effluents; nonpoint source programs have been developed based on
  design and implementation of preventive conservation management practices that recognize
  competing resource needs.

  Agriculture production, livestock grazing, and silviculture occurs on approximately 40% of
  the nonfederal land in the United States. By virtue of their size and distribution, agricultural
  activities have widespread potential as a source of nonpoint pollutants. Fortunately, only a
  fraction of the potential degradation occurs. Unfortunately, because of the scale of American
  agriculture, that fraction is significant. Silvicultural activities are a much smaller potential
  source of nonpoint pollutants because of the less intensive use and smaller spatial extent.
  Agriculture, livestock grazing, and silviculture are not the only sources of nonpoint source
  pollution. Other sources include acid rain and runoff from mining operations, construction
  sites, roads, urban areas, and industrial areas.




                                               2
4. POLICY

  With the need to continue the prudent and sustained use of the nation's renewable natural
  resources, it is the policy of USDA to help minimize the impacts from nonpoint sources of
  pollution from agriculture, grazing, and silviculture lands.
  Accordingly, USDA will:

  a.   Promote the improvement, protection, restoration, and the maintenance of water quality
       to support beneficial uses.

  b.   Provide the opportunity for public involvement in decisions potentially affecting water
       quality.

  c.   Support continued emphasis on voluntary actions by landowners in preventing and
       correcting nonpoint problems.

  d.   Encourage the use of Best Management Practices (BMPs), conservations practices, and
       conservation management systems as mechanisms to meet federal, state, and local water
       quality requirements for agricultural, grazing, and silvicultural lands. Conservation
       management systems are composed of a combination of BMPs and other conservation
       practices which recognize site-specific conditions, natural background, and variability of
       nonpoint sources, and include consideration of social, economic, and technical
       feasibility.

  e.   Continue to use an established process to control, to the extent feasible, nonpoint
       sources on USDA administered lands.

  f.   Support programs addressing nonpoint source problems that are site-specific,
       technology-based, and flexible in the application of BMPs and other conservation
       practices.

  g.   Use nonpoint source management strategies that contribute to the achievement of
       defined state water quality objectives over realistic timeframes through using BMPs and
       other conservation practices within defined drainage areas or groundwater basins.

  h.   Acknowledge that the states have the lead in developing and implementing nonpoint
       source management on private lands and USDA nonpoint source control activities will
       be coordinated with state and local agencies.

  i.   Use state water quality standards, where applicable, as a basis for attaining or
       maintaining designated uses of surface water and groundwater resources. State water
       quality standards shall take into consideration the needs of beneficial uses including
       public water supplies, propagation of fish and wildlife, recreational purposes, and
       agricultural, industrial, and other purposes.



                                               3
  j.   Consider activities undertaken as part of an EPA approved state nonpoint source
       management plan to be consistent with state water quality standards.

  k.   Coordinate water quality data collection and research with other federal, state, and local
       agencies, to the extent practicable.

  l.   Provide educational, technical, and other assistance to land users, states, and local
       governments in the context of conservation management systems.

  m. Use existing knowledge and program base information, and continue improvement of
     data gathering and research efforts to define and assess water quality and nonpoint
     source pollution problem areas.

  n.   Continue to support and conduct research to identify cause-effect relationships between
       management practices and impacts on beneficial uses and to evaluate social costs and
       benefits associated with nonpoint control.


5. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The Under Secretaries will:

       (1) Ensure that their agencies and staff offices comply with this DR;

       (2) Ensure that applicable USDA Mission Area, agency, and staff office policies and
           guidance are consistent with this DR;

       (3) Coordinate USDA efforts with other Federal departments and agencies that
           implement policies and procedures supportive of this policy;

       (4) Coordinate the work of USDA agencies in carrying out provisions of this policy;
           and

       (5) Encourage, support, and provide guidance to Federal, state, and local level USDA
           related agencies and committees in implementing this policy.

  b.   USDA Agencies and Departmental staff offices will:

       (1) Ensure that their actions and programs on Federal and nonfederal lands will
           conform with the nonpoint source water quality plans adopted by state and local
           governments;

       (2) Coordinate water quality activities with appropriate public and private institutions
           including Federal, state, and local governments;

       (3) Integrate water quality concepts, consideration, and management techniques into

                                                4
           appropriate programs, research, and modes of assistance to landowners or users;

      (4) Seek state recognition as the designated management agency for lands under the
          administrative control of the Department. Land management agencies will seek
          state approval of a process which will insure proper design and implementation of
          conservation management systems;

      (5) Provide federal assistance in accordance with overall environmental policy and
          other procedural directives developed by USDA;

      (6) Train agency personnel in surface water and groundwater quality concepts to a
          level commensurate with their responsibility; and

      (7) Provide agency offices with copies of this policy and agency procedures necessary
          for its implementation.


6. INQUIRIES

  Inquiries regarding this DR should be directed to the Natural Resources Conservation Service
  (NRCS), Ecological Sciences Division at 202-692-5307.


                                         -END-




                                             5
                                APPENDIX A

                   ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


BMP      Best Management Practice
DR       Departmental Regulation
EPA      Environmental Protection Agency
NRCS     Natural Resources Conservation Service
U.S.C.   United States Code
USDA     United States Department of Agriculture




                                   A-1
                                           APPENDIX B

                                           DEFINITIONS


Best Management Practice. A practice, including NRCS conservation practices, that is
determined to be an effective and practicable (including technological, economic, and
institutional considerations) means of preventing or reducing the amount of pollution generated
by nonpoint sources to a level compatible with water quality goals.

Conservation Management Systems. Sets of approved conservation practices which, when
properly planned and applied, work in tandem to provide environmental conservation and
protection for soil, water, air, plant, animal, energy, and human resources.

Conservation Practice. A specific treatment, such as a structural or vegetative measure, or
management technique, commonly used to meet specific needs in planning and implementing
conservation, for which standards and practice specifications have been developed.
Conservation practices are contained in the NRCS Field Office Technical Guide, Section IV,
which is based on the National Handbook of Conservation Practices.

Nonpoint Source Pollution. Any source of water pollution that does not meet the legal definition
of point source in section 502(14) of the Clean Water Act of 1987. Nonpoint source pollution
generally results from land runoff, precipitation, atmospheric deposition, drainage, seepage, or
hydrologic modification. Nonpoint source pollution, unlike pollution from industrial and sewage
treatment plants, comes from many diffuse sources. Nonpoint source pollution is caused by
rainfall or snowmelt moving over and through the ground. As the runoff moves, it picks up and
carries away natural and human-made pollutants, finally depositing them into lakes, rivers,
wetlands, coastal waters, and groundwaters. Nonpoint source pollution can include:

a.   Excess fertilizers, herbicides and insecticides from agricultural lands and residential areas.

b.   Oil, grease and toxic chemicals from urban runoff and energy production.

c.   Sediment from improperly managed construction sites, crop and forest lands, and eroding
     streambanks.

d.   Salt from irrigation practices and acid drainage from abandoned mines.

e.   Bacteria and nutrients from livestock, pet wastes and faulty septic systems.

f.   Atmospheric deposition and hydromodification.

Point Source Pollution. Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including but not
limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock,
concentrated animal feeding operation, or vessel or other floating craft, from which pollutants



                                                 B-1
are or may be discharged. This term does not include agricultural stormwater discharges and
return flows from irrigated agriculture.




                                             B-2
                                        APPENDIX C

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Federal Water Pollution Control Act, (Clean Water Act), 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., as Amended
through Public Law 107-303, November 27, 2002

Safe Drinking Water Act, Title XIV of the Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 311f et seq.
Approved July, 1944, as Amended through Public Law 116-92, enacted December 20, 2019

USDA, NRCS, Field Office Technical Guide

USDA, NRCS, National Handbook of Conservation Practices




                                              C-1
