                                  U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                        Washington, D.C.


                                                                                    NUMBER:
           DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                 9630-001
SUBJECT:                                          DATE:     June 18, 2009
USDA Policies and Procedures on
Biohazardous Waste Decontamination,               OPI:   Agricultural Research Service
Management, and Quality Controls at
Laboratories and Technical Facilities

     1.     PURPOSE

            Decontamination, sterilization, and disinfection procedures in a research or
            diagnostic environment vary, depending on the capabilities of the facility and the
            biological hazards (biohazard) being handled. Existing Department of
            Agriculture (USDA) Department Manuals (DM) on Security Policies for
            Biosafety Level (BSL)-3 and Labs excluding BSL-3 (DM9610-1 and DM9610-2)
            do not address biohazardous waste decontamination, management and quality
            control. This manual should provide USDA-wide biosafety policies for biological
            waste management and quality control at USDA facilities, including general
            information on decontamination methods and technologies, methods for
            validating decontamination efforts, and information on security and employee
            safety issues.


     2.     SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS

            The policies and procedures described herein are subject to review on a 5-year
            basis unless conditions warrant earlier review.


     3.     STATEMENT OF POLICY

            Biohazardous agents used at USDA facilities must be decontaminated prior to
            disposal or discharge. Decontamination and disposal of biohazardous wastes
            should be conducted in accordance with applicable USDA, Federal, State, local,
            facility and/or host nation environmental standards. General procedures for
            decontamination, destruction, and disposal are described in this Manual, but it
            may be necessary to use additional resources to identify and develop appropriate
            biohazardous waste management on a case-by-case basis.

            a.     The preferred methods of decontamination, destruction, and disposal of
                   many infectious/etiologic agents, zoonotic agents, veterinary pathogens,
                   and biohazards are steam sterilization (autoclaving), chemical inactivation
                   with appropriate biocidal solutions, or incineration in an appropriately
DR 9630-001                                                                  June 18, 2009


                      permitted hospital/medical/infectious waste and/or pathological waste
                      incinerator(s).

              b.       Infectious/etiologic agents or other biohazards awaiting decontamination,
                      destruction, and disposal will be properly contained and labeled at the
                      appropriate biosafety/biocontainment level according to the risk presented
                      by the biohazard.


       4.     ABBREVIATIONS

              BSL            Biosafety level
              CDC            U.S. Centers for Disease Control

              CFR            Code of Federal Regulations

              DM             Departmental Manual

              EPA            U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

              FIRFA          Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act

              FDA            U.S. Food and Drug Administration

              FRC            Federal Records Center

              NARA           National Archives and Records Administration

              OSHA           Occupational Safety and Health Administration

              PPE            Personal Protective Equipment

              PPQ            Plant Protection and Quarantine

              SOP            Standard Operating Procedure(s)

              UN             United Nations

              USDA           U.S. Department of Agriculture

              UV             Ultraviolet


       5.     DEFINITIONS

              Antimicrobial - An agent that kills or suppresses the growth of microorganisms.



                                               2
June 18, 2009                                                                      DR 9630-001




                Antiseptic – A substance that prevents or arrests the growth or action of
                microorganisms, either by inhibiting their activity or destroying them.

                Bioburden - The number and types of viable microorganisms with which an item
                is contaminated; also known as "bioload" or "microbial load."

                Biocide - A chemical or physical agent that kills all living organisms, both micro
                and macro, as well as pathogenic and nonpathogenic microorganisms. Microbio-
                cide specifies an agent that kills microorganisms. Because a biocide kills spores
                as well as vegetative cells, it is presumably a sterilizing agent.

                Biohazard - an infectious agent, or hazardous biological agent, or part thereof,
                regardless of origin (naturally occurring, bioengineered, or synthesized
                component of any such microorganism or infectious substance), that presents a
                real or potential risk to humans, animals or plants, either directly through
                infection, or indirectly through the disruption of the environment. Biohazards
                include certain types of recombinant DNA; organisms and viruses infectious to
                humans, animals or plants (e.g., parasites, viruses, bacteria, fungi, prions, and
                rickettsia); and biologically active agents (i.e.,, toxins, allergens, and venoms) that
                may cause disease in other living organisms or significantly affect the
                environment, community, commerce, or trade agreements.

                Biohazard Incident – An incident that may include human exposure to an
                infectious, potentially infectious, or zoonotic agent; a release of a biohazard into
                the environment; escape of infected animals or vectors; biohazard spills outside of
                a primary containment device; loss or theft of biohazardous agents; or other loss
                of containment or equipment failure in conjunction with a biohazard which may
                lead to a release of a hazardous agent within the laboratory environment or
                outside the laboratory environment.

                Biohazardous waste types: Waste items as described in section 7 of this manual
                generated at USDA facilities.
                Biological Indicator (BI) – A standardized preparation of nonpathogenic
                (surrogate) microorganisms (in many cases bacterial endospores) that are highly
                resistant to specific sterilization methods. BIs are used during the sterilization
                process to provide additional evidence that the sterilization method was effective
                in achieving sterilization. BIs can be dried preparations on filter paper (spore
                strips), stainless steel coupons, or aluminum foil, or can be a combined unit
                consisting of a paper carrier of the BI and a vial of growth medium containing a
                pH indicator system.
                Biological Toxin or Biotoxin – A broad range of substances, predominantly of
                natural origin but increasingly accessible by modern synthetic methods, that may
                cause death or severe incapacitation at relatively low exposure levels. Biological
                toxins include metabolites of living organisms, degradation products of dead



                                                   3
DR 9630-001                                                                      June 18, 2009


              organisms, and materials rendered toxic by the metabolic activity of
              microorganisms.

              Biosafety Level (BSL)- Four BSLs are described in the 5th edition of Biosafety in
              Microbiology and Biomedical Laboratories, published by the Centers for Disease
              Control (CDC) and the National Institutes of Health. These consist of increasingly
              protective combinations of laboratory practices and techniques, safety equipment,
              and laboratory facilities. Each combination is specifically appropriate for the
              operations performed, the documented or suspected routes of infectious agent
              transmission, and the laboratory function or activity.

              Common Carrier- A U.S. Department of Transportation licensed commercial
              carrier contracted to transport biohazardous waste.
              Contamination – The introduction of microorganisms or biological toxins to
              items or surfaces, or into tissues or sterile material.
              D-Value – The time required to inactivate 90% of the cell population or to reduce
              the microbial population to one-tenth of its original number (a one-logarithm
              reduction).
              Decontamination – Disinfection or sterilization of articles contaminated with
              toxins or agents to make the articles safe for use or disposal.
              Disinfectant – A chemical agent that eliminates a defined scope of pathogenic
              organisms, but not necessarily all microbial forms (e.g., bacterial endospores).
              Disinfection – The selective elimination of certain undesirable microorganisms to
              prevent their transmission to a susceptible host.
              Disinfestation – Extermination or destruction of insects, rodents, or other animal
              forms that transmit disease or are otherwise considered pests and that may be
              present on plants, animals, humans, or in their immediate environments.
              Droplet nuclei – Particles of 5 µm diameters or less, that are formed by
              dehydration of airborne droplets and capable of air dispersal.
              Etiologic agent – Any viable microorganism or its toxin that has the capacity to
              cause human disease.
              F-value – The time in minutes required to kill all the spores in suspension at a
              temperature of 121°C (250°F). By calculating and converting the temperature-
              time equivalents of the F-value during the heating and cooling of the sterilization
              cycle and adding them together, the holding time at sterilization temperature may
              be reduced and the product subjected to less heating than otherwise would be
              required.
              Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) – Provides the
              basis for regulation, sale, distribution, and use of pesticides in the United States.
              FIFRA authorizes the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to review
              and register pesticides for specified uses. EPA also has the authority to suspend
              or cancel the registration of a pesticide if subsequent information shows that its


                                                 4
June 18, 2009                                                                    DR 9630-001


                continued use would pose unreasonable risks. Some key elements of FIFRA
                include:
                •      product licensing statutes that require the registration of pesticide products
                       with the EPA before their manufacture, transport, and sale;
                •      registration based on a risk/benefit standard;
                •      strong authority to require data, and the authorization to issue Data Call-
                       ins;
                •      regulation of pesticide use through labeling, packaging, composition, and
                       disposal;
                •      emergency exemption authority that permits approval of unregistered uses
                       of registered products on a time limited basis; and
                •      authorization to suspend or cancel a product's registration, including the
                       appeals process, adjudicatory functions, etc.
                Fomite(s) – Inanimate objects that may transmit infectious microorganisms, such
                as pens, eating utensils, equipment, combs, etc.
                Fumigation – A means of decontaminating an enclosed space and the articles
                enclosed in that space by using a gas or vapor method. Usually the agent selected
                can inactivate bacterial endospores.
                Germicide – An agent that destroys microorganisms, especially pathogenic
                organisms. As commonly used, the term is associated with the death of all
                disease-producing microorganisms, but it does not necessarily include the
                capability of destroying bacterial spores.
                Infection – The establishment of a pathogenic microorganism within a
                susceptible host after transmission via a viable route and subsequent host
                invasion.
                Pasteurization – A process developed by Louis Pasteur for heating milk, wine,
                or other liquids to 60° to 100°C (140o to 212oF) for approximately 30 minutes to
                significantly reduce or kill the number of pathogenic and spoilage organisms.
                Prion(s) – Proteinaceous infectious particles that lack nucleic acids. They are
                thought to consist of an abnormal isoform of a normal cellular protein highly
                resistant to treatments (e.g., moderate heat, protein digesting enzymes, radiation,
                and formalin) that would inactivate typical proteins, viruses, or bacteria.
                Complete inactivation may not always be possible, but all attempts should be
                made to ensure that adequate decontamination is met. The World Health
                Organization’s publication, “Infection Control Guidelines for Transmissible
                Spongiform Encephalopathies,” provides internationally-accepted guidance on
                handling Prion disease agents; it is located at:
                http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/2000/WHO_CDS_CSR_APH_2000.3.pdf).




                                                  5
DR 9630-001                                                                    June 18, 2009


              Select Agent and/or Toxin - A biological agent or toxin listed in 7 CFR 331.3
              (PPQ); 9 CFR 121.3 and 9 CFR 121.4 (VS); and 42 CFR 73.3 and 42 CFR 73.4
              (CDC) (See “Overlap Select Agent and/or Toxin”).
              Source Reduction - The process of removing certain items and/or materials from
              a contaminated site for further treatment and reuse or disposal; cleaning items
              remaining on site prior to the main decontamination activity; and/or cleaning
              surfaces. The latter step is usually performed in conjunction with fumigation
              remedies. For cleanups that only involve the application of liquids to nonporous
              surfaces, this step may provide the main remediation activity. When effectively
              conducted, source reduction:
              •      Reduces the number of potentially contaminated items and/or materials
                     present;
              •      Ensures that any material that might inhibit decontamination is removed;
                     and
              •      Reduces high contamination levels before full decontamination.

              Spaulding Classification – Strategy suggested by Dr. E. H. Spaulding in 1972
              that divides medical devices into three infection risk categories (Critical, Semi-
              critical and Non critical), based on use and types of tissue they contact. To
              complement the categorization of medical and surgical devices, three levels of
              germicidal action (High, Intermediate, and Low) were developed to carry out
              disinfection strategies in healthcare settings.

              Sterile – Free from living microorganisms.

              Sterility Assurance Level (SAL) – The probability of a viable microorganism
              being present on a product unit after sterilization. SAL is normally expressed as
              10-x. SAL of 10-6 is most often used for sterile devices and drugs.

              Sterilization – A carefully monitored process that will assure that the probability
              of an item being contaminated by a microbe to be equal to or less than one in a
              million (10–6)

              Toxin - See Biological Toxin

              USDOT regulated medical waste or clinical waste or (bio) medical waste –
              Defined in 49 CFR § 173.134, means a waste or reusable material derived from
              the medical treatment of an animal or human, which includes diagnosis and
              immunization, or from biomedical research, which includes the production and
              testing of biological products. Regulated medical waste or clinical waste or (bio)
              medical waste containing a Category A infectious substance must be classed as an
              infectious substance, and assigned to UN2814 or UN2900, as appropriate.
              •      Category A, UN 2814- Infectious substances affecting humans and
                     animals: An infectious substance in a form capable of causing permanent



                                                6
June 18, 2009                                                                        DR 9630-001


                        disability or life-threatening or fatal disease in otherwise healthy humans
                        or animals when exposure to it occurs.
                •       Category B, UN 2900- Infectious substances affecting animals only: An
                        infectious substance that is not in a form generally capable of causing
                        permanent disability of life-threatening or fatal disease in otherwise
                        healthy humans and animals when exposure to it occurs.
                •       Category B, UN 3373- Biological substance transported for diagnostic or
                        investigative purposes.
                •       Regulated Medical Waste, UN 3291- Waste or reusable material derived
                        from medical treatment of an animal or human, or from biomedical
                        research, which includes the production and testing of biological products.

                Virucide – An agent that destroys or inactivates viruses to make them
                noninfective, especially a chemical substance used on living tissue. The word
                virucide is a misnomer because the ending "cide" means kill, and the virus by
                itself is not a living entity. Thus, we do not say a virus is killed, but that a virus is
                inactivated.

                Z-value – A measure of the way the D-value changes with temperature for a
                particular organism. It may be considered the slope of the logarithm of the D-
                value against temperature and the number of degrees to change the D-value by a
                factor of 10. It is useful for comparing the death rate of spores with the
                destructive effect on the product over an equivalent temperature range.


        6.      PERSONNEL RESPONSIBLE FOR BIOHAZARDOUS WASTE
                MANAGEMENT

                Areas of Responsibility

                This section outlines individual responsibilities for implementation of
                biohazardous waste disposal policies and procedures.

                a.      Agency

                        (1)     Administrator or Agency Head. The Administrator is responsible
                                for ensuring agency compliance with USDA biohazardous waste
                                policies and procedures, and designates the agency official
                                (Deputy Administrator or equivalent) who will ensure compliance
                                implementation.

                        (2)     Deputy Administrators or equivalent. The Deputy Administrators
                                ensure USDA biohazardous waste policies and procedures are
                                implemented at all sub-agency levels, and designate an Agency
                                Biosafety Officer or equivalent.




                                                    7
DR 9630-001                                                              June 18, 2009


                   (3)    Agency Biosafety Officer or equivalent. The Agency Biosafety
                          Officer is responsible for ensuring adherence to all agency
                          biohazardous waste policies and procedures, which includes
                          reporting all biohazardous waste incidents to the designated
                          Agency official.

              b.   Facility

                   (1)    Center Director, Laboratory Chief or Director, or Research Leader
                          or equivalent. The Center Director ensures the implementation of
                          biohazardous waste policies and procedures at their facility or
                          institute and also designates a Location
                          Biosafety/Biosecurity/Quarantine Officer or equivalent.

                   (2)    Location Biosafety/Biosecurity/Quarantine Officer(s) or
                          equivalent. The Location Biosafety Officer(s) works with local
                          line managers, scientists, and research personnel to ensure the
                          facility is in compliance with agency and Department policy on
                          biohazardous waste disposal. S/he reports all biohazardous waste
                          incidents through Center or Location Management to the Agency
                          Biosafety Officer or designated Agency Official.

                   (3)     USDA Scientists and Research personnel. All USDA Scientists
                          and Research personnel are responsible for:
                          •     staying informed about hazardous biological agents in their
                                work areas;
                          •     adhering to biohazardous waste disposal policies and
                                procedures; and
                          •     Ensure that their employees are aware of hazards associated
                                with biohazards or biohazardous waste(s) and are
                                appropriately trained on the applicable regulations,
                                standard operating procedures, emergency procedures,
                                security and safety procedures.
                          •     informing supervisors (or designee) and the Location
                                Biosafety/Security/Quarantine Officer(s) of all
                                biohazardous waste disposal incidents.

              c.   Development of Location Biohazard Waste Management
                   Plan

                   (1)    DR 4400-007, Biological Safety Program, dated May 19, 2006,
                          (www.ocio.usda.gov/directives/doc/DR4400-007.htm) requires
                          that affected personnel must be provided site-specific Biohazard
                          Control Plans which contain specific information about biological
                          hazards at their worksite.



                                           8
June 18, 2009                                                                DR 9630-001


                            (a)     The Biohazard Control Plan must include provisions for the
                                    safe handling and disposal of hazardous biological agents,
                                    and can be incorporated into existing plans, such as the
                                    Chemical Hygiene Plan (Laboratory Safety) or Hazard
                                    Communication Plan--both mandated by the Occupational
                                    Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)--or the
                                    Biohazardous Control Plan.

                            (b)   Whether it is incorporated into existing plans or exists as an
                                  independent document, the directives contained in the
                                  Biohazard Control Plan should be in accordance with the
                                  policy and procedures for decontamination, destruction,
                                  and disposal of hazardous waste as described in this
                                  Manual.
                d.   Biohazardous Waste Incident Reporting

                     All USDA scientists and research personnel are responsible for reporting
                     any biohazardous waste incidents, regardless of severity, to their
                     supervisor or designee and to the Location Biosafety Officer.

                     (1)    The notification must be made by phone or in person.

                     (2)    After investigating the circumstances that are reported, the
                            Location Biosafety Officer will determine if a biohazardous
                            waste incident has occurred.

                     (3)    The Location Biosafety Officer is responsible for reporting
                            biohazardous waste incidents to the appropriate line management
                            and/or the Responsible Official for select agents and toxins. Line
                            management is responsible for reporting the incident through the
                            the normal management communication structure to the Agency
                            Biosafety Officer or equivalent for incidents involving potential
                            occupational exposure or illness, environmental release or a
                            reportable incident involving a select agent.

                     (4)    Once an investigation of the situation is complete, the supervisor
                            will report the findings and corrective actions taken through the
                            normal management communication structure.

                     (5)    The Agency Biosafety Officer or equivalent is responsible for
                            reporting any biohazardous waste incidents to the designated
                            Agency official.

                     (6)    Incidents related to select agents and toxins must be reported to the
                            Agriculture Select Agent Program at 301-734-5960 (Or if
                            registered with CDC Select Agent Program at 404-718-2000).



                                              9
DR 9630-001                                                                   June 18, 2009


                             When responding to these incidents, the Responsible Official
                             should follow the requirements of 7 CFR 331.19, 9 CFR 121.19 or
                             42 CFR 73.19- Notification of a theft, loss, or release.


       7.     TYPES OF BIOHAZARDOUS WASTE GENERATED AT USDA

              USDA is composed of a number of agencies and offices. At least 6 agencies
              have diagnostic or research laboratories, animal research facilities, and
              containment greenhouse facilities. USDA diagnostic and research operations
              generate a range of biological waste products. The appropriate precautionary
              procedures and the most effective decontamination methods vary for different
              pathogens and waste streams, and the selection of any waste management method
              should only be done after a careful evaluation and risk assessment is performed.
              Various disinfection methods are described in subsequent sections of this
              document.

              The following is a list of the many categories/types of biological waste generated
              in USDA facilities, but it is not comprehensive. Biological waste products not
              specified in this section are to be handled in a manner providing maximum
              protection to facility personnel, public health, U.S. Agriculture and to the
              environment.

              All Federal, State, local, and facility regulations must be consulted and
              followed for the definition of biohazardous wastes and waste disposal.

              a.     Cultures, stocks of etiologic or infectious agents, and associated
                     biologicals (including but not limited to all agents, whether designated as
                     pathogens or not):

                     (1)     Specimens from veterinary, diagnostic, regulatory, pathology, and
                             research laboratories related to testing of products for animals,
                             plants, food, soil, etc);
                     (2)     Diagnostic sample cultures, including all inoculated media used to
                             isolate or enumerate microorganisms regardless of final isolation
                             result;
                     (3)     Incubated food samples, including the initial dilution, recovery, or
                             enrichment culture of the food sample;
                     (4)     Quality control cultures;
                     (5)     Disposable culture/Petri dishes;
                     (6)     Devices used to manipulate specimens and devices used to
                             transfer, inoculate, and mix cultures, including disposable and
                             reusable items (reusable items include but are not limited to
                             blender jars and blades, glass pipettes, scissors, knives, dilution
                             bottles, ring slides, filter units, forceps, and funnels);
                     (7)     Wastes from the production of biologicals;



                                              10
June 18, 2009                                                                 DR 9630-001


                     (8)    Waste water from containment greenhouses;
                     (9)    All microorganisms constructed using rDNA; and
                     (10)   Discarded live and attenuated vaccines.

                b.   Carcasses, body parts, and bedding from animals exposed to pathogens in
                     research/diagnostics or that are used for diagnostics and may naturally
                     harbor pathogens

                c.   Plant specimens or debris, seeds, or soil exposed to plant pathogens,
                     infectious material, insects under a plant pest permit (PPQ 526), or plant
                     materials and associated pests

                d.   All contaminated and uncontaminated sharps, including:

                     (1)    Needles and syringes
                     (2)    Scalpels, razors, and microtome blades
                     (3)    Pasteur pipettes
                     (4)    Slides and cover plates
                     (5)    Broken glass

                e.   Laboratory wastes, including but not limited to:

                     (1)    Specimen containers
                     (2)    Histology samples and other fixed slides or wax embedded tissues
                     (3)    Disposable personal protective equipment (gloves, lab coats,
                            masks, and aprons)
                     (4)    Contaminated culture containers (Petri dishes, flasks, cell culture
                            flasks, pipette tips, disposable pipettes, vials, tubing, etc.)
                     (5)    Towels, absorbent surface liners, or underpads
                     (6)    Cell culture materials
                     (7)    Test or diagnostic kits, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
                            equipment, lateral flow devices, and spent pH test paper
                     (8)    Disposable inoculating loops and needles, colony spreaders, and
                            swabs
                     (9)    Sample bags and collection and transport systems
                     (10)   Filters and disposable filter units.

                f.   Human blood, blood products, and body fluids, including solidified blood
                     and body fluids

                g.   Prions, including:

                     (1)    Abnormal host proteins
                     (2)    Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathy agents
                     (3)    Proteins resistant to moderate heat, digestion enzymes, radiation,
                            and formalin



                                              11
DR 9630-001                                                                  June 18, 2009




              h.   Biological toxins, including:

                   (1)    Poisons of natural origin
                   (2)    Poisons of natural origin synthetically produced
                   (3)    Toxic metabolites of living organisms
                   (4)    Degradation products of dead organisms
                   (5)    Materials rendered toxic by the metabolic activity of
                          microorganisms

              i.   Select Agents: All laboratories working with Select Agents must adhere to
                   the requirements in 42 CFR part 73, 9 CFR part 121 and 7 CFR part 331,
                   as well as the most current version of any and all relevant USDA manuals.

              j.   Multihazardous Waste: Waste with multiple type hazards including two or
                   more of the following: radioactive, biohazardous agent(s), or hazardous
                   chemical(s). If the multihazardous waste contains a biohazardous agent(s),
                   inactivation of the biohazard(s) is usually the first step in the disposal
                   process. After inactivation of the biohazard the waste will be treated as
                   radioactive or hazardous chemical waste as appropriate. Contact your
                   location Biosafety Officer and/or equivalent for appropriate inactivation
                   methods.


       8.     BIOHAZARDOUS WASTE SEGREGATION, PACKAGING, LABELLING,
              AND COLLECTION

              a.   Biohazardous/infectious waste must be segregated from the general trash.

              b.   Packaging material must be selected that is appropriate for the type of
                   waste handled (e.g., plastic bags for solid or semisolid infectious waste;
                   puncture resistant containers for sharps; and bottles, flasks, or tanks for
                   liquids).

              c.   Suitable containers must be used for the intended treatment, (e.g.,
                   incineration requires combustible containers). Suitable containers for
                   sharps include; metal, rigid plastic, and heavy cardboard; containers that
                   are compatible with selected treatment processes (NOTE: State and local
                   regulations/requirements for sharps containers may vary).

              d.   Primary and secondary containment must be adequate to prevent release of
                   biohazardous constituents into the environment.

              e.   Packaging containers/materials must maintain its integrity during storage
                   and transportation.




                                             12
June 18, 2009                                                                   DR 9630-001


                f.     Biohazardous/infectious waste or packaged biohazardous/infectious waste
                       shall not be compacted using a trash compactor prior to decontamination.

                g.     Biohazardous waste Storage time should be minimized.

                h.     Biohazard bags should be sealed and containerized in leak-proof/puncture
                       resistant secondary containment appropriate for treatment or transport.
                       Autoclave Bags used in steam sterilization should be loosely closed during
                       autoclaving to allow for steam circulation within the bag.

                i.     Liquid wastes must be in capped or tightly stoppered bottles or flasks and
                       containerized in leak-proof/puncture resistant secondary containment as
                       appropriate for transportation. Liquid waste vessels should never be
                       tightly capped during steam sterilization (autoclaving).

                j.     The universal biological hazard symbol must be visible on infectious
                       waste containers.
                k.     Appropriate labeling or color coding should be used to differentiate
                       decontaminated from non-decontaminated waste.

                l.     Waste moved within the facility for treatment or storage may require
                       additional packaging to preserve containment of the waste. This may be a
                       rigid or semi-rigid container or double bagging.

                m.     Carts used to transfer wastes within a facility should be disinfected and
                       cleaned frequently.

                n.     USDOT Regulated waste material to be transported offsite, on public
                       access roads (or otherwise enter commerce), for decontamination shall be
                       packaged, marked, labeled and shipped in compliance with USDOT
                       hazardous materials regulations (49 CFR Parts171-180).


        9.      MECHANICAL METHODS FOR DECONTAMINATION OF
                BIOHAZARDOUS WASTE

                The purpose of this section is to describe mechanical strategies used for
                decontaminating surfaces, items, and areas (laboratories, animal facilities, etc.).
                The basic goal of decontamination is to render an article safe for reuse or
                disposal. In order to eliminate the potential for environmental transmission of a
                biological agent under study/examination to a susceptible host, one or more of the
                requirements for environmental transmission must be disrupted. Environmental
                transmission can occur when the following requirements, also known as the
                “Chain of Transmission,” include:
                •      Presence of agent



                                                13
DR 9630-001                                                                    June 18, 2009


              •      Sufficient virulence of agent
              •      High numbers of agent
              •      Mechanism of transmission from environment to host
              •      Correct portal of entry
              •      Susceptible host

              a.     Mechanical decontamination involves measures to remove, but not
                     necessarily neutralize, an agent. Cleaning is the removal of visible dirt
                     and stains. This includes, but is not limited to:

                     (a)     brushing or vacuuming with a HEPA vacuum
                     (b)     washing or damp mopping with water containing a soap or
                             detergent
                     (c)     flushing water lines

              b.     Precleaning is routinely carried out if the risk of human or animal contact
                     with pathogen-contaminated materials is high and subsequent
                     decontamination is needed. In these cases, precleaning is essential to
                     achieve proper disinfection or sterilization, because dirt and soil can shield
                     microorganisms and can also interfere with the killing action of chemical
                     germicides.

              c.     Many germicidal products are only effective on precleaned items.

              d.     Precleaning must be carried out carefully to avoid exposure to infectious
                     agents.

              e.     Precleaning should only be conducted with materials chemically
                     compatible with the germicides that will be subsequently applied.
                     Because of this, it is common to use the same chemical germicide for
                     precleaning and disinfection.


       10.    PHYSICAL METHODS FOR DECONTAMINATION OF BIOHAZARDOUS
              WASTE
              The purpose of this section is to describe physical strategies used for
              decontaminating surfaces, items, and areas (laboratories, animal facilities, etc.).
              The basic goal of decontamination is to render an article safe for reuse or
              disposal. In order to eliminate the potential for environmental transmission of a
              biological agent under study to a susceptible host, one or more of the
              requirements for environmental transmission must be disrupted. Physical
              decontamination renders the agent harmless through physical means, such as heat,
              ionizing radiation, and ultraviolet (UV) radiation.



                                               14
June 18, 2009                                                                 DR 9630-001


                a.   The most effective method of physical decontamination is steam
                     sterilization (autoclaving). Steam sterilization under pressure is
                     universally used in the conduct of biological research except when steam
                     penetration or heat and moisture damage is a concern. Steam sterilization
                     is considered one of the most dependable systems available for
                     decontaminating laboratory waste and sterilizing laboratory glassware,
                     media, and reagents.

                     Autoclaves are essentially steel pressure vessels that use pressurized
                     steam, usually 15 PSI (1.05 kg/cm2), to achieve a chamber temperature of
                     at least 121°C (250°F), which is effective at inactivating microorganisms
                     and proteinaceous bacterial and plant toxins.
                     The critical factors in ensuring the reliability of this sterilization method
                     are proper temperature and time and the complete replacement of the air
                     with steam (i.e., no entrapment of air). Because of these factors, chamber
                     pressurization requirements increase at higher geographic elevations.

                     Some autoclaves use a steam-activated exhaust valve that remains open
                     during the replacement of air by live steam until the steam triggers the
                     valve to close. Others use a pre-cycle vacuum to remove air prior to steam
                     introduction.

                     (1)    There are three types of autoclave cycles:

                            (a)     The gravity cycle is also known as the “Fast Exhaust”
                                    cycle, and is typically used to decontaminate or sterilize dry
                                    goods, glassware, etc. During this cycle, the chamber
                                    charges with steam and holds it at a set temperature for a
                                    set time; at the end of the cycle, the chamber returns
                                    quickly to atmospheric pressures.

                            (b)     The pre-vacuum cycle is used for decontaminating porous
                                    materials, animal bedding, etc.; in this process, the
                                    autoclave chamber is partially evacuated before steam is
                                    introduced, which facilitates steam penetration throughout
                                    the load.

                            (c)     The liquid cycle is also known as the “Slow exhaust” cycle.
                                    Steam is exhausted slowly at the end of the cycle to prevent
                                    sterilized liquids from boiling over; in this process, liquid
                                    containers must not be overfilled before autoclaving, or
                                    they will boil over and represent a hazard to the operator.

                     (2)    The following procedures must be followed when preparing to
                            place biohazardous materials in an autoclave.




                                              15
DR 9630-001                                                    June 18, 2009


              (a)   Materials that are to be decontaminated should be carried to
                    the autoclave in closed, leak proof containers. Primary
                    containers used during autoclaving include plastic
                    autoclave bags, which are polypropylene bags used to
                    contain materials during decontamination cycles within
                    autoclaves. These bags, also known as "autoclavable bags",
                    come in a wide variety of sizes, shapes and colors, and are
                    available from many laboratory supply houses.

              (b)   Autoclave bags are usually placed in polypropylene or
                    stainless steel pans during decontamination cycles to catch
                    liquids that may drain out of the bag.

              (c)   Autoclave bags should be closed loosely during
                    decontamination to allow steam to penetrate into the
                    bag. It is essential for steam to come in contact with all
                    areas of the load, and steam saturation is required for
                    maximum heat transfer; air pockets or inadequate steam
                    supply will result in incomplete sterilization.

              (d)   Water should be added to the materials that will be
                    decontaminated to facilitate steam contact, but it is
                    necessary to guard against creating infectious aerosols in
                    the process. For safe handling, operators should trickle
                    water down the sides of the container, instead of pouring
                    water directly onto the material in the container or bag. In
                    any case, 250-500 ml of water should be added to the
                    interior of the autoclave bag to facilitate heat transfer to the
                    material being decontaminated, unless the addition of water
                    might create splashing that could facilitate the release of
                    potentially infectious material from the bag.

              (e)   Autoclave bags that are filled in a laboratory should be
                    temporarily placed inside another leak proof and puncture
                    resistant container, which can then be taken to the
                    autoclave. The autoclave bag should be removed from the
                    container, decontaminated in the autoclave and discarded
                    into the appropriate waste container in accordance with all
                    facility policies and State and/or local regulations.

                    1       Secondary containers used during autoclaving can
                            include plastic containers and steel containers.

                    2       Polypropylene is a durable, inexpensive plastic
                            resin that is commonly used to contain material
                            during autoclaving. Polypropylene plastic pans



                              16
June 18, 2009                                                          DR 9630-001


                                     with 6-12 inch sides can withstand autoclaving
                                     without melting and are preferred over polyethylene
                                     and polystyrene pans. When using polypropylene
                                     containers, extra processing time needs to be added
                                     to the autoclave decontamination cycle because
                                     polypropylene does not conduct heat as well as
                                     stainless steel.

                             3       Stainless steel containers are durable and come in a
                                     variety of sizes and shapes, and may reduce
                                     autoclave decontamination cycle processing time
                                     because stainless steel is a good conductor of heat.
                                     Durable stainless steel containers may be the
                                     optimal containers for autoclave decontamination
                                     when waste containment is mandatory.

                (3)   Only adequately-trained personnel should be permitted to operate
                      an autoclave, and laboratory/program supervisors are responsible
                      for providing and documenting autoclave operator training.

                      (a)    Appropriate personal protective equipment is required,
                             including a fully fastened lab coat, heat resistant gloves,
                             eye protection, etc., particularly when unloading the
                             autoclave. Local or area Safety, Health, and Environment
                             staff should be consulted on the purchase of appropriate
                             personal protective equipment.

                      (b)    Autoclave operators should routinely inspect the autoclave
                             components for proper operation, including inspections of
                             autoclave door clamps and seals for signs of wear and
                             damage.

                      (c)    Autoclave operators should ensure that debris from the
                             autoclave chamber floor drain has been removed; if the
                             sieve is blocked with debris, a layer of air may form at the
                             bottom of the autoclave, preventing sufficient heat transfer.
                             If operators find a problem, they should promptly notify the
                             laboratory/program supervisor who will facilitate the repair
                             of the unit. A DAMAGED AUTOCLAVE MUST NOT
                             BE OPERATED UNTIL IT HAS BEEN PROPERLY
                             REPAIRED.

                (4)   Processing times starts after the autoclave is loaded and started and
                      has reached normal operating conditions of 121oC (250oF) and
                      pressures of 15 psi.




                                       17
DR 9630-001                                                          June 18, 2009


                    (a)    Decontamination conditions vary with load type, load
                           volume (loose packed or tightly packed), container type
                           (polypropylene, glass, stainless steel), and the type of
                           material to be decontaminated. Larger loads will typically
                           require more time for complete decontamination.

                    (b)    Sixty minutes are needed to decontaminate lab and medical
                           waste, unless a shorter interval has proven effective by
                           testing with biological indicators. Typically, additional
                           time is required if polypropylene containers are used
                           instead of stainless steel containers.

                    (c)    Ninety minutes are recommended for the decontamination
                           of waste in low sided polypropylene containers with bags
                           half filled and loosely gathered.

                    (d)    A longer processing time (120 minutes or more) may be
                           needed if bags are tightly packed and do not readily permit
                           steam penetration throughout the load.

                    (e)    If the autoclave is equipped to operate at 132oC (270oF), it
                           may be possible to reduce the processing time, if the
                           shorter run times are validated using biological indicators.
                           Typically BIs are placed in the center of the load.

                    (f)    According to the EPA, "Infectious wastes from
                           departments of health care facilities may be rendered
                           noninfectious by subjecting the waste to autoclave
                           temperatures of 121oC (250oF) and 15 minutes of
                           prevacuum of 15 psi for the following dwell times when
                           proper containers are used:"

                           EPA Recommended Decontamination Processing (Dwell)
                           Times:

                           TRASH                         60 Minutes
                           GLASSWARE                     60 Minutes
                           LIQUIDS                       60 Minutes / Gallon
                           ANIMAL CARCASSES              8 Hours
                           ANIMAL BEDDING                8 Hours

              (5)   At the end of a decontamination cycle, the operator must ensure
                    that the pressure in the autoclave chamber is near zero before
                    opening the door. Once this has been verified, the operator should
                    slowly crack open the autoclave door (operator remaining behind
                    the door) and allow the steam to gradually escape from within the



                                     18
June 18, 2009                                                                  DR 9630-001


                            autoclave; opening the autoclave door too quickly may result in
                            glassware breakage and/or steam burns. After materials inside the
                            autoclave have been allowed to cool for 15-30 minutes, they can
                            safely be removed from the autoclave by the operator in
                            conjunction with appropriate PPE.
                     (6)    Newer autoclave models are equipped with an internal printer that
                            records temperature and pressure at pre-determined intervals
                            throughout the autoclave cycle on a receipt-tape. The recorder
                            tape should be removed and taped into the autoclave logbook as a
                            permanent record of autoclave performance.


                b.   Ionizing Radiation is known as a cold sterilization process since
                     sterilization can be achieved at room temperature. There are two
                     technologies currently in use; electron-beam (E-beam) technology or γ-
                     irradiation. Regardless of the method used, the primary means of
                     inactivating organisms is to disrupt DNA chains by secondary energetic
                     species (e.g., free radicals, electrons). The typical dose required for
                     sterilization of bacterial spores is reported as 2.5 megarads.

                     (1)    Gamma Irradiation: Gamma rays, emitted from cobalt-60, are
                            similar in many ways to microwaves and Xrays. Ionizing energy
                            produced by gamma rays penetrates deeply, making it a good fit
                            for products with various densities and packaging types.
                            Processing times tend to be longer as compared to Ebeam
                            technology.

                     (2)    E-beam radiation: a form of ionizing energy, is generally
                            characterized by low penetration and high-dose rates. E-beam
                            irradiation is similar to gamma processing in that it alters various
                            chemical and molecular bonds on contact, including the
                            reproductive cells of microorganisms. Beams produced for e-beam
                            sterilization are concentrated, highly-charged streams of electrons
                            generated by the acceleration and conversion of electricity. Typical
                            medical device sterilization uses high-energy electrons, usually 10
                            million electron volts (10 MeV). This type of E-beam facility has a
                            capacity comparable to a multimillion curie 60cobalt facility.
                            Electron penetration into a product directly correlates to the energy
                            of the electron and the density of the material to be sterilized. In
                            general, E-beam irradiation performs best on low density,
                            uniformly packaged products.

                c.   UV radiation is a form of non-ionizing radiation that has been used as an
                     antimicrobial disinfectant for over 50 years, but its use as a surface and air
                     disinfection method remains limited. The inactivation of microorganisms



                                               19
DR 9630-001                                                                  June 18, 2009


                   from exposure to UV radiation is attributed to photobiochemical reactions
                   that are induced within the microorganism.

                   (1)    Germicidal lamps should have an output of least 40 microwatts per
                          Cm2 at 254 nanometers, and should be monitored frequently to
                          ensure appropriate output. UV bulbs should be cleaned frequently
                          to prevent dust accumulation.

                   (2)    Cellular nucleic acids, DNA and RNA, particularly their
                          pyrimidine bases are especially susceptible to UV radiation and its
                          antimicrobial and mutagenic effects. UV induced damage is
                          caused by the creation of nucleic acid dimers.
                   (3)    Proteins are also affected by UV radiation, but they are typically
                          less sensitive and exhibit a more varied level of damage when
                          compared to nucleic acids.

              c.   Dry Heat/Incineration systems use high-temperature combustion to burn
                   pathological and other medical wastes, and reduce the waste materials to
                   non-combustible ash. A variety of incinerators can be used to incinerate
                   research waste, but controlled air incinerators are most commonly used.
                   Typically these incinerators have a dual chamber configuration that
                   provides two sequential combustion processes, and a stack for venting
                   combustion products/emissions.

                   (1)    For effective incineration, the operator must ensure that the
                          incinerator is in proper working order and that the incinerator is the
                          proper type with a valid operation permit.

                   (2)    Pathological waste or other medical waste is loaded into the
                          primary or lower chamber, where the combustion process begins in
                          an environment which has less than the stoichiometric amount of
                          air required for combustion.

                   (3)    Combustion air enters the primary chamber from beneath the
                          incinerator hearth, below the burning bed of waste. This air is
                          called primary or underfire air. In the primary (starved-air)
                          chamber, the low air-to-fuel ratio dries and facilitates volatilization
                          of the waste, and most of the residual carbon in the ash burns. In
                          these conditions, combustion gas temperatures are a relatively low
                          760o to 980°C (1,400o to 1,800°F).

                   (4)    In the second stage, excess air is added to the volatile gases formed
                          in the primary chamber, which completes the combustion.
                          Secondary chamber temperatures are higher than primary chamber
                          temperatures--typically 980o to 1,095°C (1,800o to 2,000°F), and




                                            20
June 18, 2009                                                                    DR 9630-001


                               sterilization of any remaining infectious particulates will occur
                               within this chamber.

                       (5)     Most modern incinerators include a scrubbing system or other
                               pollution control systems after the secondary chamber to remove
                               particulates and acid gases.

                d.     Alkaline hydrolysis is a process by which complex molecules are broken
                       down into their constituent building blocks by the insertion of ions of
                       water (H2O), H+, and OH- between the atoms of the bonds that held those
                       building bocks together. The process occurs in nature when animal tissues
                       and carcasses are buried in soil of neutral or alkaline pH and in our small
                       intestines after we eat.

                       Alkaline hydrolysis can also be used for disposing of waste biologic
                       tissues and animal carcasses by subjecting the waste to strong alkali and
                       heat under pressure. Alkali, in the form of either sodium or potassium
                       hydroxide solution, or a mixture of both, is used at temperatures ranging
                       from ~100ƒC to 180ƒC and higher for rapid dissolution and then
                       hydrolysis of the proteins into small peptides and amino acids in the form
                       of their sodium or potassium salts. Potassium hydroxide or mixtures of
                       potassium hydroxide and sodium hydroxide are the preferred alkali
                       solutions because of the instability of concentrated (50%) stock solutions
                       of NaOH solutions at temperatures below 20ƒC . The result is a sterile
                       liquid with high biological and chemical oxygen demand, and a crumbly,
                       sterile solid resembling bone.


        11.     CHEMICAL METHODS FOR DECONTAMINATION OF BIOHAZARDOUS
                WASTE
                The purpose of this section is to review the various chemical methods used for
                decontaminating biohazardous wastes or potentially contaminated surfaces.
                Chemical decontamination renders the agent harmless through the use of
                antimicrobial disinfectants or sterilants. Current technologies for chemical
                (antimicrobial) decontamination fall into three categories: liquids, foams and gels,
                and gases and vapors. Liquids are effective against many biological agents when
                applied to hard, nonporous surfaces, but they can cause corrosion to sensitive
                materials. Foams and gels are effective against certain biological contaminants,
                but some can pose a post-decontamination cleanup issue. Gases and vapor
                fumigants are effective for inactivating biological agents under controlled
                environments and conditions, but they involve complex, time-consuming, and
                expensive operations. Gases offer advantages in decontamination, but the
                quantities of certain gases required for room/area decontamination can create
                inherent safety hazards.




                                                 21
DR 9630-001                                                                    June 18, 2009


              Chemical disinfectants are regulated by the EPA under the Federal Insecticide,
              Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) and assigned to the following
              categories:

              •      Sterilizer or Sterilant - will destroy all microorganisms, including bacterial
                     and fungal spores, on inanimate surfaces.
              •      Disinfectant - will destroy or irreversibly inactivate specific viruses,
                     bacteria, and pathogenic fungi, but not bacterial spores.
              •      Hospital Disinfectant - shown to be effective against S. aureus, S.
                     choleresis and P. aeruginosa. It may be effective against M. tuberculosis,
                     pathogenic fungi or other viruses.
              •      Antiseptic - formulated for use on skin or tissue, and does not act as a
                     disinfectant.

              a.     In 1972 Dr. Earl Spaulding classified chemical germicides by levels of
                     disinfection (High, Intermediate and Low). Material Safety Data Sheets,
                     Manufacturer Label Instructions & Claims and other manufacturer’s
                     product information should be available and thoroughly reviewed before
                     using these products to ensure appropriate and safe application.

                     (1)    High-level disinfection kills vegetative microorganisms and
                            inactivates viruses, but may not kill high numbers of bacterial
                            spores. These disinfectants typically are capable of sterilization
                            when the contact time is relatively long (e.g., 6 to 10 hours). As
                            high-level disinfectants, they are used for relatively short periods
                            of time (e.g.,, 10 to 30 minutes). In some cases these chemical
                            germicides are potent sporicides that are classified by the Food and
                            Drug Administration (FDA) as sterilants/disinfectants. They are
                            formulated for use on medical devices, but not on environmental
                            surfaces such as laboratory benches or floors.

                     (2)    Intermediate-level disinfection kills vegetative microorganisms,
                            including Mycobacterium tuberculosis and all fungi, and
                            inactivates most viruses. Chemical germicides used in this
                            procedure often correspond to EPA-approved "hospital
                            disinfectants" that are also "tuberculocidal." They are used
                            commonly in laboratories to disinfect laboratory benches, and are
                            part of the inventory of detergent germicides used for
                            housekeeping.

                     (3)    Low-level disinfection kills most vegetative bacteria (except M.
                            tuberculosis), some fungi, and inactivates some viruses. The EPA
                            approves chemical germicides used in this procedure in the United
                            States as "hospital disinfectants" or "sanitizers."




                                               22
June 18, 2009                                                                DR 9630-001


                b.   Common laboratory disinfectants include alcohols, aldeyhdes, chlorine
                     compounds, iodine and iodophors, phenol and phenolic compounds, and
                     quaternary ammoninum compounds

                     (1)    Alcohols possess many desirable attributes for use as disinfectants
                            or antimicrobials. Many alcohols have a cleansing action and have
                            no residual effects, which can be advantageous in some
                            applications. Their specific activity depends on concentration
                            levels and disinfection conditions. Like many chemical
                            disinfectants, the effectiveness of alcohol as a non-specific
                            antimicrobial disinfectant stems from a range of combined toxic
                            mechanisms, but its primary mode of action is through protein
                            coagulation/denaturation.

                            (a)    Alcohols are bactericidal as well as bacteriostatic against
                                   vegetative forms, and are also effective against fungi and
                                   lipid viruses, but are only moderately effective against
                                   nonlipid viruses, and are completely ineffective against
                                   bacterial spores.

                            (b)    The most commonly used alcohols, ethanol and
                                   isopropanol, are most effective at concentrations of 70% in
                                   water; higher and lower concentrations are less effective
                                   because proteins are not denatured as readily in the absence
                                   of water, so alcohol solutions above 85% are ineffective for
                                   disinfection purposes.

                            (c)    Alcohols are not recommended for use as a surface contact
                                   disinfectant because they evaporate quickly, which
                                   decreases contact time and impedes their penetration of
                                   organic matter.

                            (d)    When disinfecting with alcohols, it is best to clean an
                                   object and then submerge it in alcohol for the
                                   recommended contact time.

                            (e)    Because the most commonly used alcohols (methanol,
                                   ethanol, propanols, propanols and tert-butanol) have
                                   flashpoints lower than 15oC (59oF), proper precautions are
                                   essential when they are used as disinfectants; for instance,
                                   alcohols should never be used around a Bunsen burner or
                                   other open flame.

                     (2)    Aldehydes—including formaldehyde in its gas state and
                            glutaraldehyde in its liquid state—are both good disinfectants.




                                             23
DR 9630-001                                                          June 18, 2009


                    However, aldehydes are toxic, and their practical use in the
                    laboratory for routine disinfection is limited.

                    (a)    Aldehydes are active against vegetative bacteria (including
                           mycobacteria), spores, fungi, and both enveloped and
                           nonenveloped viruses. They remain active in the presence
                           of protein, and their activity levels are only lessened
                           slightly by natural or man-materials or detergents.

                    (b)    Formaldehyde is available as a gas dissolved in a mixture
                           of water and methanol, and as a 37% formaldehyde
                           solution known as formalin. Dissolved in water,
                           formaldehyde is active at 1-8% solutions, and can be used
                           to decontaminate hard surfaces. However, formaldehyde is
                           very irritating at low concentrations (0.1 to 5 ppm), and is
                           classified as a probable carcinogen, so it is used only when
                           necessary to disinfect hard surfaces.

                    (c)    Gluteraldehyde is usually supplied as a 20% solution and
                           requires activation by the addition of an alkaline agent prior
                           to use. The activated product may be kept for about two
                           weeks and should be discarded when turbid.
                           Glutaraldehyde is toxic, irritating, and mutagenic, and
                           should be used only when necessary (i.e., for the
                           decontamination of endoscopes). It is essential to follow
                           the manufacturer’s guidance/label claims when using
                           glutaraldehyde-based products, because there are many
                           different formulations that have been designed for specific
                           uses.

              (3)   Chlorine compounds: The most commonly used and generally
                    effective chlorine based disinfectant is sodium hypochlorite
                    (common household bleach). It is a strong oxidizing agent and
                    therefore can be corrosive to metal. The presence of high
                    concentrations of protein or other organic material can reduce the
                    effectiveness of chlorine products, and dilute hypochlorite solution
                    should be prepared daily to be maximally effective. There are
                    more concentrated sodium hypochlorite solutions available for
                    industrial use, and product information must be followed carefully
                    to determine the proper dilution.

                    (a)    A 1:50 dilution of 5.25% Sodium hypochlorite(e.g.,
                           Clorox® household bleach) with water, supplying 1000
                           ppm available chlorine is very effective as a general
                           laboratory disinfectant.




                                     24
June 18, 2009                                                          DR 9630-001


                      (b)    A 1:10 dilution supplying 5000 ppm available chlorine is
                             effective against spills involving blood or other organic
                             material.

                (4)   Iodine and iodophors are compounds in which the iodine is
                      combined with a solubilizing or carrier agent. They serve as all-
                      purpose disinfectants and have an action similar to that of chlorine
                      products. Like chlorine compounds, the effectiveness of iodine
                      compounds may be diminished in the presence of protein.

                      (a)    The appropriate concentration for iodine-containing
                             products to disinfect work surfaces is 75 ppm available
                             iodine. Concentrations may be much higher for other
                             purposes.

                      (b)    Only those iodophors registered with EPA as hard-surface
                             disinfectants should be used, and the manufacturer's
                             instructions regarding proper dilution and product stability
                             must be closely followed.

                      (c)    Antiseptic iodophors are not suitable for disinfecting
                             devices, environmental surfaces, or medical instruments.

                (5)   Phenolic compounds are active at concentrations of 0.2% to 3%
                      against all forms of vegetative microorganisms, but are not active
                      against spores, and have only limited effectiveness against nonlipid
                      viruses. Most phenolics are active in the presence of large
                      amounts of protein, but are inactivated to some extent by rubber,
                      wood, and plastics. They are not compatible with cationic
                      detergents. In the laboratory, they can be used to disinfect discard
                      jars and surfaces. Many common disinfectants are based on
                      phenol and should be used according to the manufacturer’s
                      recommendations.

                      (a)    Clear phenolics should be used at the highest recommended
                             concentration.

                      (b)    Dilutions should be prepared daily and diluted. Phenolics
                             should not be stored for more than 24 hours.

                      (c)    Precautions must be taken to protect skin and eyes from
                             contact with phenolic substances.

                (6)   Quaternary ammoninum compounds are cationic detergents, active
                      at concentrations of 0.1% - 2%, which are effective against
                      vegetative bacteria, enveloped viruses, and some fungi. They are



                                       25
DR 9630-001                                                                 June 18, 2009


                          less or not effective at inactivating mycobacteria, spores, and non-
                          enveloped viruses, and are inactivated by protein and a variety of
                          natural and plastic materials and soap. Because of this, their
                          laboratory uses are limited; however, they are stable compounds
                          and are non-corrosive to metals. They are usually used for
                          cleaning surfaces and are used extensively in food hygiene
                          laboratories because of their detergent nature. They are non-toxic
                          and harmless to the skin and eyes.

              c.   Only a few gas and vapor chemical sterilants are widely used in
                   biomedical and research institutions, and for other industrial sterilization
                   applications. Gaseous sterilants can be broadly characterized by an
                   alkylation or oxidizing mode of action, and gas/vapor sterilization is only
                   achieved through the successful union of the sterilant and the sterilization
                   process. Many of the gas/vapor methods have a fundamental process
                   sequence of pre-conditioning (temperature, relative humidity, sterilant
                   concentration etc), exposure, and sterilant removal.

                   (1)     Only individuals who are well versed and well trained on the
                          sterilization method, sterilant, and associated hazards should be
                          permitted to conduct decontamination/sterilization operations
                          using these agents. Certain gas-phase water disinfection systems
                          involve the generation of gas onsite, using chemical or
                          electrochemical processes that offer some advantages in terms of
                          removing the requirement for the storage of compressed gases.

                   (2)    Difficulties with some of these systems include measuring the
                          efficiency of the gas-producing reaction, and establishing that the
                          required contact time and concentration gradients are achieved.

                   (3)    Chlorine dioxide (CD), a greenish-yellow gas, is an effective
                          sterilant and powerful oxidizer even at low concentrations of 10–
                          20 mg/L. The EPA registered CD under the FIFRA as a sterilizing
                          agent in 1988. CD reacts with carbohydrates by oxidizing the
                          primary hydroxyl groups to aldehydes and then to carboxylic acids.
                          Oxidation occurs at the double bond with lipids. The effect on
                          peptides and proteins is mainly oxidation, substitution, and
                          addition reactions.

                          (a)     The lethal activity of CD on spores is dependent on
                                  hydration of the spores for optimal activity—a relative
                                  humidity of 50% or higher is optimal for sterilization.

                          (b)     CD is noncarcinogenic, nonflammable, does not deplete
                                  ozone, and is not associated with any serious human
                                  toxicity from either acute or chronic ingestion.


                                            26
June 18, 2009                                                          DR 9630-001




                      (c)    CD is considered a mucous membrane irritant and
                             inhalation of excessive amounts can result in pulmonary
                             edema. The threshold limit value time-weighted average
                             (the period of safe exposure during an 8-hour period) for
                             CD is 0.1 parts per million, which is also the reported odor
                             threshold.

                      (d)    After an area is treated, CD can be converted to sodium
                             sulfate using sodium thiosulfate.

                      (e)    Because of the selective reactivity of CD, materials such as
                             titanium, stainless steel, silicone rubber, ceramics,
                             polyvinyl chloride, and polyethylene are unaffected by
                             exposure to the gas. However, uncoated copper and
                             aluminum are highly affected. In addition, certain
                             formulations of polycarbonates and polyurethanes develop
                             a marked change in color and tensile properties.

                (4)   Ethylene oxide (epoxyethane, ETO) is one of the most widely used
                      alkylating sterilants by the research and biomedical communities.
                      It is a flammable and explosive gas, and is classified as both a
                      mutagen and a carcinogen. The microbicidal activity of ETO is
                      caused by alkylation of sulfhydryl, amino, carboxy, phenolic, and
                      hydroxyl groups in the spore or vegetative cell. The primary
                      mechanism of its bactericidal and sporicidal activity is the reaction
                      of ETO with nucleic acids. ETO is used because of its ability to
                      inactivate most bacteria, molds, yeasts, and viruses, but its use is
                      limited because of the many dangers mentioned. An EPA air
                      permit is required to use ETO under certain circumstances because
                      of air quality emission standards. ETO sterilization should only
                      be conducted in strict compliance with the sterilizer manufacturer’s
                      operating guidelines.

                      (a)    Four parameters affect the ability of ETO to sterilize
                             products: temperature, concentration, humidity and time.

                             1       Most routine sterilization is conducted at 49o to
                                     60oC (120o to 140 oF), but sterilization of
                                     particularly heat sensitive materials is performed at
                                     38o to 40oC (100o to 105o).

                             2       It has been determined that 450 mg/liter is the
                                     minimum ETO concentration required to achieve
                                     sterilization, but most ETO sterilizers use ETO
                                     concentrations of 600 -1,100 mg/liter.



                                       27
DR 9630-001                                                           June 18, 2009




                           3       A relative humidity of 45-75% must be maintained
                                   to achieve sterilization.

                           4       The amount of time required for sterilization is
                                   temperature dependent, taking less than 2 hours at
                                   54oC (130oF) and over 5 hours at 38oC (100oF).

                           5       Since ETO penetrates into porous material and is
                                   absorbed strongly by rubber and many plastics, an
                                   appropriate aeration time is required; in most cases
                                   aeration times of 12 hours or more are utilized.

              (5)   Formaldehyde is widely used by the research and biomedical
                    communities as a fumigant for buildings, rooms, and equipment,
                    and has commonly been used as a gas/vapor decontaminant for
                    enclosed areas. Formaldehyde acts as a decontaminant by
                    denaturing proteins. It is capable of killing microorganisms and
                    detoxifying C. botulinum toxin, but is not effective at inactivating
                    prions, and a formaldehyde concentration of 0.6 g/ft3 is required to
                    kill the rikettsial agent Coxeilla burnetii, the causative agent for Q
                    fever.

                    (a)    Ammonium carbonate/bicarbonate can be used to
                           neutralize formaldehyde gas.

                    (b)    Although formaldehyde vapor is explosive at
                           concentrations between 7.0 and 73.0% by volume in air,
                           these concentrations should not be reached if standard
                           decontamination procedures (using 0.3–0.6 g/ft3 of
                           paraformaldehyde in the presence of 60–90% relative
                           humidity with a minimum contact time of 6 hours) are
                           used.

                    (c)    Although widely used and recommended as a surface and
                           area sterilant, formaldehyde is a safety hazard because it is
                           a carcinogen.

                    (d)    Formaldehyde is also a powerful reducing agent, has
                           limited penetrating ability, and is potentially explosive.
                           Environmental release of formaldehyde is also highly
                           regulated.

                    (e)    Until 1991, paraformaldehyde was registered for
                           decontamination of laboratories and experimental animal
                           facilities. However, all registrations for this use and many



                                      28
June 18, 2009                                                          DR 9630-001


                             of the other uses described above were canceled due to
                             nonpayment of registration maintenance fees by the
                             manufacturer. Currently only those facilities that have
                             applied and received a quarantine exemption from EPA can
                             use paraformaldehyde for laboratory disinfection.

                (6)   Vapor Phase Hydrogen Peroxide (VPHP) has been emerging as a
                      viable alternative for sterilizing biomedical devices and for some
                      industrial applications. Because of its low toxicity, VPHP can
                      provide rapid, low-temperature decontamination that is less
                      hazardous to workers compared to most of the other
                      decontaminants discussed in this section. VPHP can be utilized to
                      decontaminate or sterilize items and equipment that cannot
                      withstand the higher temperatures required in steam sterilization
                      and dry heat. The hydroxyl radical, a strong oxidant, is believed
                      to have microbicidal activity by attacking membrane lipids, DNA,
                      and other essential cell components. The hydrogen peroxide vapor
                      is unstable and degrades through a catalytic process to the nontoxic
                      residues of water vapor and oxygen.

                      (a)    In this cold sterilization process, 35% liquid hydrogen
                             peroxide (300,000 ppm) is vaporized to yield 700–1200
                             ppm.

                      (b)    Small rooms, biological safety cabinets, or other small
                             enclosures (up to 7500 ft3) that can be effectively sealed
                             can be sterilized with existing portable equipment.

                      (c)    Non-portable generating equipment that can decontaminate
                             larger spaces is available, but the initial purchase of one of
                             these systems can be costly.

                (7)   Propylene oxide (epoxy propane) is an alkylating agent that is
                      widely used for industrial applications such as the deinfestation
                      and sterilization of agricultural products, including spices, nuts,
                      and other food products. Propylene oxide hydrolyzes in the
                      presence of moisture to form nontoxic propylene glycol.
                      Propylene glycol vapor is odorless, tasteless, and nonirritating to
                      the respiratory mucosa. The microbicidal mode of action of
                      propylene oxide is the alkylation of DNA guanines, which results
                      in single-strand breaks. β-propiolactone (BPL) is approximately
                      4000 times more active than ETO and 25 times more effective than
                      formaldehyde. The microbiological activity of BPL is caused by
                      alkylation of DNA.




                                       29
DR 9630-001                                                                  June 18, 2009


                            (a)     Although propylene oxide is similar in activity to ETO and
                                    uses similar equipment and cycles, use of this
                                    decontaminant is limited because BPL lacks the ability to
                                    penetrate material, requires a longer processing time, and is
                                    carcinogenic in mice.

                     (8)    Methyl Bromide is a broad spectrum fumigant used to control
                            insects, weeds, rodents, and pathogens. A colorless and odorless
                            gas at room temperature, methyl bromide is normally applied as a
                            liquid under pressure that vaporizes upon release at the point of
                            application. Methyl bromide is produced by direct bromination of
                            methane and by the hydrobromination of methanol. In the United
                            States, methyl bromide is used primarily as a soil fumigant, but it
                            can also be used as a disinfectant, rodenticide, methylating agent,
                            wool degreaser, and in ionization chambers. Methyl bromide is
                            applied into loose soil under plastic sheets or used in space
                            fumigation under tarpaulins, and is also applied to a variety of
                            agricultural commodities in specially designed fumigation
                            chambers.

                            (a)     Worker exposure may result from leaks in the plastic sheets
                                    or the tarpaulin, or from failure to allow adequate time for
                                    the methyl bromide to dissipate following fumigation.

                            (b)     The use of methyl bromide as a pesticide is currently being
                                    phased out in the United States and all other countries,
                                    because of significant scientific evidence that using methyl
                                    bromide contributes to the destruction of the ozone layer.

                            (c)     The use of methyl bromide was completely phased out in
                                    2005, with the exception of certain preshipment and
                                    quarantine uses, and other critical uses where no other
                                    technically or economically feasible alternatives are
                                    available.


       12.    BIOHAZARDOUS WASTE DECONTAMINATION PROCESS VALIDATION

              Validation of the decontamination process ensures that agents of potential harm to
              human, animal or plant health will be killed or inactivated prior to disposal or
              release into the environment. Written procedures are needed to document process
              validation, provide proof of compliance with relevant performance standards, and
              ensure ongoing process performance. Each decontamination process should be
              appropriately validated for the agent(s) to be treated, regardless of the type of
              process.




                                              30
June 18, 2009                                                                DR 9630-001


                a.   Equipment calibration, maintenance and process validation

                     (1)    Autoclaves are a common means of decontamination in USDA
                            facilities. Validation of effectiveness includes monitoring
                            temperature, pressure and cycle duration time for each cycle and
                            providing periodic decontamination challenges (quality assurance),
                            i.e., use of biological indicators.

                            (a)    Autoclaves performance must be verified prior to initial use
                                   and maintained to assure that the temperature sensing
                                   system is accurate, uniform and stable. Annual
                                   rechecks/validation of operation is required.

                            (b)    Validation of autoclave temperature and pressure using
                                   thermocouples placed in various locations of the autoclave
                                   chamber should be performed annually to assess the
                                   temperature uniformity and gauge accuracy. Perform
                                   verifications for temperature and time daily using
                                   appropriate chemical indicators.

                            (c)    Routinely conduct sterility validations using biological
                                   indicators (i.e., spore vials or strips). Use a microorganism
                                   that has a proven resistance to steam sterilization, such as
                                   Geobacillus stearothermophillus. Validation frequency
                                   should be determined by autoclave usage and load types;
                                   weekly or bimonthly for each load type is typically
                                   preferred.

                            (d)    Some laboratories may choose to conduct more frequent
                                   autoclave monitoring/validation using biological and
                                   chemical indicators.

                            (e)    Laboratory/research programs that use a particular
                                   autoclave should maintain a logbook to record autoclave
                                   usage. The logbook should be available for inspection by
                                   USDA safety representatives and other authorities. The log
                                   should contain the following information:
                                   •      date of treatment
                                   •      quantity and type of waste autoclaved
                                   •      method/condition of treatment
                                   •      name of autoclave operator

                            (f)    Quality assurance for autoclaves also includes:

                                   1      ensuring that the appropriate containers are being
                                          selected for the waste that is being decontaminated


                                             31
DR 9630-001                                                          June 18, 2009




                           2       providing odor control when necessary

                           3       providing personnel training for the operation of an
                                   autoclave

              (2)   Hot air sterilizing ovens, other heat sterilizing equipment and
                    rendering processes should be validated for intended use. The
                    same general principles involved with autoclave process validation
                    can be used with these types of equipment as well.

              (3)   Incineration processes used for burning medical and veterinary
                    pathological waste ensure that most biological agents do not
                    survive the process. Risk assessments should be done to ensure
                    that the type of incineration process selected meets acceptable
                    criteria for the target agent:

              (4)   Vapor and gas systems should be calibrated and the process
                    validated before use. The validation should include verification of
                    efficacy and uniformity across the area to be treated (room or
                    chamber). Annual performance checks should be performed. Each
                    run should monitor the relevant parameters (Temperature, Relative
                    Humidity, Vapor/Gas concentration) and verified for effectiveness
                    using biological indicators, recommended by the equipment
                    manufacturer. Biological indicators should be utilized to verify the
                    effectiveness of ethylene oxide, formaldehyde (Bacillus
                    atrophaeus and/or Geobacillus stearothermophillus ), or vaporized
                    Hydrogen Peroxide processes (Geobacillus stearothermophillus).

              (5)   Ionizing Radiation treatment. Should be validated using the
                    biological indicator, Bacillus pumilus. The appropriate load size
                    must be considered to assure that radiation penetration is achieved.
                    Penetration is dependant on the technology used (i. e., Gamma
                    radiation or E Beam) and size, volume and density of the load.

              (6)   Alkaline Hydrolysis. This method used primarily for carcass
                    disposal/decontamination may utilize a similar validation process
                    to steam sterilization. Each run should monitor the relevant
                    parameters such as time, temperature, pressure, and alkalinity. In
                    many cases Standard biological indicators used for steam
                    sterilization could be used. The process results in the formation of
                    an alkaline (pH 10.3-11.5) aqueous residue with a high BOD
                    (biological oxygen demand, 50.000-75.000 mg/l) and a higher
                    COD (chemical oxygen demand, up to 100.000 mg/l).




                                     32
June 18, 2009                                                                 DR 9630-001


                     (7)    Chemical Disinfectants. EPA and the states (usually that state's
                            agriculture office) register or license pesticides for use in the
                            United States. EPA receives its authority to register pesticides
                            under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act
                            (FIFRA). More than 5000 antimicrobial products are currently
                            registered with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
                            and sold in the marketplace. Nearly 60% of antimicrobial products
                            are registered to control infectious microorganisms in hospitals and
                            other health care environments. Additional guidance needed for
                            antimicrobials can be found in the links for efficacy test guidelines,
                            antimicrobial policy questions, and other antimicrobial guidance.
                            See specific antimicrobial laws and guidance documents below:

                            (a)    Registration Policy Documents - list of policy and guidance
                                   documents to assist in registering or understanding
                                   antimicrobial products
                                   (http://www.epa.gov/oppad001/regpolicy.htm

                            (b)    Disinfectant Technical Science Section (DIS/TSS)
                                   Documents - for determining efficacy data requirements,
                                   label claims, and in some cases testing requirements
                                   (http://www.epa.gov/oppad001/sciencepolicy.htm )

                b.   Chemical process validation indicators

                     (1)    Chemical color change indicators for steam autoclaves change
                            color after being exposed to normal autoclave operating
                            temperatures of 121oC (250oF) for a few minutes, and provide a
                            quick visual reference for heat penetration inside the load.
                            Chemical indicators should be positioned near the center of each
                            load, and toward the bottom front of the autoclave. Most chemical
                            indicators can only be used to verify that the autoclave has reached
                            normal operating temperature for decontamination, 121oC (250oF).
                            Chemical indicators alone are not designed or intended to prove
                            that organisms are actually killed during a decontamination cycle.

                            Chemical indicators are manufactured by many companies and
                            come in a wide variety of sizes, shapes, and colors. They can be
                            purchased from the manufacturers of sterilization equipment,
                            biosafety suppliers and lab supply distributors. In addition to
                            chemical indicators for steam sterilization, a variety of chemical
                            indicators (color change) are available to monitor other
                            decontamination processes, such as vaporized Hydrogen Peroxide,
                            formaldehyde, etc. These indicators will verify
                            exposure/concentration of decontaminating agent(s); however




                                              33
DR 9630-001                                                                 June 18, 2009


                          additional indicators should also be employed to verify the
                          effectiveness of the process.

                   (2)    Tape indicators are adhesive backed paper tape with heat sensitive,
                          chemical indicator markings. Commonly used heat sensitive
                          markings include diagonal stripes (autoclave tape), and/or the word
                          "sterile." These markings only appear when the tape has been
                          exposed to normal autoclave decontamination temperatures. Tape
                          indicators can only be used to verify that the autoclave is reaching
                          normal operating temperatures for decontamination, 121oC
                          (250oF); they have no time factor. Tape indicators alone are not
                          designed or intended to prove that organisms have actually been
                          killed.

                          Tape indicators should be used on all material decontaminated by
                          autoclaving to show that the material has been processed. A three
                          to four inch length of autoclave tape placed on the outside of the
                          autoclave pan, bag, or individual container is sufficient for visual
                          inspection by the operator.
              c.   Biological process indicators

                   Biological indicator systems are designed to demonstrate that a
                   decontamination method is capable of killing microorganisms that have
                   shown resistance to that particular method. For example Geobacillus
                   stearothermophilus spores have typically been used to monitor the
                   effectiveness of steam sterilization equipment (autoclaves).

                   Typical biological indicator systems used to validate steam sterilization
                   consist of a vial with spore strips or a small glass ampoule of growth
                   medium with spores and indicator dye. The manufacturers' instructions
                   for use must be followed when using biological indicators for validations.

              d.   Physical indicators of process validation should be included in the
                   protocols to validate sterilization processes. These include:
                   •      thermocouples
                   •      maximum registry thermometers
                   •      temperature recorders, and
                   •      time-temperature sensors and software.

              e.   Quality controls for sterilization process validation include the following:

                   (1)    Each run or process should be traceable back to equipment or
                          process by date, time, operator, and run identifier. This provides
                          verification that each run was performed with equipment that was
                          properly calibrated and maintained.



                                            34
June 18, 2009                                                                    DR 9630-001


                       (2)     Data should be maintained to ensure the effective verification of
                               each process.

                       (3)     Working thermometers, thermocouples or other equipment used
                               for calibrations and verifications of decontamination/sterilization
                               process should be calibrated traceable to recognized national or
                               international calibration units against a national or international
                               reference thermometer.

                       (4)     Environmental monitoring of equipment or work areas by
                               swabbing the work areas and testing for the analyte(s) or
                               contaminant of interest will ensure that treatments are effective.

                       (5)     Equipment maintenance records and run logs should be maintained
                               to document maintenance, malfunctions and routine use.

                       (6)     Documentation of run or load information and effectiveness of
                               treatments should be maintained. Records should be retained
                               according to Federal, State and local regulation or requirements, as
                               well as facility or program requirements.


        13.     USDA PROCEDURES FOR PROTECTING EMPLOYEES FROM
                BIOHAZARDOUS WASTE

                Biohazardous waste operations can be divided into four major categories:
                generation, packaging, transport, and disposal. Supervisors should perform a Job
                Hazard Analysis of all new tasks or new biohazard associated with biohazardous
                waste related operations to assess whether these tasks can be safely executed by
                new or existing employees. The Job Hazard Analysis should be performed in
                accordance with guidance provided by OSHA at www.osha.gov, including
                Bulletin 3071, Job Hazard Analysis. A Job Hazard Analysis identifies high-risk
                tasks, analyzes the tasks to identify hazards, and determines methods to control
                the hazards.

                Biological Risk Assessment is similar to Job Hazard Analysis, but is focused on
                biological hazards. Section II, “Biological Risk Assessment,” in the 5th edition of
                Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories (BMBL) outlines an
                approach for conducting a biological risk assessment, which includes:
                •      identifying agent hazards
                •      identifying lab procedure hazards
                •      determining appropriate biosafety levels
                •      evaluating staff safety proficiency
                •      reviewing the risk assessment with subject matter experts as appropriate.




                                                 35
DR 9630-001                                                               June 18, 2009


              The BMBL should be referenced for complete details
              http://www.cdc.gov/od/ohs/biosfty/bmbl5/bmbl5toc.htm. The following table is a
              sample Job Hazard Analysis format that can be used to assess all the risks of a
              task before initiation.




                                             36
June 18, 2009                                                                  DR 9630-001


                                    Job Hazard Analysis Format Table




                a.   Biohazardous waste generation. Generation of biohazardous waste may
                     result from a number of activities, including but not limited to animal
                     necropsy, potentially-infectious sample collection, sample preparation,
                     sample analysis, animal waste collection, infectious article collection (e.g.,
                     contaminated laundry), infectious waste receptacle collection (e.g., waste
                     sharps containers), spill clean-up, and mechanical equipment operation.

                b.   Biohazardous waste packaging. Once biohazardous waste is generated, it
                     may need to be packaged or otherwise contained in preparation for
                     disposal. The packaging process may involve a number of activities,
                     including but not limited to moving, containing, packaging and/or
                     decontamination/disinfection of biohazardous waste/waste containers, and
                     cleaning up spills.

                     (1)    If the disposal/treatment unit is located within the containment
                            area, little or no packaging may be required.

                     (2)    If the disposal/treatment unit is located outside the containment
                            area (whether onsite or offsite), the waste will need to be packaged
                            (if small articles) or contained (if liquid or bulk solid materials) in
                            accordance with Section 15 - Security.



                                               37
DR 9630-001                                                                June 18, 2009


                   (3)    The exterior of the package or container will then need to be
                          disinfected prior to removal from the containment area using a
                          disinfectant appropriate for the biological agent(s).

              c.   Biohazardous waste transport. Whether the biohazardous waste is to be
                   disposed onsite or offsite, the waste will need to be taken to a treatment
                   site. The activities associated with transport include, but are not limited
                   to, collecting biohazardous waste containers and/or articles, placing the
                   waste/waste containers/biohazardous articles in vehicles, driving transport
                   vehicles, pushing hand carts, guiding self-propelled equipment, cleaning
                   up spills, decontaminating items, and unloading waste/waste
                   containers/biohazardous articles into disposal units.

                   (1)    The treatment site may be a nearby autoclave within the work area,
                          and transport may simply involve transporting the leak proof, sharp
                          resistant waste container to the decontamination/treatment unit for
                          processing.

                   (2)    If the disposal unit is located outside the work area or laboratory,
                          whether onsite or offsite, the packaged or contained waste will
                          need to be transported in a secure manner to avoid releasing the
                          biological agent(s) to the environment. Check with federal, state
                          and local requirements applicable to waste packaging or containers
                          for transport.

              d.   When biohazardous waste is delivered to the disposal site, the waste may
                   be staged temporarily prior to processing.

                   (1)    If the disposal site is offsite, and the waste is transported in
                          relatively small packages or containers which are sealed and
                          disinfected, then temporary staging should pose few risks as long
                          as the staging site is secured.

                   (2)    In some cases, as with necropsy or pathological waste, the material
                          may need to be placed in controlled environments (cold/freezer
                          rooms or refrigerators) prior to decontamination and final disposal.

                   (3)    If the packages or containers are unsealed in the staging area, the
                          area must meet appropriate biocontainment standards according to
                          the risk and planned manipulations, and disposal unit operators
                          must use appropriate practices and protective equipment.

              e.   Biohazardous waste disposal. Tasks associated with biohazardous waste
                   disposal may include, but are not limited to, moving waste items, loading
                   waste items into treatment units, using heavy equipment or forklifts,




                                            38
June 18, 2009                                                                   DR 9630-001


                     operating disposal units, disinfecting premises and equipment, disposing
                     of treatment by-products and sampling media, and cleaning up spills.

                     (1)    The disposal process will pose few risks if the packages or
                            containers are disposed of with the waste and the seals remain
                            unbroken, assuming the disposal process meets biocontainment
                            standards.

                     (2)    If the packages or containers are unsealed prior to disposal, then
                            the disposal facility must meet appropriate biocontainment
                            standards according to the risk and planned manipulations, and
                            disposal unit operators must use appropriate practices and
                            protective equipment.

                f.   Physical hazards of biohazardous waste operations:

                     (1)    Potential physical hazards while performing the tasks discussed in
                            the previous section include ergonomic issues associated with
                            heavy lifting and associated body strains; temperature extremes;
                            slips, trips, and falls; contact with sharps; contact with poisonous
                            plants, animals, and/or insects, including animal bites; injury from
                            mechanical equipment; electrical noise hazards; explosions; and
                            compressed gases.

                     (2)    The potential consequences of unmitigated physical hazards
                            include strains, sprains, fractures, loss of limbs, death, lacerations,
                            contusions, electrocution, burns, hearing loss, blindness,
                            hypothermia, heat stress, and skin irritation.

                g.   Chemical hazards of biohazardous waste operations

                     (1)    Potential chemical hazards during biohazardous waste operations
                            could arise from chemicals used during sample preparation and
                            analysis, decontamination, spill clean-up, equipment operation, and
                            waste treatment.

                     (2)    Chemical exposures can occur by dermal contact, absorption
                            through mucous membranes, injection, inhalation, or ingestion.

                     (3)    The consequences of such exposures vary depending on chemical
                            type and concentration, how it was used, and environmental
                            conditions during its use. Possible effects of chemical exposure
                            include burns, poisoning, acute symptoms, cancer, reproductive
                            effects, mutations, birth defects, death, environmental
                            contamination, fire and explosion.




                                              39
DR 9630-001                                                                 June 18, 2009


                   (4)    Chemical suppliers are required to provide Material Safety Data
                          Sheets (MSDS) for the materials they sell, which contain
                          information about how to prevent and treat specific chemical
                          exposures; these should be reviewed prior to using the chemical.

              h.   Biological hazards of biohazardous waste operations. Biological hazards
                   are likely to be present during biohazardous waste operations. The
                   severity of the hazard depends on the specific agent, the concentration of
                   the agent in the exposure medium, the health of the exposed individual,
                   route of transmission, and many other factors.

                   (1)    Exposure can occur through dermal contact, mucous membrane
                          absorption, injection, inhalation, or ingestion, and can result in
                          infection, intoxication, or transmission of infection to others hosts
                          via fomites or other routes.

                   (2)    Depending on the agent, an infection with a human or zoonotic
                          pathogen, or intoxication by a biological toxin, can cause varying
                          levels of morbidity and mortality.

                   (3)    Released agricultural pathogens which are not transmitted to
                          humans may cause economic, trade and environmental impacts if
                          transmitted to a susceptible host.

              i.   Radiation (ionizing/non-ionizing) hazards of biohazardous waste
                   operations. Ionizing radiation refers to alpha, beta, gamma, and neutral
                   particles that can cause tissue damage by the ionization of cellular
                   components. Non-ionizing radiation refers to UV, visible light, infrared,
                   and microwaves that cause injury to tissue by thermal or photochemical
                   means. Radiation hazards may be encountered during any phase of
                   biohazardous waste operations if radiation sources are present in the work
                   area, the waste or as part of the decontamination operation.

                   (1)    Exposure to radiation can occur through dermal exposure,
                          inhalation, or ingestion, depending on the type of radiation, the
                          proximity to the source, and the duration of exposure.

                   (2)    Radiation exposure in humans can result in cancer, reproductive
                          effects, burns, and death.

              j.   Hazard controls for biohazardous waste. Hazard controls can be grouped
                   into three categories: 1) engineering controls; 2) administrative controls;
                   and 3) personal protective equipment (PPE). In general, engineering
                   controls are preferred to administrative controls or PPE because
                   engineering controls are typically mechanized or structural, and therefore
                   less subject to failure due to human error.



                                            40
June 18, 2009                                                              DR 9630-001




                A detailed Job Hazard Analysis must be performed by a person
                experienced in hazard analysis for each biohazardous waste disposal
                operation task prior to initiating the task in order to select the appropriate
                hazard controls for each situation.

                (1)    Engineering Controls include:

                       (a)     designing the facility, equipment, or process to remove the
                               hazard
                       (b)     substituting a hazard with a non or lesser hazard
                       (c)     enclosing the hazard using physical barriers
                       (d)     isolating the hazard with interlocks, machine guards, or
                               other means
                       (e)     removing or redirecting the hazard with local or exhaust
                               ventilation.

                (2)    Engineering controls that can be used to control the hazards
                       associated with biohazardous waste disposal operations include:

                       (a)     biological safety cabinets;
                       (b)     air locks and directional airflow;
                       (c)     chemical fume hoods;
                       (d)     process containment (glove boxes);
                       (e)     ergonomic equipment;
                       (f)     assistive devices (remote operations); and
                       (g)     protective barriers (enclosed containers, safety centrifuge
                               cup).

                       A summary of practices, engineering controls and facilities
                       (secondary barriers) may be found in the HHS (CDC/NIH)
                       publication, Biosafety in Microbiology and Biomedical
                       Laboratories (BMBL), 5th edition located at
                       http://www.cdc.gov/od/ohs/biosfty/bmbl5/bmbl5toc.htm
                       Recommended sections are Section IV, Table 1 “Summary of
                       recommended biosafety levels for infectious agents” and Section
                       V, Table 1 “Summary of recommended biosafety levels for
                       activities in which experimentally or naturally infected vertebrate
                       animals are used.

                       Additional guidance on engineering controls and facilities may be
                       found in Chapters 7, 9, and 10 of The ARS Facilities Design
                       Standard, Manual 242.1 -ARS.

                (3)    Administrative controls include:

                       (a)     safe work practices


                                          41
DR 9630-001                                                         June 18, 2009


                    (b)    written standard operating procedures (SOPs),
                    (c)    work permits
                    (d)    exposure time limitations
                    (e)    environmental monitoring
                    (f)    alarms, signs, and warnings
                    (g)    the buddy system
                    (h)    training.

              (4)   Some specific administrative controls applicable to the hazards
                    identified for biohazardous waste disposal operations include:

                    (a)    Restricted access areas
                    (b)    Security features (door locks, electronic entry devices)
                    (c)    Shower-out facilities and contaminant reduction zones
                           (containment or max containment facilities)
                    (d)    SOPs
                    (e)    Training
                    (f)    Signage

              (3)   Personal Protective Equipment

                    Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) is a type of primary barrier
                    worn by the employee, and should only be used if engineering and
                    administrative controls do not provide sufficient protection. PPE
                    includes gloves, lab coats, coveralls, gowns, shoe covers, boots,
                    respirators, face shields, safety glasses, goggles, and hearing
                    protection. The sections referenced within the BMBL 5th edition
                    provided in section 13, j(2)g of this manual provide guidance on
                    PPE appropriate to the various biosafety levels (BSL) and animal
                    biosafety levels (ABSL).

                    PPE must be carefully selected based on the specific hazards and
                    conditions identified in the Job Hazard Analysis. Comfort should
                    also be considered to ensure maximum compliance with PPE
                    requirements. Below is a list of PPE categories with associated
                    selection considerations which may be applicable to biohazardous
                    waste disposal operations.

                    (a)    Head protection – hard hats should be used in the presence
                           of operational heavy equipment, or if the possibility exists
                           that falling objects could strike and injure employees or
                           visitors at the worksite. Chemical-resistant head coverings
                           are recommended if the potential exists for dermal contact
                           with skin irritants; if so, PPE providing head protection
                           must prevent dermal contact with the hazardous substance.




                                     42
June 18, 2009                                                     DR 9630-001


                (b)   Eye protection – Appropriate eye protection (safety
                      goggles, glasses, and face shield) must be worn if
                      chemicals, pathogens, dust, particles, or flying objects may
                      be present. The material and type of the eye protection
                      must be carefully selected to ensure resistance to the
                      specific hazards at the worksite.

                (c)   Hand protection – gloves must be selected based on the
                      expected hazard. Many safety equipment suppliers have
                      charts showing recommended hand protection for various
                      hazards; material should be selected to ensure the gloves
                      will not be compromised by tears or otherwise damaged
                      upon contact with the hazardous substance.

                (d)   Respiratory protection – the respirator must be selected
                      based on the type and concentration of the breathing
                      hazard, the fit-test results for the wearer, and suitability for
                      the task. Employees wearing respirators must be enrolled
                      in a Respiratory Protection Program in accordance with
                      OSHA requirements.

                (e)   Foot protection – foot protection must be selected based on
                      the type of hazard. Steel-toed or similar shoes are required
                      where heavy items may fall, and additional protection is
                      required when metal drums are handled. Boot or shoe
                      covers may be required to prevent tracking of contaminants
                      from one area to another, and must be slip resistant and
                      impervious to damage from chemical hazards. In
                      laboratory environments, open toed-shoes (sandals, etc.)
                      shall not be worn by employees or visitors.

                (f)   Hearing protection – hearing protection must be selected
                      based on the noise level at the worksite and in accordance
                      with OSHA standards.

                (g)   Skin/clothing protection – protective clothing must be
                      selected based on a risk assessment which considers the
                      type of work to be performed, the nature of the hazards to
                      be encountered, and resistance to break through/penetration
                      of biological hazards or chemical hazards in the worksite.
                      All protective clothing is either disposed of in the work
                      area or decontaminated and laundered by the institution or
                      decontaminated at the facility and laundered by a
                      vendor/contractor who has been made aware of any
                      potential risks. Home laundering of protective clothing is
                      prohibited.



                                43
DR 9630-001                                                         June 18, 2009




              (4)   Medical monitoring and other medical issues

                    Section VII of BMBL, “Occupational Health and
                    Immunoprophylaxis,” discusses occupational health/medical
                    monitoring in detail. This section provides a summary of the
                    BMBL information as it pertains to biohazardous waste issues.
                    The BMBL should be consulted for complete guidance on these
                    issues.

                    As discussed earlier in this section, each job task should undergo a
                    Job Hazard Analysis. The analysis will identify specific risks,
                    some of which may require the services of a occupational health
                    provider. These medical services must comply with OSHA
                    regulations, patient confidentiality laws (i.e. HIPPA), and the
                    Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. Occupational medical
                    services may be provided through in-house, contracted or
                    community based professionals, as long as the service is readily
                    available and allows timely and appropriate medical evaluation and
                    treatment. The medical provider must be knowledgeable about the
                    nature of potential health risks in the biohazardous waste work
                    environment and have access to expert consultation.

                    Medical support services for USDA facilities should be evaluated
                    annually. Joint annual reviews of occupational injury and illness
                    reports by healthcare providers and environmental health and
                    safety representatives can facilitate the revision of exposure
                    prevention strategies to minimize the occupational health hazards
                    that cannot be eliminated.

                    (a)    Preplacement Medical Evaluations should be considered
                           for workers who may be exposed to human pathogens,
                           zoonotic pathogens, toxins, hazardous chemicals, physical
                           hazards and ionizing radiation during the course of their
                           work.

                    (b)    Healthcare providers should be cognizant of potential
                           hazards associated with biohazardous waste handling or
                           decontamination operations.

                    (c)    Information from the job hazard analysis and individual
                           history that should be obtained by the occupational health
                           providers should include:
                           •       a description of the requirements for the position;
                           •       potential health hazards present in the work
                                   environment;


                                     44
June 18, 2009                                                  DR 9630-001


                      •      worker’s previous and ongoing medical problems;
                      •      current medications;
                      •      allergies to medicines, animals, and other
                             environmental proteins;
                      •      prior immunizations; and
                      •      pre-existing medical records, if needed.

                (d)   Healthcare provider responsibilities include the following:
                      •      identify needed medical services based on job
                             requirements.
                      •      Provide fitness for duty examinations/consultation
                      •      evaluate individual’s vulnerability to exposure to
                             potential job-related hazards (e.g.,, immunodeficient
                             workers, workers of reproductive age)
                      •      establish optional serologic documentation that
                             individual workers have pre-existing immunity to
                             specific infections
                      •      evaluate clearance for respirator use, if applicable.

                (e)   Periodic medical evaluations or medical clearances targeted
                      to job requirements may be warranted for respirator use or
                      for workers with substantial risk of exposure to infectious
                      agents to detect pre-clinical or sub-clinical evidence for an
                      occupationally acquired infection. Refer to previous
                      section for information related to healthcare provider
                      capabilities, information for healthcare provider, and
                      healthcare provider responsibilities.

                (f)   Medical support for occupational illnesses and injuries
                      should be provided in the following circumstances:
                      •      to any worker experiencing symptoms they suspect
                             may be related to infectious agents, toxins or other
                             biohazards in their work area.
                      •      to workers or visitors to worksites containing
                             biohazards who experience unexplained illness

                (g)   Healthcare providers must possess the following attributes:
                      •      a working understanding of the biohazards present
                             in the workplace
                      •      an ability to identify subtle evidence of infection
                             and atypical presentations
                      •      an ability to maintain close working relationship
                             with employee’s research or clinical program
                      •      a willingness to interact closely with employee and
                             the employee’s supervisor to facilitate adequate
                             medical management and recordkeeping.


                                45
DR 9630-001                                                   June 18, 2009




              (h)   Employees are responsible for reporting all occupational
                    injuries, including exposures to biological hazards, to the
                    appropriate supervisor/line management and medical
                    support services providers

              (i)   Employers are responsible for the following:
                    •     Preparing emergency response plan in advance (see
                          Section 13 (j)(6) “Emergency Response” for
                          additional information)
                    •     Training employees on biohazard response plans
                    •     Providing all necessary tools and equipment to
                          execute biohazard response plans
                    •     Providing wound-cleansing facilities and first aid
                          supplies near work area
                    •     Eliminating barriers to medical evaluation and
                          treatment
                    •     Maintaining SOPs near work areas that include
                          printed summaries of recommended medical
                          responses to specific exposures that can be used to
                          guide immediate responses in the work place and
                          for the reference of the facility treating the injured
                          worker
                    •     Consider collecting and storing a serum specimen
                          prior to the initiation of work when occupational
                          exposure to human or zoonotic pathogens is a risk.
                          The sample can be used to establish baseline sero-
                          reactivity, should additional blood samples be
                          collected for serological testing subsequent to a
                          recognized or suspected exposure.
                    •     Providing applicable workers’ compensation claim
                          form(s) with instructions for completion
                    •     Obtaining a description of accidents or incidents,
                    •     Confirming the circumstances of injuries or
                          exposures
                    •     Distributing report to all other relevant parties, such
                          as the safety professional.
                    •     Evaluating initial job hazard analysis/risk
                          assessments and modify procedures if necessary to
                          prevent recurrence of the incident.

              (j)   Healthcare provider(s) are responsible for:

                    1      providing descriptions of the injury, including:
                           •      identification of potential infectious agent or
                                  biohazard.


                              46
June 18, 2009                                                        DR 9630-001


                                 •        mechanism and route of exposure
                                          (percutaneous, splash to mucous membranes
                                          or skin, aerosol, etc.)
                                 •        the time and place of the incident
                                 •        personal protective equipment used at the
                                          time of the injury
                                 •        prior first aid provided (e.g.,, nature and
                                          duration of cleaning and other aid, time that
                                          lapsed from exposure to treatment)
                                 •        aspects of the worker’s personal medical
                                          history relevant to risk of infection or
                                          complications from treatment

                            2    Repeating first aid if the initial adequacy is in
                                 question

                            3    Using appropriate barrier precautions to avoid
                                 exposure to infectious agents and toxins

                            4    Administering post-exposure prophylaxis, if
                                 applicable

                            5    Consulting with subject matter experts if needed

                            6    carefully explaining the clinical risk assessment and
                                 treatment decision process

                            7    Addressing the worker’s questions

                            8    Providing relevant, preprinted educational materials
                                 if available

                            9    Providing prompt treatment

                            10   Providing treatment plan for employee to follow

                            11   Performing post-exposure serologic testing if
                                 appropriate, and ensuring tests are administered at
                                 appropriate time intervals after exposure

                            12   Compare post-exposure serologic testing with
                                 baseline and over time, as appropriate.

                (5)   Vaccines




                                     47
DR 9630-001                                                         June 18, 2009


                    Section VII of BMBL, “Occupational Health and
                    Immunoprophylaxis,” discusses immunoprophylaxis (vaccines) in
                    detail. This section summarizes information from the BMBL as it
                    applies to biohazardous waste issues.

                    (a)    This section applies to employees who are occupationally
                           exposed to infectious agents

                    (b)    Employers have the following responsibilities for ensuring
                           their employees are properly vaccinated:

                           1      In accordance with the Advisory Committee on
                                  Immunization Practices, provide commercial
                                  vaccines on a voluntary basis to workers
                                  occupationally exposed to infectious agents
                                  (recommendations found at www.cdc.gov).

                           2      Provide current, applicable vaccine information
                                  statements whenever a vaccine is administered.

                           3      Evaluate each worker’s immunization history for
                                  completeness and currency at the time of
                                  employment and re-evaluate when the individual is
                                  assigned job responsibilities with a new biohazard.

                           4      Consider using vaccines or immune serum
                                  preparations that are investigational or as an off-
                                  label use only when occupational exposure to
                                  highly pathogenic agents is possible and no
                                  commercial vaccine is available; this must be
                                  accompanied by adequate informed consent and in
                                  accordance with Investigational New Drug
                                  protocols.

              (6)   Emergency Response

                    In order to ensure adequate post-exposure emergency response, an
                    emergency response plan must be developed in advance of an
                    emergency. The emergency response plan should include the
                    following exposure-specific information:

                    •      Appropriate first aid
                    •      Potential post-exposure prophylaxis options, applicability,
                           and limitations
                    •      Recommended diagnostic tests
                    •      Sources of expert medical evaluation


                                     48
June 18, 2009                                                                   DR 9630-001


                              •       Procedures for exposures that occur outside of regular work
                                      hours

                              These protocols should be distributed to potential healthcare
                              providers (e.g., local hospital emergency departments). In some
                              cases, the protocols should be reviewed with state and community
                              public health departments.

                       (7)    Training

                              (a)     Training may take the form of individual instruction, group
                                      seminars, audiovisual presentations, handout material, or
                                      any other format that communicates safe handling and
                                      hazard awareness to the employee.

                              (b)     Prospective workers should be educated about the
                                      biohazards to which they may be occupationally exposed,
                                      the types of exposures that place their health at risk, the
                                      nature and significance of such risks, the appropriate first
                                      aid and follow up for potential exposures, and how to
                                      report exposures or suspected exposures.

                              (c)     This information should be reinforced annually, as well as
                                      at the time of any significant change in job responsibility
                                      and following recognized and suspected exposures.
                              (d)     Emergency incident training and drills should be provided
                                      on a regular basis for all affected employees. The training
                                      should include the contents and use of the Emergency
                                      Response Plan.

                              (e)     Training must be provided at the time of an employee's
                                      initial assignment to a work area where known biohazards
                                      are present, and prior to an assignment involving new
                                      exposure situations. Employees must receive periodic
                                      refresher information and training as new information
                                      becomes available.

                              (f)     All training must be documented.


          14. ENVIRONMENTAL DISPOSAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR BIOHAZARDOUS
              WASTE

                The purpose of this section is to provide information on environmental regulatory
                issues as they relate to the disposal of biohazardous waste. Many different
                activities within USDA generate biohazardous waste. Some of the components in


                                                49
DR 9630-001                                                                   June 18, 2009


              these wastes can be detrimental to human health, livestock (animals), plants
              and/or the environment if not properly managed.

              It is USDA policy to follow all Federal, State, or local laws and regulations
              regarding biohazardous waste. If standards vary, the more stringent requirement
              should apply.

              a.     Responsibilities

                     (1)     Laboratory managers and supervisors are responsible for proper
                             biohazardous waste disposal procedures and for training
                             employees in these procedures.

                     (2)     All laboratory employees are responsible for following proper
                             biohazardous waste disposal procedures.

                     (3)     The EPA does not generally regulate biohazardous waste.
                             Exceptions include Clean Air Act regulations for medical waste
                             incinerators and chemical treatment systems, biotechnology
                             products such as bioremediation microorganisms regulated under
                             the Toxic Substance Control Act, and biopesticides regulated
                             under FIFRA.

                     (4)     Although there are no Federal EPA requirements for the
                             management and disposal of biohazardous waste, most States do
                             regulate biohazardous waste streams. Additionally, States with
                             EPA approved programs have authority over medical waste
                             incinerators, chemical treatment systems, etc. There are a number
                             of waste categories (i.e., sharps, cultures and stocks, animal
                             wastes, etc.) and treatment, destruction, and disposal methods vary
                             for each.

                             (a)    The State’s Department of Natural Resources Office should
                                    be contacted to obtain current requirements prior to making
                                    any decision on the manner in which biohazardous waste
                                    will be disposed.

                             (b)    Prior to generating waste, the waste generator must
                                    determine if a feasible disposal path exists for the proposed
                                    waste stream. No wastes should be generated until a
                                    disposal path has been identified and developed.

                             (c)    Biohazardous waste streams containing a chemical and/or
                                    radiological component are considered multiple-hazard
                                    wastes. Such wastes must be treated to eliminate the
                                    biohazard prior to disposal. After treatment, the waste



                                              50
June 18, 2009                                                                 DR 9630-001


                                   must be managed pursuant to the regulations that apply to
                                   its non-biological component. For example, a waste
                                   containing a biohazardous component and a Resource
                                   Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) regulated
                                   constituent must be managed as a RCRA hazardous waste.

                     (5)    Local Authorities: Biohazardous waste that has been rendered
                            noninfectious may qualify for disposal at the local landfill or
                            Publicly Owned Treatment Works. Waste generators should
                            contact local authorities to discuss and seek approval for this
                            action. All verbal approvals obtained from local authorities should
                            be documented in a follow up letter that details the types of wastes
                            to be disposed, processes that will be utilized to render the material
                            noninfectious, quality control practices, etc.

                b.   Waste Minimization

                     (1)    Pollution prevention and waste minimization procedures should be
                            incorporated wherever feasible. An effective biohazardous waste
                            program protects workers and the environment and can result in
                            cost savings from waste reduction or prevention. Personnel should
                            diligently investigate and pursue opportunities to use materials
                            with a lower biohazard level or alternative procedures to reduce the
                            material handling and disposal requirements. These practices will
                            reduce biohazardous waste steams and ensure that biohazardous
                            wastes are handled and treated appropriately.

                     (2)    A primary means of reducing biohazardous waste is to ensure that
                            it is separated from general waste, which should occur at the point
                            of generation.

                            (a)    Biohazardous waste should be placed directly into
                                   “biological hazard” labeled or color coded containers or
                                   plastic bags clearly identifiable and distinguishable from
                                   the general solid waste stream.

                            (b)    Temporary markings or a second container or bag should
                                   be used if the waste is to be decontaminated prior to
                                   disposal.

                c.   Additional Information

                     There are many sources of information available regarding biohazardous
                     waste disposal, including Federal and State guidelines regarding the
                     disposal of biohazardous waste, which can be found at
                     www.epa.gov/epaoswer/other/medical/#two



                                              51
DR 9630-001                                                                    June 18, 2009


       15.    SECURITY PARAMETERS FOR BIOHAZARDOUS WASTE

              This section sets policy and procedure to ensure appropriate levels of protection
              for securing and safeguarding biohazardous waste during its generation and
              packaging, transport (either on or off-site), storage (either on or off-site) and
              scheduled destruction. This section also details protection levels required in
              accordance with potential consequences, and ensures effective security planning
              and coordination between the government and local authorities in the proper
              disposal of biohazardous waste. This section does not cover incidents resulting
              from declared agricultural emergencies.

              a.     Disposal sites

                     The design of disposal sites varies, depending on the type of biohazardous
                     waste, so it is necessary to refer to all relevant Federal, State, local, and
                     facility regulations to ensure regulatory compliance when selecting a site
                     for biohazardous waste disposal.

                     (1)     On-site disposal area, or location: A designated area within the
                             property of a given USDA facility properly designed to store,
                             handle and dispose of biohazardous waste.

                     (2)     Off-site disposal area, or location: A commercial facility that is
                             properly permitted to receive, store, handle, and dispose of
                             biohazardous waste.

              b.     Common Carrier and Transportation Vehicles

                     Biohazardous waste should be transported in closed leak-proof trucks or
                     dumpsters. Secondary containment may be needed as well, depending on
                     the type of biohazardous waste being transported.

                     (1)     Vehicles used for transporting Category A and Category B
                             biohazardous waste (see Definitions) should be in good mechanical
                             condition and strong enough to carry the load without difficulty. If
                             vehicles do not have a closed body, the body should be covered
                             with a tarpaulin. Vehicle selection should include, but not be
                             limited to:
                             •       Transporting infected carcasses.
                             •       Transporting infected live animals.
                             •       Transporting clinical and diagnostic cultures.

                     (2)     Vehicles should be properly marked with the appropriate UN
                             identifier. Additional labeling and placards as noted below should
                             be in accordance with 49 CFR 172.323 and 49 CFR 172.432, if the




                                               52
June 18, 2009                                                                 DR 9630-001


                            vehicle will travel on public access roads or otherwise enter
                            commerce.
                            •      Biohazard- See Figure 1
                            •      Infectious Substance- See Figure 2

                     (3)    Unless provided by the common carrier, the shipper should provide
                            all required shipping labels and placards in accordance with 49
                            CFR 172.505- Providing and affixing placards: Highway.

                     (4)    Common carrier drivers should have a valid state driver’s license
                            appropriate for the type of vehicle commissioned to transport
                            biohazardous waste, and/or a Commercial Driver License (CDL)
                            for operating vehicles that require a CDL.

                     (5)    Common carrier should be licensed or certified/permitted to
                            transport biohazardous waste.

                c.   Additional common carrier responsibilities

                     (1)    The common carrier is responsible and liable for the safe transport
                            and accountability of the biohazardous waste once the carrier has
                            accepted the biohazardous waste from the shipper of record.

                     (2)    Acceptance includes the signature receipt of the hazardous waste
                            manifest [49 CFR 172, Subpart C, §172.205(c)(2)].

                     (3)    Unless approved by USDA, the common carrier of record should
                            not transfer the biohazardous waste to another common carrier for
                            transport.

                     (4)    Upon delivery to the designated receiving facility, the receiving
                            facility becomes responsible for disposing of the biohazardous
                            waste accepted from the common carrier of record. Note that
                            USDA is still liable for the waste from cradle to grave, so it is
                            prudent for USDA to confirm that the receiving facility is
                            disposing of USDA’s biohazardous waste in compliance with
                            relevant laws and regulations.

                     (5)    Acceptance includes the signature receipt of the hazardous waste
                            manifest [49 CFR 172, Subpart C, §172.205(d)(2)].

                     (6)    Unless approved by USDA, the receiving facility of record should
                            not transfer the biohazardous waste to another facility for disposal.

                d.   Additional security precautions during transport




                                              53
DR 9630-001                                                          June 18, 2009


              (1)   In compliance with Department of Transportation (DOT)
                    regulations, the USDA location and the transporter of the
                    biohazardous waste (if different entity than USDA location) must
                    develop and implement a security plan if the following types or
                    quantities of hazardous materials will be transported [49 CFR 172,
                    Subpart I, §172.800]:

                    (a)    hazardous material in an amount that must be placarded in
                           accordance with the Hazardous Materials Regulations;

                    (b)    hazardous material in a bulk packaging having a capacity
                           equal to or greater than 13,248 L (3,500 gallons) for liquids
                           or gases or more than 13.24 cubic meters (468 cubic feet)
                           for solids; or

                    (c)    select agents or toxins regulated by the CDC under 42 CFR
                           Part 73, or USDA under 9 CFR Part 121 [49 CFR Part 172,
                           Subpart I, §172.800(6)]. USDA facilities generating
                           biohazardous or medical waste containing select agents and
                           toxins shall need to develop a transportation security
                           facility plan.

              (2)   At a minimum, a security plan must include provisions for the
                    following elements [49 CFR Part 172, Subpart I, §172.802]:

                    (a)    Personnel security;
                    (b)    Preventing unauthorized access; and
                    (c)    En-route security

                    DOT’s pamphlet, “Hazardous Materials Transportation Enhanced
                    Security Requirements, DHM50-0030-0903,” has additional
                    information on this topic.

                    The security plan must be in writing and must be retained for as
                    long as it remains in effect. The security plan must be revised as
                    necessary to reflect changing circumstances. When applicable,
                    transportation security plans developed under Sections 15(d)(1)(c)
                    and 15(g) must be submitted to the USDA Animal and Plant
                    Health Inspection Service or CDC Select Agent Program(s) for
                    approval.

              (3)   A means of communication should be established between the
                    transport driver, and the originating and receiving stations,
                    including radios, cell phones, or similar devices. The transport
                    driver and the originating and receiving stations will be provided
                    with all relevant contact numbers. If transportation of the



                                     54
June 18, 2009                                                                 DR 9630-001


                            biohazardous waste to the receiving station exceeds one (1) day, or
                            in the event of an unplanned layover exceeding one (1) day, the
                            transport driver should make contact with the originating station
                            and receiving station at least every eight (8) hours.

                     (4)    Unless pre-arranged, stops and overnight layovers should not be
                            permitted. In the event of an unanticipated layover (i.e., vehicle
                            breakdown, weather, traffic incident, etc.), the transporting vehicle
                            should be secured to prevent unwanted intrusions. The driver
                            should report any delay to the point of contact at the originating
                            station and receiving station, and should remain with the vehicle
                            until the vehicle is transported to a safe location and properly
                            secured. Local law enforcement should be advised of the nature of
                            the cargo that is being temporarily secured.

                e.   USDA On-site Storage and Disposal Security Requirements

                     All transportation of biohazardous waste generated at USDA facilities
                     must be conducted in compliance with all Federal, State, local, and facility
                     regulations, including all applicable DOT regulations. Each laboratory
                     must obtain and comply with the regulations for its location. The
                     importation or interstate movement of infested or potentially infested plant
                     material requires an APHIS PPQ 526 Plant Pest Permit. The permit
                     conditions will include information about proper packaging, transport, and
                     sterilization procedures.

                     (1)    Movement and handling of biohazardous waste should be kept to a
                            minimum, and disposal preparation should be done as outlined in
                            Sections 10, 11 and 12. The use of mechanical loading devices
                            which may rupture packaged wastes should be avoided.

                     (2)    All bags containing biohazardous waste should be properly labeled
                            in accordance with Section 15(b)(2).

                     (3)    Animal bedding, manure and/or mixture should be bagged in bio-
                            degradable material in order to establish a numerical account for
                            manifesting.

                     (4)    A transfer/chain-of-custody form (see Figure 3 for sample
                            document) should be prepared to document the biohazardous waste
                            product that is being disposed. Laboratory should maintain a
                            logbook to record chain-of-custody events.

                     (5)    An accurate, current inventory for each biohazardous product must
                            be maintained if held in short-term or long-term storage.




                                              55
DR 9630-001                                                            June 18, 2009


              (6)    USDA worksites and locations must establish a designated storage
                     area for biohazardous waste that is not disposed of immediately.
                     Such storage areas must be adequately secured to prevent theft or
                     release of biohazardous waste material. Packaging integrity,
                     storage temperature, storage duration, and storage location should
                     be evaluated to ensure that the delay in treatment will not create
                     potentially hazardous conditions.

                     (a)    Temporary storage shelters should have secondary
                            containment provisions for liquid waste or waste
                            susceptible to leakage, such as concrete curbing or similar
                            impervious barriers to prevent release to the environment.

                     (b)    The packaging should deter rodents and vermin, and should
                            be strong enough to block or mitigate the emission of any
                            unpleasant odors that might develop.

                     (c)    Storage site location and security should also be assessed to
                            ensure they meet established requirements for biohazardous
                            waste.

                     (d)    Biohazardous waste held in storage for more that one (1)
                            day should be physically checked daily, and verified
                            against the inventory log, for each day in storage.

                     (e)    The locking devices will also be checked daily.

                     (f)    Long-term and short-term storage areas should be properly
                            identified with applicable labels similar to the requirements
                            of OSHA Subpart Z Section 1910.1030(g)-Communication
                            of hazards to employees.

              (7)    Prior to destruction, an inventory should be conducted to ensure
                     that all biohazardous waste has been accounted for.

              (8)    USDA facilities that have remote disposal sites (i.e., incinerators)
                     within the facility property should secure and transport
                     biohazardous waste in properly maintained vehicles.

              (9)    USDA laboratories utilizing on-site disposal areas should have an
                     emergency response plan in place to appropriately address
                     incidents involving theft, loss, or release of biohazardous waste
                     scheduled for destruction.

              (10)   All documentation records related to the transportation and
                     disposal of biohazardous waste at USDA on-site locations Records



                                       56
June 18, 2009                                                                 DR 9630-001


                            must be retired to FRC 5 years after completion of shipment to an
                            offsite disposal/treatment facility. Agencies should consider
                            maintaining infectious medical waste records for “longer periods
                            of time, such as 15 years with subsequent transfer to NARA for
                            storage as permanent records (e.g. Waste containing
                            environmentally stable agents or that have a hazardous waste
                            component and could be a continuing concern in the event that the
                            waste is improperly disposed of by the receiving site). Generators
                            should also review State and local regulations to ensure they do not
                            have more stringent requirements.

                f.   Non-USDA Off-site Storage and Disposal Security Requirements

                     All transportation of biohazardous waste generated at USDA facilities
                     must be conducted in compliance with all Federal, State, local, and facility
                     regulations, including all applicable USDOT regulations. Each laboratory
                     must obtain and comply with the regulations for its location.

                     (1)    Prior to any interstate transport of biohazardous waste to an off-site
                            disposal location, the facility/Location Environmental or Biosafety
                            Specialist/Officer should notify and coordinate with state and local
                            transportation authorities to verify any transport restrictions and
                            obtain any necessary permit requirements. Such transport should
                            have a pre-established primary route and secondary route in the
                            event of inclement weather or traffic incidents.

                     (2)    Disposal site should be a properly licensed/certified organization
                            and permitted to handle the type of biohazardous waste being
                            transported.

                     (3)    Disposal preparation should be done as outlined in Sections 9
                            through 11 of this document.

                     (4)    All bags containing biohazardous waste should be properly labeled
                            in accordance with Section 15(b)(2). In addition, animal bedding,
                            manure and/or mixture should be bagged in bio-degradable
                            material in order to establish a numerical account for manifesting.

                     (5)    All biohazardous waste should be placed into appropriate USDOT
                            rigid or semi-rigid containers before transport off-site.

                     (6)    A transfer/chain-of-custody form (see Figure 3 for sample
                            document) should be prepared to document the biohazardous waste
                            product that is being disposed. The laboratory should maintain a
                            logbook to record chain-of-custody events.




                                              57
DR 9630-001                                                          June 18, 2009


              (7)   A shipment manifest should be prepared for animal carcasses
                    and/or live animals scheduled for disposal. Manifests should
                    include type of biohazardous waste, quantity (quantity should not
                    be by volume or weight), method of disposal (see Sections 9, 10,
                    and 11), date of departure/arrival, and signature of authorizing
                    USDA agent. Manifests should accompany the biohazardous
                    waste. When applicable, shipment manifests should be in
                    accordance with 49 CFR 172.205 “Hazardous waste manifest”.

              (8)   In the event that the disposal cannot be performed at the scheduled
                    time and there is a delay of more than one (1) day, the off-site
                    disposal facility must provide a secured location for transport
                    vehicles, freezers, or other means of storage until the disposal is
                    complete.

                    (a)    Such storage areas, whether a truck yard, room, trailer,
                           freezer, or refrigerator, must have appropriate locking
                           devices to secure the material.

                    (b)    Biohazardous waste held in storage for more than one (1)
                           day should be physically checked daily, and verified
                           against the inventory log or shipping manifest for each day
                           in storage. In addition, the locking devices should be
                           checked daily.

                    (c)    Long-term and short-term storage areas should be properly
                           identified with applicable labels similar to the requirements
                           of OSHA Subpart Z Section 1910.1030(g)-Communication
                           of hazards to employees.

                    (d)    If treatment cannot be accomplished on the day the waste is
                           generated, packaging integrity, storage temperature, storage
                           duration, and storage location should be evaluated to ensure
                           that the delay in treatment will not create potentially
                           hazardous conditions.

                           1       Temporary storage shelters should have secondary
                                   containment provisions for liquid waste or waste
                                   susceptible to leakage, such as concrete curbing or
                                   similar impervious barriers to prevent release to the
                                   environment.

                           2       The packaging should deter rodents and vermin, and
                                   should be strong enough to block or mitigate the
                                   emission of any unpleasant odors that might
                                   develop.



                                     58
June 18, 2009                                                                   DR 9630-001


                                    3       Storage site location and security should also be
                                            assessed to ensure they meet established
                                            requirements for biohazardous waste.

                     (9)    Prior to destruction, an inventory should be conducted to ensure
                            that all biohazardous wastes have been accounted for.

                     (10)   A USDA agent should witness each disposal event to certify that it
                            was completed in compliance with all relevant agreements,
                            regulations, etc.

                     (11)   All documentation records related to the transportation and
                            disposal of biohazardous waste utilizing USDA off-site disposal
                            locations should be prepared and retained in accordance with DOT
                            49 CFR 172, Subpart C- Shipping Paper. Records must be retired
                            to FRC 5 years after completion of shipment to an offsite
                            disposal/treatment facility. Agencies should consider maintaining
                            infectious medical waste records for “longer periods of time, such
                            as 15 years with subsequent transfer to NARA for storage as
                            permanent records (e.g. Waste containing environmentally stable
                            agents or that have a hazardous waste component and could be a
                            continuing concern in the event that the waste is improperly
                            disposed of by the receiving site). Generators should also review
                            State and local regulations to ensure they do not have more
                            stringent requirements.

                g.   USDA Facilities that Possess, Use, and Transfer Select Agents and Toxins

                     The following security requirements apply to those USDA facilities that
                     generate biological waste deriving from select agents and toxins whether
                     for on-site or off-site disposal.

                     (1) Security of select agents and toxins shall comply with
                          7 CFR Part 331.11, 9 CFR Part 121.11 and 42 CFR Part
                         73.11.

                     (2) Storage, transfer, transportation, and disposal of select agents
                         and toxins shall comply with 7 CFR Part 331.11/16/17;
                         9 CFR Part 121.11/16/17; and 42 CFR Part 73.11/16/17. Storage,
                         transfer, and transportation of select agents and toxins to an off-site
                         unregistered entity shall require prior approval of the Agriculture
                         Select Agent Program (telephone number (301) 734-5960).

                     (3) Emergency response plans for biohazardous waste involving
                         select agents and toxins shall comply with 7 CFR 331.14, 9 CFR
                         121.14 or 42 CFR 73.14.



                                               59
DR 9630-001                                                                 June 18, 2009




                     (4) All documentation related to select agents and toxins shall comply
                         with 7 CFR 331.17(c), 9 CFR 121.17(c), and 42 CFR 73.17(c).

              h.     Emergency Response Plans

                     To ensure the safety of the general public and the environment
                     the shipper should develop emergency response plans.

                     (1)    USDA utilizing on-site disposal areas should have in-place an
                            emergency response plan to address incidents involving theft, loss
                            or release of a biohazardous waste scheduled for destruction.

                     (2)    USDA laboratories utilizing off-site disposal areas requiring the
                            transportation of biohazardous waste scheduled for destruction via
                            common carrier should provide emergency response information in
                            accordance with 49 CFR 172, Subpart G- Emergency Response
                            Information. The emergency response information should be
                            coordinated with the transportation security plan as outlined in 49
                            CFR 171, Subpart I-Security Plans.

                   FIGURE 1. BIOHAZARD LABEL [49 CFR 172.323]




                                             60
June 18, 2009                                              DR 9630-001


            FIGURE 2. INFECTIOUS SUBSTANCE LABEL [49 CFR 172.432]




                                     61
           DR 9630-001                                                                                                                 June 18, 2009


                                      FIGURE 3. SAMPLE TRANSFER AND CHAIN OF CUSTODY FORM

                                                                                 Section 1
                                        Instructions:
USDA Facility                           •     All external (inter-entity) transfers are required to have a Transfer/Chain of Custody Form completed prior to movement and
123 Main Street                               filed in the facility logbook. Receiving organization is required to sign and FAX/return 1 copy to USDA once biohazardous
Any City, USA 10101                           waste is received and disposed.
Tel: (218) 560-8070                     •     All internal (intra-entity) transfers are required to have a Transfer/Chain of Custody Form completed and filed in the facility
Fax: (218) 560-8071                           logbook.
                                        •     Transfer/Chain of Custody Form is required to be signed by the Responsible Official (RO) and Principal Investigator (PI).

     Biohazardous                         Transfer          Received             Type of Transfer                Location          Number of Primary              Remarks
                                        Use for internal   Use for internal    Check box ; below and              Code             Containers/Animals
[infectious substances]                 and external       and external        complete Section 2 for           ST- Storage
                                        transfers.         transfers.          external shipping/receiving.                        Use for internal and
         Waste                          **************     **************      ***********************
                                                                                                                LS- Lab to
                                                                                                                                   external transfers.
                                                                                                                Storage
                                        If transfer        If transfer         For internal transfer provide                       **************
                                                                                                                SFD- Storage
________________________                exceeds 8          exceeds 8           an entry of each movement        to Facility
                                                                                                                                   If transfer exceeds 8
Signature of Responsible Official       actions use        actions use         in the below columns noting                         actions use second form.
                                                                                                                Disposal
                                        second form.       second form.        each location code.              SOD- Storage
___________________________                                                                                     to Off-site
Signature of Principal Investigator                                                                             Disposal
                                        Date     Time      Date      Time      Internal;       External;
                                                                                                                O- Other
                                                                                                                (explain)
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)
8)


                   Section 2: External (inter-entity) Shipping and Receiving Information (Check ; appropriate box)

Authorization/Ship to:                Received From:                 Authorization/Ship              Received From:                  Instructions: Section 2 provides for two
                                                                                                                                     (2) shipping and receiving actions.
                                                                     to:                                                             Check ; the appropriate box beginning
Organization:                         Organization:                  Organization:                   Organization:                   with the first action-shaded area.

RO                                    Signature:                     RO Signature:                   Signature:
Signature:_________________           ____________________           _________________               ____________________
Date:                                 Date:                          Date:                           Date:




                                                                                      62
June 18, 2009                                                                   DR 9630-001


16      REFERENCES

Ali, Y., Dolan, M.J., Fendler, and Larson, E.L., 2001, in Disinfection, Sterilization, and
Preservation, 5th edition (S. Block, ed.). Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 229-
254.

American Public Health Association, 2001. “Laboratory Quality,” in Compendium of Methods
for the Microbiological Examination of Foods, 4th Edition, edited by F. Pouch Downes and K.
Ito.

Kay, G.I. Weber, P.B., Wetzel, W.M., Animal Lab News, Alkaline Hydrolysis
September/October 2004

AOAC International, 2004 Guidelines for Laboratories Performing Microbiological and
Chemical Analyses of Food and Pharmaceuticals: Revision of the Analytical Laboratory
Accreditation Criteria Committee criteria.

Block, S., 2001. Disinfection, Sterilization, and Preservation, 5th edition, edited by S. Block.
Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 19–28.

Canter D.A., Gunning D., Rodgers, P., O'connor, L., Traunero, C., and Kempter, C.J., 2005.
Remediation of Bacillus anthracis contamination in the U.S. Department of Justice mail facility.
Biosecurity and Bioterrorism 3(2), 119-27.

Fitch, J.P., Raber, E. and Imbro, D.R., 2003. Technology challenges in responding to biological
or chemical attacks in the civilian sector, Science 302 (5649), 1350-54.

Hawley, R. J., and Kozlovac, J., 2004. Decontamination, in Biological Weapons Defense:
Principles and Mechanisms for Infectious Diseases Counter-Bioterrorism, edited by L. Lindler,
F. Lebeda, G.W. Korch, and G. W. Totowa. New Jersey: Humana Press Inc., 333-348.

Kozlovac, J.P., and Hawley, R.J., 2006. Biological Toxins: Safety and Science, in Biological
Safety Principles and Practice, 4th edition, edited by D. O. Fleming and D. L. Hunt.
Washington, D.C.: American Society for Microbiology.

Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 2005. Berkeley Lab Waste Management Policy,
Hazardous Waste Disposal. www.lbl.gov/ehs/pub3000/CH20.html

Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 2003. Anthrax E-tool.
www.osha.gov/SLTC/etools/anthrax/index.html

Spaulding, E.H., 1972. Chemical disinfection and antisepsis in the hospital. Journal of Hospital
Research 9: 5-31.

U.S. Department of Agriculture, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, 7 CFR Part 331
and 9 CFR Part 121, Agriculture Bioterrorism Act of 2002; Possession, Use, and Transfer of
Biological Agents and Toxins.


                                                63
DR 9630-001                                                                June 18, 2009




U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 42 CFR Parts 72 and 73: Possession, Use, and
Transfer of Biological Agents and Toxins.

U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 29 CFR 1910.

U.S. Department of Transportation, Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, 49
CFR Parts 171-180: Hazardous Materials Regulations.

U.S. Department of Transportation, Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, 49
CFR Parts 171, 172, 173 and 175, Hazardous Materials: Infectious Substances; Harmonization
with the United Nations Recommendations.

U.S. Department of Transportation, Hazardous Materials Transportation Enhanced Security
Requirements, DHM50-0030-0903.

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 1986. Guide for Infectious Waste Management,
Washington, D.C.: Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response, 20460, EPA/530-SW-014.

University of Iowa Biohazard Waste Guidelines, 2006. Iowa City, Iowa: Biosafety Health
Protection Office,\.
www.uiowa.edu/~hpo/biosafety/biowaste.pdf

World Health Organization 2005. Communicable Disease Surveillance and Response, Guidance
on regulations for the Transport of Infectious Substances.




                                             64
