                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                   WASHINGTON, DC 20250

                                                                 NUMBER:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION DR 9700-002
                                                                 DATE:
 SUBJECT: Beginning Farmers and Ranchers Program                 August 25, 2020
                                                                 EXPIRATION DATE:
 OPI: Farm Service Agency, Office of Outreach
                                                                 August 25, 2025



Section                                                                                       Page

1.   Purpose                                                                                  1
2.   Special Instructions/Cancellations                                                       1
3.   Scope                                                                                    2
4.   Background                                                                               2
5.   Policy                                                                                   2
6.   Roles and Responsibilities                                                               2
7.   Inquiries                                                                                4

Appendix A – Acronyms and Abbreviations                                                       A-1
Appendix B – Authorities and References                                                       B-1



1. PURPOSE

     This Departmental Regulation (DR) establishes the United States Department of Agriculture
     (USDA) integrated and coordinated policy for beginning farmer and rancher outreach
     initiatives. The strategy will be led by the USDA National Beginning Farmer and Rancher
     Coordinator and implemented in each State as required by the Agriculture Improvement Act
     of 2018 (“Farm Bill”), P.L. 115-334, and Secretary's Memorandum (SM) 1076-030,
     Implementation of the Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018.


2. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

     a.   This policy is effective immediately and will remain in effect until it is superseded or
          expiration.

     b.   All Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices must align their policies and procedures
          with this DR within 3 months of the publication date.
3. SCOPE

  This DR applies to all USDA Mission Areas, agencies, staff offices, programs, teams,
  organizations, appointees, and employees. This includes contractors and grantees operating
  on behalf of USDA with beginning farmer and rancher programs.


4. BACKGROUND

  Support for beginning farmers and ranchers has long been a priority of the USDA. The Food,
  Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008, P.L. No. 110-246, and the Agricultural Act of 2014,
  P.L. 113-79, included significant new investments for beginning farmers and ranchers. In
  2015 the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) published Audit Report 50601-0003-31,
  USDA Beginning Farmers and Ranchers Programs. This report found that past efforts to
  serve beginning farmers and ranchers had been limited as a result of no Departmentwide
  directive requiring participation by Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices in USDA’s
  beginning farmer and rancher efforts.

  The 2018 Farm Bill expanded opportunities and funding for beginning farmers and ranchers
  throughout the Department’s programs. The Farm Bill, Section 12304, Beginning farmer
  and rancher coordination, and SM 1076-030, established a National Beginning Farmer and
  Rancher Coordinator position to implement the Beginning Farmer and Rancher program.


5. POLICY

  USDA will establish, and continuously implement targeted educational, marketing, outreach,
  credit, risk management, conservation, technical assistance, and other programs that help
  ensure that beginning farmers and ranchers can gain access to the resources they need for
  success.


6. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The National Beginning Farmer and Rancher Coordinator (“National Coordinator”), in
       consultation with State Food and Agriculture Councils, will:

       (a) Designate in each State a collateral duty State Beginning Farmer and Rancher
           Coordinator (“State Coordinator”) from either the State office of the Farm Service
           Agency (FSA), Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), Rural
           Development (RD) or regional office of the Risk Management Agency (RMA);

       (b) Determine whether to approve a plan submitted by a State Coordinator;




                                                2
     (c) Establish a Beginning Farmer and Rancher Working Group to identify, assess and
         improve Mission Area, agency, and staff office programs that serve beginning
         farmers and ranchers. Working group members will consist of:

         (1) The National Beginning Farmer and Rancher Coordinator – Chair and
             Member;

         (2) FSA Administrator or delegate – Member;

         (3) NRCS Chief or delegate – Member;

         (4) RMA Administrator or delegate – Member;

         (5) RD Administrator or delegate – Member;

         (6) National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) Administrator or delegate –
             Member;

         (7) Economic Research Service (ERS) Administrator or delegate – Member;

         (8) Agricultural Marketing Service (AMS) Administrator or delegate – Member;

         (9) National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS) Administrator or delegate –
             Member; and

         (10) Office of Partnerships and Public Engagement (OPPE) Director or delegate –
              Member;

     (d) Leverage the Secretary’s Advisory Committee for Beginning Farmers and Ranchers
         to frame priority issues;

     (e) Work with NASS to develop and monitor statistics on beginning farmers and
         ranchers;

     (f) Establish key program performance indicators and include them in an annual plan;
         and

     (g) Assess and report on performance of utilization of USDA programs by beginning
         farmers and ranchers.

b.   Each collateral duty State Beginning Farmer and Rancher Coordinator will:

     (1) Coordinate technical assistance at the State level to assist beginning farmers and
         ranchers in accessing USDA programs,




                                               3
       (2) Develop and submit to the National Coordinator for approval a State plan to
           improve the coordination, delivery and efficacy of USDA programs to beginning
           farmers and ranchers at each county and area office in the State;

           (a) Oversee the implementation of the approved State plan and submit annual plan
               accomplishments to the National Coordinator;

           (b) Work with State and county outreach coordinators to ensure appropriate
               program information and technical assistance is available at outreach events
               and activities; and

           (c) Coordinate partnerships and joint outreach efforts with other organizations and
               government agencies serving beginning farmers and ranchers.

  c.   Mission Areas, agencies, and staff offices without a field-based presence will provide
       measurable program or grant data benefitting beginning farmers and ranchers to the
       National Coordinator annually.


7. INQUIRIES

  Inquiries regarding this directive should be directed to the FSA Office of Outreach at 202-
  690-1700, or via email to fsaoutreach@usda.gov.


                                            -END-




                                                4
                               APPENDIX A

                   ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS


AMS    Agricultural Marketing Service
DR     Departmental Regulation
ERS    Economic Research Service
FSA    Farm Service Agency
NASS   National Agricultural Statistics Service
NIFA   National Institute of Food and Agriculture
NRCS   Natural Resources Conservation Service
OIG    Office of the Inspector General
OPPE   Office of Partnerships and Public Engagement
P.L.   Public Law
RD     Rural Development
RMA    Risk Management Agency
SM     Secretary’s Memorandum
USDA   United States Department of Agriculture




                                      A-1
                                        APPENDIX B

                            AUTHORITIES AND REFERENCES


Agricultural Act of 2014, P.L. 113-79, February 7, 2014

Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018, P.L. 115-334, December 20, 2018

Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008, P.L. No. 110-246, June 18, 2008

USDA, OIG, Audit Report 50601-0003-31, USDA Beginning Farmers and Ranchers Programs,
May 2015

USDA, SM 1076-030, Implementation of the Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018, July 1, 2019




                                               B-1
