                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250


                                                                                   Number:
           DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                                 9700-001
SUBJECT:                                                          DATE:
Small Farms and Beginning Farmers and Ranchers Policy             August 3, 2006
                                                                  OPI:
                                                                  Office of the Chief
                                                                  Economist


1      PURPOSE

       This regulation sets forth the policy of the United States Department of
       Agriculture (USDA) with regard to the importance and role of small farms,
       ranches, woodlots, and beginning farmers and ranchers (hereafter referred to as
       small farms and beginning farmers and ranchers) to U.S. agriculture and the
       establishment of strategies, systems, and a Departmental framework for
       achieving and maintaining the viability of small farms and beginning farmers
       and ranchers.


2      SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS

       Departmental Regulation (DR) 9700-1, dated September 8, 1999 is replaced by
       this revised regulation, which revises DR 9700-1 to include beginning farmers
       and ranchers.


3      BACKGROUND

       a      Small farms have been critical to American society throughout the
              Nation's history. Today, as historically, the vast majority of all farms
              in the United States are small. The viability and sustainability of these
              farms is important to our Nation's economy, to the wise stewardship of
              our biological and natural resources, and to the leadership and social
              fabric of rural communities. Their economic contribution is important
              to the Nation and is especially critical to the thousands of rural
              communities where they pay taxes and to the thousands of businesses
              they support.

       b      Small farms play an important role in the U.S. agricultural sector. The
              Economic Research Service (ERS) in its Farm Typology Group
              Definition uses the definition of “small farm” developed by the
              National Commission on Small Farms. The Commission used
DR 9700-001                                                                   August 3, 2006


              $250,000 in gross sales as its cutoff between small and large farms in
              its report, A Time to Act (U.S. Dept. Agr., Nat’l. Comm. on Small
              Farms, 1998), released in January 1998. This definition was instituted
              in 1997 by the Secretary of Agriculture to examine issues facing small
              farms. The definition is generally accepted by Congress, researchers,
              land grant institutions, the small farm community and others. In 2004,
              small farms accounted for 92 percent of all farms and ranches, owned
              71 percent of the total productive assets in agriculture, operated 60
              percent of all land used in agricultural production, and accounted for 26
              percent of all agricultural receipts from crops and livestock. Small
              farms took leadership in the development of organic production
              systems in the United States. In the late 1990s, the organic and natural
              foods market became the fastest growing sector of the U.S. food
              market.

       c      Owning and operating a small farm represents an avenue to economic
              independence and entrepreneurial achievement for many Americans
              from all walks of life. Small farms owners and operators are a diverse
              group of Americans, including American Indians or Alaska Natives,
              Asians, Blacks or African Americans, Ethnic Europeans, Hispanic or
              Latino Origin, Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders, Spanish,
              Whites, women, persons with disabilities, and others.

       d      Small farms are operated by resourceful agriculturalists, who combine
              entrepreneurship, business skills, family labor, and knowledge to
              produce food and fiber, and wood products consumed by millions of
              Americans and people around the world. However, not all small family
              farms are alike. As of 2004, the Economic Research Service (ERS)
              identified four primary groups of small family farms, each with
              different resources, goals, and contributions to the Nation's agricultural
              production. These groups are: 1) Primary occupation farms, which
              account for 25 percent of all U.S. farms and are operated by farmers
              who farm as their primary occupation; 2) Limited resource farms,
              which make up 9 percent of farms and have low household income and
              gross sales less than $100,000; 3) Retirement farms, which account for
              16 percent of farms and are operated by individuals who identify
              themselves as retired; and 4) Residential or lifestyle farms, which
              constitute 40 percent of farms and are operated by people whose
              primary occupation is something other than farming.

              Limited resource, retirement, and residential or lifestyle farms
              accounted for about 8 percent of the value of U.S. agricultural
              production. Small farms where farming is the primary occupation
              accounted for almost one fifth of production.




                                          2
August 3, 2006                                                                  DR 9700-001


        e        Due to Congressional concern over the increasing average age of
                 American farmers and ranchers, the Agricultural Credit Improvement
                 Act of 1992 (Act) required the Secretary to establish: (1) beginning
                 farmer loan programs; (2) Federal-State beginning farmer partnerships
                 for the purpose of providing joint financing to beginning farmers and
                 ranchers; and (3) an Advisory Committee on Beginning Farmers and
                 Ranchers. The Act also required that loan funds be targeted to
                 beginning farmers and ranchers.

                 In accordance with the Act, USDA implemented beginning farmer and
                 rancher loan programs in Fiscal Year (FY) 1994. Since then, through
                 the end of FY 2005, the Farm Service Agency (FSA) has made more
                 than 87,000 loans to beginning farmers and ranchers, totaling $7.6
                 billion. FSA has also created Federal-State beginning farmer
                 partnerships by signing Memorandums of Understanding (MOUs) with
                 20 State beginning farmer programs through December 2005.

                 USDA also established an Advisory Committee on Beginning Farmers
                 and Ranchers in 1998. The Committee meets annually and has
                 provided recommendations to the Secretary. USDA has implemented
                 some of the recommendations.

                 The Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 required the
                 Natural Resources Conservation Service to provide higher payments to
                 beginning farmers and ranchers in some of its programs, and authorized
                 the Secretary to establish a Beginning Farmer and Rancher
                 Development Program.


4       POLICY

        USDA’s policy for Small Farms and Beginning Farmers and Ranchers is based
        on the guiding principles for Federal farm policy as recommended by the
        Secretary of Agriculture's National Commission on Small Farms and the
        Advisory Committee on Beginning Farmers and Ranchers.

        It is the policy of USDA to:

        a        Encourage farming systems that produce safe, healthy, and diverse
                 food, fiber and wood products, and create greater opportunities to
                 connect farmers with consumers.

        b        Encourage and support an agricultural system that sustains and
                 strengthens rural communities, cultural diversity, and encourages and
                 rewards responsible stewardship of natural resources.




                                            3
DR 9700-001                                                                  August 3, 2006


       c      Enable farmers, farm workers and ranchers to live and work in a safe
              and responsible environment, own and operate farms and ranches as a
              livelihood, and enhance opportunities for them to generate farm and
              ranch incomes comparable to other economic sectors where feasible.

       d      Establish and foster marketing, development, credit, and outreach
              programs that improve the competitiveness of small and beginning
              farmers and ranchers and give priority to farmer-owned and farm-based
              businesses, especially those that foster local and regional competition
              in production, processing, and distribution of food, fiber, and wood
              products that connect small farms and beginning farmers and ranchers
              and consumers at the local and regional levels.

       e      Establish and support research, development, marketing, incentive,
              regulatory, and outreach programs and initiatives that focus on the
              special needs of small farms and beginning farmers and ranchers,
              especially those programs that help small farms and beginning farmers
              and ranchers develop alternative enterprises, value-added products, and
              collaborative marketing efforts, including cooperatives that enhance
              stewardship of biological, natural, human, and community resources.

       f      Make special efforts to meet the credit needs of small farms and
              underserved, minority, women, and beginning farmers and ranchers.

       g      Encourage and emphasize educational, outreach, marketing, regulatory,
              credit, and other programs that will help ensure new generations of
              small farmers and ranchers can gain access to the resources they need.

       h      Foster collaboration among public and private sector agencies,
              programs, and institutions, including farm and community-based
              organizations, to meet the financial, educational, and technological
              needs of small farms and beginning farmers and ranchers, including
              developing small farms and beginning farmer and rancher networks,
              joint enterprises, and mentoring systems.

       i      Encourage all USDA agencies, the land grant institutions, and
              collaborating public and private sector institutions to emphasize
              sustainable agriculture, sustainable forestry, and agroforestry as
              profitable, environmentally sound, and socially desirable strategies for
              small farms and beginning farmers and ranchers.




                                          4
August 3, 2006                                                                     DR 9700-001




5       ACTION ORDERED

        a        This regulation establishes a Small Farms and Beginning Farmers and
                 Ranchers Council, chaired by the Deputy Secretary. Membership will
                 be comprised of the Under Secretary, Marketing and Regulatory
                 Programs; Under Secretary, Farm and Foreign Agricultural Services;
                 Under Secretary, Food, Nutrition and Consumer Services; Under
                 Secretary, Food Safety; Under Secretary, Natural Resources and
                 Environment; Under Secretary, Research, Education and Economics;
                 Under Secretary, Rural Development; Chief Economist; Assistant
                 Secretary for Administration; Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights;
                 Director of the Office of Outreach; General Counsel; and the Director,
                 Office of Budget and Program Analysis.

        b        The Director of the Office of Small Farms Coordination, Office of the
                 Under Secretary, Research, Education and Economics, and the
                 Designated Federal Official for the Secretary’s Advisory Committee on
                 Beginning Farmers and Ranchers will serve as Co-Executive Directors
                 of the Small Farms and Beginning Farmers and Ranchers Council and
                 are responsible for coordinating, advocating, and facilitating
                 implementation of small farms and beginning farmer and rancher
                 policies and programs.

        c        The Director of the Office of Small Farms Coordination will chair a
                 Department-wide group of coordinators for each mission area,
                 individual agencies, the Designated Federal Official for the Secretary’s
                 Advisory Committee on Beginning Farmers and Ranchers, the Office
                 of Outreach, the Office of Civil Rights, the Office of Chief Economist,
                 the Office of Budget and Program Analysis and the Office of the
                 General Counsel for the purpose of planning, recommending, and
                 coordinating the implementation of small farms and beginning farmers
                 and ranchers policies and programs within USDA. The Coordinators
                 will make recommendations to the Council. The Council will be
                 responsible for implementing any recommendations.

        d        Equal opportunity practices, in line with USDA policies, will be
                 followed in all membership appointments as coordinators and
                 committees. To ensure that the recommendations of the coordinators
                 and committees have taken into account the needs of the diverse groups
                 served by the Department, membership shall include, to the extent
                 practicable, individuals who are minorities, women, and persons with
                 disabilities.

        e        The policies and actions ordered in this regulation are to be reflected in
                 all mission area and agency mission statements, strategic plans,



                                             5
DR 9700-001                                                                 August 3, 2006


              performance plans, and performance goals. These policies are to be
              incorporated into all technical guides, handbooks, and materials used to
              provide service to small farms and beginning farmer and rancher
              operators (including extension publications).


                                     —END—




                                          6
