                           U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                                                              Number:
 DEPARTMENTAL REGULATION                                      DR 9800-001
                                                      DATE:
 SUBJECT: Publishing Reports at the Economic Research January 4, 2017
 Service, a Federal Statistical Agency                OPI:
                                                      Economic Research Service




1. PURPOSE

  This regulation outlines responsibilities, requirements, and procedures followed by the
  Economic Research Service (ERS), a Federal Statistical Agency, as it prepares and issues
  economic research, analysis, and statistical reports to meet its mission.


2. APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE

  ERS publications are issued to provide economic analysis and statistical information for use
  in public and private decision-making concerning agriculture, food, the environment, and
  rural development. The audience for ERS publications is broad, but the primary audience is
  decision-makers in Congress, USDA, and other Federal agencies, as well as State and County
  governments, industries related to agriculture, concerned public interest organizations, and
  academia.

  This regulation applies to ERS reports including Economic Research Reports, Economic
  Information Bulletins, Economic Briefs, Technical Bulletins, Administrative Publications,
  and any future publication series ERS develops. The World Agricultural Outlook Board
  (WAOB) provides clearance for the newsletters, special reports, and data that ERS publishes
  to support the Agency’s participation in WAOB activities; these publications are not covered
  by this directive.


3. SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/CANCELLATIONS

  a.   This regulation is effective immediately and remains in effect until superseded.

  b.   As applicable, this regulation should be used in conjunction with:

       (1) Delegations of Authority to the Under Secretary for Research, Education, and
           Economics Related to Scientific Integrity, 7 CFR 2.21(a)(11), January 1, 2006
      (2) Departmental Manual (DM) 1074-001, Procedures for Responding to Allegations of
          Compromised Scientific Integrity, November 18, 2016

      (3) Departmental Regulation (DR) 1074-001, Scientific Integrity, November 18, 2016

      (4) Departmental Regulations, 5 United States Code (U.S.C.) 301, January 3, 2012

      (5) The Information Quality Act, Public Law (PL) 106-554, Section 515

      (6) The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, Committee on
          National Statistics, Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency, 2013

      (7) Office of Management and Budget (OMB), Guidelines for Ensuring and
          Maximizing the Quality, Objectivity, Utility, and Integrity of Information
          Disseminated by Federal Agencies, October 1, 2001

      (8) OMB Memorandum M-05-03, Issuance of OMB’s “Final Information Quality
          Bulletin for Peer Review”, December 16, 2004

      (9) Statistical Policy Directive No. 1: Fundamental Responsibilities of Federal
          Statistical Agencies and Recognized Statistical Units, December 2, 2014

      (10) Statistical Policy Directive No. 4: Release and Dissemination of Statistical Products
           Produced by Federal Statistical Agencies, October 17, 2016 (as amended)


4. ABBREVIATIONS

  ERS        Economic Research Service
  OC         Office of Communications
  OMB        Office of Management and Budget
  OSEC       Office of the Secretary
  PRCC       Peer Review Coordinating Council
  REE        Research, Education, and Economics Mission Area
  USDA       United States Department of Agriculture
  WAOB       World Agricultural Outlook Board


5. BACKGROUND

  As a Federal Statistical Agency, ERS provides data and analyses that must satisfy standards
  established through Governmentwide and Departmental regulations and guidelines to
  preserve the public’s trust in the accuracy, objectivity, and integrity of information provided
  by the entire Federal statistical system.




                                                 2
  ERS’s data collection, research, and dissemination activities are guided by the Principles and
  Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency, developed by the National Research Council’s
  Committee on National Statistics, and are subject to directives and standards issued by OMB
  in its role as coordinator of the Federal statistical system. ERS is covered by OMB Statistical
  Policy Directive No. 1: Fundamental Responsibilities of Federal Statistical Agencies and
  Recognized Statistical Units, and OMB Statistical Policy Directive No. 4: Release and
  Dissemination of Statistical Products Produced by Federal Statistical Agencies, (as
  amended).

  OMB’s Statistical Policy Directive No. 4 states that statistical products are, generally,
  information dissemination products that are published or otherwise made available for public
  use that describe, estimate, forecast, or analyze the characteristics of groups, customarily
  without identifying the persons, organization, or individual data observations that
  compromise such groups. Statistical products include general-purpose tabulations, analyses,
  projections, forecasts, or other statistical reports.

  In OMB’s Final Information Quality Bulletin for Peer Review, the term “scientific
  information” means factual inputs, data, models, analyses, technical information or scientific
  assessments related to such disciplines as the behavioral and social sciences. This definition
  does not include opinions where the agency’s presentation makes clear that what is being
  offered is someone’s opinion, rather than fact or the agency’s views.

  The Information Quality Act requires all Federal agencies to maximize the quality,
  objectivity, utility, and integrity of information provided to the public. OMB’s related
  Governmentwide guidelines on information quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity require
  that ERS:

  a.   Maintain its commitment to using the best available science and statistical methods;

  b.   Subject information, models, and analytic results to independent peer review by
       qualified experts, when appropriate;

  c.   Disseminate its data and analytic products with a high degree of transparency about the
       data and methods to facilitate its reproducibility by qualified third parties; and

  d.   Ensure that the information presentation is comprehensive, informative, and
       understandable.


6. POLICY AND RESPONSIBILITIES

  a.   The ERS Administrator shall provide final approval for release of all ERS publications
       and to that end has the following specific responsibilities:

       (1) To administer directives, policies, and regulations governing publishing activities of
           ERS as a Federal Statistical Agency;


                                                 3
     (2) To establish policies and procedures that enable ERS to publish quality information
         quickly and economically;

     (3) To review the research and analysis conducted by ERS economists to ensure
         accurate characterization of USDA programs, scientific quality of research,
         effectiveness of communication, and neutrality of language such that reports do not
         make policy recommendations or pronouncements;

     (4) To establish and ensure compliance with pre-determined release dates for ERS
         publications; and

     (5) To provide final approval for the release of ERS publications.

b.   The ERS Publications Control Officer shall be responsible for oversight of the
     publication process so that ERS complies with all USDA expectations regarding
     publications. To that end, the Publications Control Officer shall ensure that:

     (1) All manuscripts have been thoroughly edited and that each publication has been
         prepared to meet exacting standards of economy and effectiveness;

     (2) Other USDA agencies have an opportunity to review ERS research report language
         that is closely related to the work, programs, or policies of the other agency in order
         to avoid misrepresentation or misunderstandings regarding their programs;

     (3) ERS’s Peer Review Agenda is posted on the ERS website and updated periodically;

     (4) ERS holds regularly scheduled meetings with officials in the Office of
         Communications (OC) and the Office of the Secretary (OSEC), a representative
         from USDA’s Research, Education, and Economics (REE) mission area, and the
         communications coordinators for other USDA mission areas in which an ERS
         publication plan document is distributed and discussed;

     (5) Subcabinet officials and other USDA leadership receive regular updates to the ERS
         publication plan that includes actual release dates once the dates have been set;

     (6) After a manuscript has been cleared for publication, but before it is released, ERS
         provides embargoed copies of reports to senior officials in relevant USDA agencies
         for information purposes only, to provide recipients the opportunity to request a
         briefing on the report’s findings;

     (7) ERS provides pre-release copies of each manuscript to USDA’s Press Secretary and
         Director of Communications so they can evaluate newsworthiness and determine
         whether to prepare a Departmental reaction to the findings. These are embargoed
         copies of the report that shall not be shared or distributed beyond the initial
         recipient; and



                                               4
       (8) All ERS publications are released on the agency website.

  c.   The responsibility for overseeing and coordinating the research publication peer review
       process rests with ERS’s Peer Review Coordinating Council (PRCC). The PRCC is a 7-
       person internal ERS committee comprised of ERS Deputy Directors of Research and
       Senior Economists charged with overseeing and managing the peer review process.

       Since ERS reports inform public and/or private decision-making, they are subject to
       OMB’s Final Information Quality Bulletin for Peer Review requirements for scientific
       information. The Bulletin spells out the need for arms-length reviews by technical
       experts inside and outside Government, combined with transparent and publicly
       available peer review plans for each report and clear procedures for correcting errors in
       previously released reports—to maintain confidence in the agency’s commitment to
       information quality.

       The PRCC shall:

       (1) Establish criteria for publication of reports in each series; and

       (2) Send all research manuscripts out for formal review and determine whether revised
           research reports sufficiently address the reviewer comments.

  d.   The USDA Office of Communications Brand, Events, Exhibits, and Editorial Review
       Division shall:

       (1) Ensure that ERS research manuscripts have been prepared in conformance with
           applicable USDA editorial, design, photography, and printing policies;

       (2) Review all ERS research publications within 10 workdays; and

       (3) Not share any ERS manuscripts beyond the OC editorial offices.


7. INQUIRIES

  Questions and comments concerning the requirements of this regulation should be
  directed to the ERS Administrator at 202-694-5000.


                                               -END-




                                                  5
