                                                     ,iJ :'/-
                                                    . ll t ( { iJ 1


           UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                    OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
                     WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                   SECRETARY'S MEMORANDUM 1078-006

                                    April 3, 2025

INCREASING TIMBER PRODUCTION AND DESIGNATING AN EMERGENCY
         SITUATION ON NATIONAL FOREST SYSTEM LANDS



1. PURPOSE

  Executive Order (EO) 14225, Immediate Expansion ofAmerican Timber Production
  (March 1, 2025), highlights the importance of timber production and how forest
  management and wildfire risk reduction projects can save American lives and
  communities. The United States has an abundance of timber resources that are more than
  adequate to meet our domestic timber production needs, but heavy-handed federal
  policies have prevented full utilization of these resources and made us reliant on foreign
  producers. It is vital that we reverse these policies and increase domestic timber
  production to protect our national and economic security. We can manage our forests to
  better provide domestic timber supply, create jobs and prosperity, reduce wildfire
  disasters, improve fish and wildlife habitats, and decrease costs of construction and
  energy. This Secretarial Memorandum details the actions I am directing the Forest
  Service to take in response to EO 14225.


2. AUTHORITIES

  This Memorandum is issued under the authority of the Organic Administration Act of
  1897 (16 U.S.C. §§ 472-475, 477-482, 551); Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield Act of 1960
  (16 U.S.C. §§ 528-531), Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of
  1974, as amended (16 U.S.C. §§ 1601-1613), and the Infrastructure, Investment, and Jobs
  Act (16 U.S.C. 6592c); as well as other statutory authorities governing the management,
  administration and protection of the National Forest System (NFS). Other authorities
  include, but are not limited to, EO 14225.
3. BACKGROUND

  National Forests are in crisis due to uncharacteristically severe wildfires, insect and
  disease outbreaks, invasive species, and other stressors whose impacts have been
  compounded by too little active management. For example:

      •   The 2023 Wildfire Hazard Potential for the Unites States report identifies
          66,940,000 acres of NFS lands under a very high or high fire risk.

     •    Roughly 78,800,000 acres of NFS lands are already experiencing, or are at risk of
          experiencing, insect and disease infestations.

  These threats-combined with overgrown forests, a growing number of homes in the
  wildland-urban interface, and more than a century of rigorous fire suppression- have all
  contributed to what is now a full-blown wildfire and forest health crisis.

  The Forest Service manages 144 million forested acres in 43 States. Forest plans identify
  approximately 43 million acres suitable for timber production. Over the last five years,
  the Forest Service has sold an average 3 billion board feet annually.

  Immediate action is needed to mitigate risk, protect public health and safety and critical
  infrastructure, support local and rural economies, and mitigate threats to natural resources
  on NFS lands. We can do more to contribute to American prosperity and protect our
  national and economic security.


4. DIRECTIVE

  a. EMERGENCY SITUATION DETERMINATION

  To address this crisis, I am making an Emergency Situation Determination (ESD) under
  section 40807 of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA). This ESD
  encompasses 66,940,000 acres of NFS lands rated as very high or high wildfire risk that
  are hereby determined to be an emergency situation as defined by IIJA. In addition, I
  have determined that the 78,800,000 acres of NFS lands designated under Section 602 of
  the Healthy Forest Restoration Act (HFRA), that are experiencing declining forest health;
  at risk of experiencing substantially increased tree mortality over the next 15 years [from
  time of designation] from insect and disease infestation; or containing hazard trees posing
  an imminent risk to public health, infrastructure, and safety, are an emergency situation
  as defined in the IIJA. There are approximately 33,846,000 acres of NFS lands which
  overlap between wildfire and insect and disease risk. In total, this ESD designates
  112,646,000 acres of NFS lands as an IIJA emergency situation, which is 59 percent of
  all NFS lands. See Map #I Forest Health and Fuels Emergency Situation Determination.
  I am also providing federally recognized Tribes, Alaska Native Corporations, and States
  the ability to request additional areas to be included in this ESD under IIJA section 40807
  through the Regional Forester to the Chief of the Forest Service for approval.

                                            2
Actions taken pursuant to this ESD will support improving the durability, resilience, and
resistance to fire, insects, and disease within forests and grasslands across the National
Forest System.

Consistent with IIJA section 40807 and this determination, the Forest Service may carry
out authorized emergency actions after an ESD is declared to achieve relief from threats
to public health and safety, critical infrastructure, and/or mitigation of threats to natural
resources on NFS lands. These actions will improve the durability, resilience, and
resistance to fire, insects, and disease within national forests and grasslands across the
National Forest System. To be eligible to use this authority, at least 50 percent of the
treatment areas supporting this authorized emergency action must be within the
designated areas.

Proposals using the special emergency action procedures at IIJA section 40807 shall:

    •   Reduce wildland fire risk to communities, critical infrastructure, or key ecological
        values; or
    •   Reduce/mitigate post fire risks needed to protect communities, critical
        infrastructure, or key ecological values; or
    •   Reduce hazardous fuels by removing or modifying vegetation to lower the risk of
        wildfires; or
    •   Reduce the density of fire-dependent forests; or
    •   Support the durability and resiliency of forests and grasslands; or
    •   Reduce hazardous fuels to help make wildfire response, as well as ingress or
        egress, safer and more effective; and
    •   Be authorized by the Forest or Grassland Supervisor.

Authorized emergency actions to respond to emergency situations include the:

    •   Salvage of dead or dying trees;
    •   Harvest of trees damaged by wind or ice [Note: or other natural disasters];
    •   Commercial and noncommercial sanitation harvest of trees to control insects or
        disease, including trees already infested with insects or disease;
    •   Reforestation or replanting of fire impacted areas through planting, control of
        competing vegetation, or other activities that enhance natural regeneration and
        restore forest species [Note: the restoration of forest species includes prevention,
        suppression, and eradication of insect, disease and invasive species outbreaks];
    •   Removal of hazardous trees in close proximity to roads and trails;
    •   Removal of hazardous fuels;
    •   Restoration of water sources or infrastructure [Note: the restoration of water
        sources includes watersheds];
    •   Reconstruction of existing utility lines; and
    •   Replacement of underground cables.



                                           3
Any required environmental assessment or environmental impact statement for an
authorized emergency action requires analysis of only the proposed action and the no
action alternative and is not subject to the project-level pre-decisional administrative
review ("objections") or any processes set forth in 36 CFR Part 218.

b. OTHER EMERGENCY AUTHORITIES

The IIJA section 40807 authority is one of several tools that can be used to achieve
expedited compliance around emergencies. Within designated areas, the Forest Service
shall deploy, or continue to deploy, other emergency authorities including:

    •   Emergency and direct hire authorities (including hiring Tribal crews to implement
        and monitor);
    •   Expedited contracting authorities or mechanisms, including virtual incident
        procurement (VIPR), sole source contracting, and USDA contracting authorities
        and include Tribes within that effort;
    •   Expedited grant and agreement authorities or mechanisms, including with Tribes;
    •   Exemptions, waivers, expanded inclusions, and expedited mechanisms for
        emergency programs on joint efforts with USDA agencies and Tribes;
    •   Emergency consultation to comply with the Endangered Species Act;
    •   Emergency and programmatic consultation to comply with the National Historic
        Preservation Act (NHPA);
    •   Emergency procedures to comply with the Clean Water Act (CWA); and
    •   Expedited permitting, certification, and qualification processes as defined in
        Fore st Service directives or as directed by the Chief.

Additional administrative authorities within the Forest Service Chief's discretion may
also be deployed to deliver emergency and expedited response. Nothing herein changes
the requirement for Tribal consultation but may require expedited consultation time
frames under certain conditions. In scenarios where Tribal consultation time frames need
to be expedited, the Forest Service shall notify Natural Resources and Environment.

The agency shall use IIJA Section 40807 where authorized emergency actions can
facilitate current and future post-disaster recovery actions within the scope of this
Emergency Situation Determination.

c. TIMBER PRODUCTION AND SOUND FOREST MANAGEMENT

In order to increase domestic jobs and prosperity, increase economic independence, and
protect our national security, the Forest Service will:

    •   Issue new or updated guidance to increase timber production, decrease the time to
        offer timber supply, and increase certainty in future timber supply. This guidance
        should include use of Good Neighbor Authority, stewardship contracting, and
        agreements or contracts under the Tribal Forest Protection Act;


                                          4
     •    Streamline, to the extent allowable by law, all processes related to timber
          production, including project planning, decision-making, implementation
          (including preparation, appraisals and measurements), and required certifications;
     •    Develop a strategy to improve the efficiency of delivering the timber program and
          increase quantity and consistency in volume offered; and
     •    Identify legislative proposals that would improve timber production and sound
          forest management.

  d. SHARED STEWARDSHIP AGREEMENTS

  The Forest Service will work with State and local partners and federally recognized
  Tribes to collaboratively align with their respective priorities. Many States and Tribes
  have Forest Action Plans that prioritize critical treatment needs, and this memo directs
  the Forest Service to work with States and Tribes to also prioritize these areas and
  projects. Given the urgency and cross-jurisdictional nature of the current crisis, the Forest
  Service shall work quickly to proactively update and expand Shared Stewardship
  Agreements to bring the full power of our partners to help address this emergency.
  Immediate implementation of actions under this ESD should proceed concurrently with
  the updating and creation of these agreements.

  e. REPORTING

  Each calendar year, the Forest Service shall report to Natural Resources and Environment
  on the use of emergency authorities that will include those actions taken pursuant to this
  Forest Health and Fuels Reduction Emergency Situation Determination detailing:

      •   Status of any ongoing environmental analysis or compliance actions;
      •   Listing of completed (signed decision) or future compliance actions;
      •   Status of any ongoing consultation, including the National Historic Preservation
          Act and Endangered Species Act;
      •   Status of any ongoing coordination with local or state emergency management
          offices or other federal agencies;
      •   Status of coordination and consultation with federally recognized Tribal
          governments and/or Alaska Native Corporations; and
      •   Listing of any completed (implemented on the ground) or future mitigating
          emergency actions, to include number of acres treated or anticipated to be treated.


5. IMPLEMENTATION
  The Under Secretary for Natural Resources and Environment is responsible for
  implementing all aspects of this memo, in coordination with the Office of General
  Counsel. In the absence of an Under Secretary, the Chief of the U.S. Forest Service will
  carry out the responsibilities assigned in this Memo.




                                            5
6. EFFECTS OF THIS MEMO
  This memo is intended to improve the internal management of the Department and to
  assure implementation of the above-referenced Executive Order. This memo and any
  resulting report or recommendations are not intended to, and do not create, any right or
  benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the
  United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities or entities, its officers or
  employees, or any other person. To the extent there is any inconsistency between the
  provisions of this memo and any federal laws or regulations, the laws or regulations will
  control.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE
  This memo is effective immediately.




                                       Isl Brooke L. Rollins
                                       Secretary
                                       U.S. Department of Agriculture




                                           6
