                   UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                            OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
                             WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                          SECRETARY'S MEMORANDUM 1078-020

                                        December 30, 2025

 DIRECTIVE ON DEPARTMENTAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES

I. PURPOSE

It is the policy of the U.S. Department of Agriculture ("USDA" or "Department") to establish a
return to American principles and realign the Department's focus towards its original objectives
of maximizing and promoting American agriculture; ensuring a safe, nutritious, and secure food
supply; enhancing rural prosperity; and protecting our National Forests and Grasslands. To
achieve this purpose, this memorandum establishes priorities for the research and development
activities of the Department.

2. BACKGROUND

When President Abraham Lincoln established USDA in 1862, his vision for the Department was
rooted in agricultural research and education, with the primary directive being "to acquire and to
diffuse among the people of the United States useful information on subjects connected with
agriculture." President Lincoln often referred to USDA as "The People's Department,"
recognizing that working to improve agriculture and secure the nation's food supply would prove
beneficial to every citizen of our great country.

Just a few short months after establishing USDA, President Lincoln reiterated this commitment
to agricultural research and education when he signed the Morrill Act of 1862. This Act granted
land to each State to create institutions of higher education for training Americans in the
agricultural and mechanical arts, creating what we know today as the land-grant system. The
land-grant mission was later expanded to include the Cooperative Extension System via the
Smith-Lever Act so that agricultural research and education could be disseminated well beyond
the walls of laboratories and classrooms on campus.

From the development of conservation practices during the Dust Bowl to the successful
eradication of multiple pests that threatened the viability of crops and livestock, the research
coming from USDA and our land-grant system over the past 163 years has resulted in
innovations that put American agriculture at the forefront of productivity.

However, the challenges of the last four years compromised American agriculture. Rising input
costs from policies that drove up inflation, no new markets for commodities due to a weak trade
agenda, crippling overregulation, and the growing threat of pests and diseases- like New World
Screwworm and Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza-have all resulted in increased pressure on
an already fragile agricultural economy.

Further, misguided policies focused on diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEi) and environmental
justice in USDA's programs-especially agricultural research, extension, and education
activities--diverted resources away from solving the serious challenges facing American
agriculture.

The United States has repeatedly proven that complex agricultural problems can be addressed
and solved through bold innovation. And with growing recognition that farm security is national
security, protecting and improving agricultural abundance is critically important now more than
ever.

To address the wide range of current challenges facing American agriculture and enhance
national security, this memorandum puts forth a focused effort to establish new priorities for
research and development activities-one that clearly puts American Farmers First.

3. POLICY

Effective immediately, all USDA agencies and staff offices shall, to the maximum extent
permitted by law and in accordance with any applicable regulations and notice and procedural
requirements, focus new research and development activities on projects that prioritize:

   1. Increasing Profitability of Farmers and Ranchers: While research to increm;e
      productivity has allowed American farmers and ranchers to provide the safest, most
      abundant, and most affordable food and fiber supply, the volatility in profitability of
      American agriculture leads to significant uncertainty for producers. Research and
      development that results in increased profitability- such as reducing inputs or increasing
      mechanization and automation- will benefit American farmers and ranchers.

   2. Expanding Markets and Creating New Uses of U.S. Agricultural Products: With
      many producers experiencing record yields this growing season, it is more important than
      ever to ensure USDA is expanding markets and creating new uses for these American­
      grown commodities. Research and development that seeks to open new markets- such as
      generating science and data to resolve longstanding sanitary and phytosanitary trade
      barriers-or expand the utilization of these commodities in novel biobased products and
      bioenergy (including biofuels) will result in increased demand.

   3. Protecting the Integrity of American Agriculture from Invasive Species: The
      resurgence of New World Screwworm in Mexico, continued westward expansion of the
      Spotted Lanternfly, persistence of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza in poultry flocks,
      and decimation of our domestic citrus industry due to citrus greening are just a few
      examples of how invasive pests and diseases threaten American agriculture and natural
      resources. Research and development focu<.;ed on new and effective methods for
       preventing, detecting, controlling, and eradicating these threats is a top priority for USDA
       and the security of U.S. agriculture.

   4. Promoting Soil Health to Regenerate Long-Term Productivity of Land: American
      farmers and ranchers are the original conservationists as no one stewards their land more
      than those whose entire livelihood, and that of their successive generations, depend on it.
      Research and development that promotes soil health practices, increases water-use
      efficiency, and reduces inputs will ensure farms and ranches remain productive for
      generations to come.

   5. Improving Human Health through Precision Nutrition and Food Quality:
      Substantial and increasingly robust evidence shows that a healthy diet can help people
      achieve and maintain good health and reduce the risk of chronic diseases throughout all
      stages of life. Rigorous research on precision nutrition is needed to better understand how
      healthy dietary patterns impact people at the individual level with the goal of more
      targeted nutritional recommendations to encourage healthy choices, healthy outcomes,
      and healthy families. Additionally, research and development on increasing the nutritional
      content and quality of foods will lead to increased demand for American agricultural
      products.

Other Federal partners also invest a significant number of resources in research that supports
American agriculture. The Office of the Chief Scientist shall not only coordinate on these
priorities within USDA but should also work with key partners across the Federal government to
help solve the most pressing challenges facing American agriculture.

4. IMPLEMENTATION

Each agency or office engaging in research and development shall be responsible for
implementing and ensuring compliance with all aspects of this memorandum. As the Chief
Scientist of the Department, the Under Secretary for Research, Education, and Economics shall
advise and assist all USDA agencies and staff offices to ensure proper implementation and
compliance of the priorities contained within this memorandum.

This memorandum is not a final agency action under chapter 5 of title 5, U.S. Code. This
memorandum is not intended to, and does not create, any right or benefit, substantive or
procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its departments,
agencies, instrumentalities or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person. To the
extent there is any inconsistency between the provisions of this memorandum and any Federal
laws or regulations, the laws or regulations will control.

This Memorandum is effective immediately. ~


                                             Isl Brooke L. Rollins
                                             Secretary
                                             U.S. Department of Agriculture
