                UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                         OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
                          WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                       SECRETARY'S MEMORANDUM 1077-013

                                       October 21, 2024

             Conserving and Restoring Terrestrial Wildlife Habitat Connectivity
                            and Corridors in the United States



1. PURPOSE

  This Memorandum serves to direct coordination and action within the Department of
  Agriculture to improve terrestrial wildlife habitat connectivity and corridors in a way that
  recognizes and leverages State and Tribal authorities, capitalizes on Federal land
  management, and respects private property rights through voluntary, locally led conservation.


2. BACKGROUND

  a.   The United States harbors diverse wildlife species that require large areas to survive and
       reproduce. Many species, such as the sage grouse in the West, or the northern bobwhite
       in the East, depend on vast swaths of connected habitat for their population viability and
       abundance. A subset of species moves seasonally between distinct ranges to meet their
       needs. For instance, migratory waterfowl, shorebirds, songbirds, and pollinators travel
       thousands of miles each spring and fall, using wetland, forest, and grassland stopovers to
       rest and refuel. Hoofed mammals, such as elk, mule deer, pronghorn, and bison migrate
       tens or hundreds of miles across Western landscapes to find seasonal food and shelter.
       Many other species travel shorter distances, yet still depend on a mosaic of connected
       habitats to thrive. These wildlife represent immense ecological value, cultural heritage,
       recreational enjoyment, and economic opportunity for the American people.

  b.   The expanding human footprint can result in habitat loss and barriers to animal
       movement, as well as increasing interactions between people and wildlife. At the same
       time, frequent and severe drought, catastrophic wildfires, and invasive species are
       altering the landscape for some wildlife species, introducing new stressors and conflicts.

  c.   Rising public concern over changing or declining wildlife populations, and the
       disruption of habitat connectivity, places growing demands upon public, private, and
       Tribal land stewards. These land stewards are increasingly asked to integrate
       conservation and restoration activities into the production of food, fiber, and energy.
d.   Addressing these challenges requires a clear understanding of wildlife movements and
     habitat needs, as well as the effects of human activity and the array of locally
     appropriate solutions. A recent revolution in animal tracking, remote sensing, and
     computational analysis is improving the prioritization of conservation and restoration
     actions. New approaches to participatory science are increasingly used to integrate local
     knowledge into prioritization, planning and management.

e.   Indigenous land management has been practiced in North America for millennia.
     Indigenous Knowledge and Traditional Ecological Knowledge are recognized as being
     essential to wildlife conservation, restoration and management, including the
     identification of priorities and best practices, and the assessment of outcomes.

f.   Wildlife use the landscape regardless of jurisdictional boundaries. States and Tribes
     have management authority for wildlife across much of the country, and are uniquely
     responsible for sensitive location and population data needed for scientifically based
     management. Federal lands often serve as anchor points for wildlife, but most of the
     country’s wildlife reside on private lands. Tribal lands also provide vast areas of
     wildlife habitat. Hence, effective conservation and restoration of wide-ranging wildlife
     requires multijurisdictional, coordinated approaches, delivered through localized
     partnerships.

g.   While the successful conservation and restoration of wildlife creates benefits for many,
     there may be disproportionate costs and risks for some. For instance, while abundant
     migratory flocks and herds produce hunting and wildlife-watching opportunities that
     contribute to quality of life and rural economies, they can also damage crops or compete
     with livestock for forage. They can transmit disease and attract predators, threatening
     livestock and sometimes threatening human safety. In particular, successful wildlife
     restoration efforts on Federal lands – as for wolves and grizzly bears in the western U.S.
     – can affect adjacent private and Tribal lands and state management activities. Where
     these challenges occur, effective wildlife damage management is essential to ensure the
     fairness and social support required for large-scale conservation and restoration.

h.   State and Tribal wildlife managers and their local partners, including agricultural
     producers and forest landowners – many of whom hold generations of knowledge –
     understand these challenges and opportunities. They are positioned to work closely with
     the scientific community to identify priority areas and necessary conservation practices.
     They know how to “keep working lands working,” while improving habitat and
     reducing conflict. Today, many are stepping forward with innovative solutions.

i.   Hunters and their associations, and a variety of other conservation organizations, have
     provided leadership in wildlife conservation for well over a century. Their efforts were
     instrumental to the establishment of Federal and state land and wildlife management
     agencies, and to the passage of key Federal legislation to fund wildlife habitat
     conservation. This legacy has continued through a variety of innovative, public-private
     habitat connectivity partnerships around the country.




                                               2
j.   For all these reasons, a locally led, incentive-based, voluntary approach is fundamental
     to wildlife conservation and restoration in the U.S. This approach respects state and
     Tribal authority to manage wildlife species, and honors Tribal treaty rights, sovereignty,
     and trust responsibility. It also honors private property rights, engages sportsmen and
     other conservationists who can serve as key partners, recognizes the importance of
     public lands as anchor points and population strongholds, and fosters cross-boundary
     solutions.

k.   State and Tribal governments determine the majority of wildlife regulations and policies
     within their boundaries, and their representative associations have provided leadership
     on multijurisdictional management by introducing specific measures to enhance the
     conservation and restoration of terrestrial wildlife connectivity. For example, the
     Western Governors Association, the Western Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies,
     and the Native American Fish and Wildlife Society have all promoted wildlife habitat
     connectivity and landscape-level conservation planning. Multiple states have increased
     their readiness by issuing state level executive orders and action plans to protect
     migration corridors and identify specific areas to implement conservation practices.

l.   Federal leaders have been responding. For instance, in 2018, the Secretary of the
     Interior issued Secretarial Order 3362, Improving Habitat Quality in Western Big-Game
     Winter Range and Migration Corridors – a policy that has been maintained by the
     current Administration and achieved significant positive impact. Through the 2021
     Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, Congress established a Wildlife Crossings Pilot Program,
     administered by the Department of Transportation (DOT), to provide competitive grants
     for wildlife crossing infrastructure on America’s roadways. In 2023, the Council on
     Environmental Quality issued Guidance for Federal Departments and Agencies on
     Ecological Connectivity and Wildlife Corridors.

m. The missions of several USDA agencies are directly relevant to the conservation and
   restoration of wildlife habitat connectivity and corridors and are well positioned to
   continue Department policy and coordination.

     (1) The Forest Service (USFS) manages the 193 million acres of the U.S. National
         Forest System. The agency’s 2012 planning rule, which governs land management
         planning across these lands, included requirements for evaluating, maintaining, or
         restoring connectivity. Additionally, the agency’s 2022 Climate Adaptation Plan
         identified the protection and improvement of connectivity as key needs, a goal
         furthered by the Deputy Chief’s 2022 Memorandum, Habitat Connectivity and
         Migration Corridors in National Forest System Planning and Decisions. The
         agency has also provided resources to collaborative efforts to conserve wildlife
         connectivity with Federal, state, Tribal, and non-governmental partners. This
         includes investments through the Forest Legacy Program, which has conserved over
         3 million acres of threatened forests to “keep working lands working” while
         protecting wildlife habitat and critical migration corridors, and contributions
         totaling $1.4 million to the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation’s (NFWF)
         Western Big Game Seasonal Habitat and Migration Corridors Fund. USFS analytic



                                               3
    tools are improving planning, including a Climate Risk Viewer that identifies
    climate-driven risks to key resources, including corridors and connectivity, and
    migration corridor tool development among the National Forest System, Research
    Stations, and partners.

(2) The Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) uses its conservation
    planning approach to incorporate terrestrial wildlife habitat connectivity and
    corridors into conservation strategies at a broad landscape scale, and into
    conservation plans with individual ranchers, farmers, and forest owners at the local
    scale. At the landscape scale, NRCS uses its Landscape Conservation Initiatives
    (LCI) and its Working Lands for Wildlife (WLFW) approach, which leverage
    strategic science and conservation partnerships, to identify needed practices and
    ensure they are targeted to achieve measurables outcomes. From 2010 to 2023,
    NRCS worked with over 10,000 private landowners to protect or restore more than
    13 million acres through WLFW. In response to needs expressed by state and local
    stakeholders, the agency has introduced a number of innovations in policy and
    conservation practices that can benefit wildlife and working lands. For example,
    through WLFW’s Migratory Big Game Initiative, NRCS is working with the Farm
    Service Agency to pilot concurrent participation in the Environmental Quality
    Incentives Program (EQIP) and the Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) to
    address both habitat connectivity and operational resource concerns. The agency
    has also recently used its Conservation Innovation Grants and other programs to
    incorporate habitat connectivity and wildlife conflict reduction considerations into
    conservation practice standards. Finally, NRCS is a leader in the Areawide
    Network to Connect Habitats and Optimize Resiliency (ANCHOR), which uses
    current science to rank sites for their connectivity value.

(3) The Farm Service Agency’s (FSA) Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) has a
    long history benefiting seasonal wildlife habitat across the U.S. In 2022, through
    the designation of a Greater Yellowstone Wildlife Corridors National Priority Zone,
    the agency enhanced incentives for producers to protect grazing land from
    development within state-identified migration habitats of national importance. The
    forthcoming expansion of several WLFW Frameworks for Conservation Action will
    ensure CRP compatibility with complementary programs to provide landowners,
    farmers, and ranchers with more tools to contribute to landscape scale conservation.
    FSA continues to engage wildlife experts and producers to inform CRP State Acres
    for Wildlife Enhancement (SAFE) proposals and competitive enrollment
    opportunities to address priority resource concerns, enhance wildlife populations,
    and target CRP enrollment objectives. FSA has also been advancing opportunities
    for Tribal partnership: since 2022, the agency has entered four Conservation
    Reserve Enhancement Program (CREP) Agreements with Tribal Nations in
    Montana and South Dakota to improve grassland productivity, reduce soil erosion,
    and enhance wildlife habitat.

(4) The Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) administers Wildlife
    Services (WS), which provides expertise to resolve wildlife conflicts to allow



                                         4
           people and wildlife to coexist. To that end, APHIS continues to build capacity and
           support inter-governmental coordination on the response to zoonotic and emerging
           wildlife diseases, such as a new Wildlife Disease Diagnostics Laboratory and
           Bioarchive Storage Facility in Ft. Collins, CO. WS has long provided technical
           assistance to help reduce predator damage, including non-lethal tools like electric
           fencing, range riding, and carcass disposal. Since Congress funded the WS
           Nonlethal Initiative (NLI) in 2020, the agency has expanded the delivery of these
           tools and is studying how new technology such as unmanned aerial systems,
           artificial intelligence, and robotics can be used to detect and deter predators to
           minimize livestock loss and wildlife mortality. WS plays an important role in
           determining cause of death in a number of settings where federally protected
           predators, such as wolves and grizzly bears, may kill livestock and cause-of-death
           determinations influence management decisions including livestock protection
           efforts or agency control actions. Recently, this has included improvements in the
           evidentiary standards for depredation investigations in the Mexican Gray Wolf
           Recovery Zone. APHIS Veterinary Services (VS) has oversight and management
           authority over bison quarantine facilities as part of the Bison Conservation Transfer
           Program (BCTP). BCTP is a cooperative program between agencies to restore
           bison to the prairie grasslands of Tribal communities. A cooperative effort between
           Yellowstone National Park, APHIS VS and the Fort Peck Tribes captures
           Yellowstone bison, ensures they are free from brucellosis, and distributes them to
           Tribal lands across the United States. To date, 414 Yellowstone National Park
           bison have been shipped to Tribal communities across the United States for
           conservation herds. Veterinary Services is also a partner agency in the Interagency
           Bison Management Plan that cooperates to manage Yellowstone bison at the
           Yellowstone National Park and State of Montana boundary to reduce the risk of
           brucellosis infection to cattle and maintain a wild free-ranging herd of bison.

  n.   USDA and its agencies, by policy and practice, implement science-based and evidence-
       driven decision-making. In the course of their work to conserve and restore wildlife
       habitat connectivity and corridors and to reduce associated conflicts, agencies recognize
       and respect science and data from a variety of sources, including but not limited to
       agencies, universities, Tribes, non-governmental organizations, and individuals.

  o.   This Memorandum is intended to build on USDA agency as well as state, Federal, Tribal
       and non-governmental partners’ previous actions on terrestrial wildlife habitat
       connectivity and corridors. The Memorandum is to be implemented within the context
       of the USDA Forest Service’s multiple-use mandate and the other agencies’ voluntary,
       incentive-based, and service-oriented approach to conservation and restoration.


3. ACTIONS ORDERED

  Pursuant to this Memorandum, the Secretary directs the Chief of NRCS, the Administrator of
  FSA, the Chief of USFS, and the Administrator of APHIS, working closely with the Under
  Secretaries for Farm Production and Conservation (FPAC), Natural Resources and



                                                 5
Environment (NRE), and Marketing and Regulatory Programs (MRP), to take the following
actions:

a.   Incorporate consideration of terrestrial wildlife habitat connectivity and corridors into
     relevant planning processes, programs, and assessments, as appropriate, including:

     (1) USFS land management plans, fuels reduction and wildfire crisis planning, national
         and regional reforestation implementation plans, State Forest Action Plans, Tribal
         Forest Management Plans, Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program
         (CFLRP), Forest Legacy Program (FLP), Forest Stewardship Program (FSP),
         Landscape Scale Restoration (LSR), and Community Forest Program (CFP).

     (2) NRCS and FSA Farm Bill conservation programs, including the Agricultural
         Conservation Easement Program (ACEP), Environmental Quality Incentives
         Program (EQIP), Regional Conservation Partnerships Program (RCPP),
         Conservation Stewardship Program (CSP), Conservation Innovation Grants (CIG),
         Conservation Reserve Program (CRP), and Grassland CRP.

     (3) USFS and NRCS jointly administered Joint Chiefs Landscape Restoration
         Partnerships program.

     (4) APHIS and WS wildlife damage, wildlife disease, and invasive species
         management programs and APHIS bison quarantine/BCTP program.

     (5) Each agency’s monitoring, assessment, and evaluation efforts, including the efforts
         of NRCS’ Resource Inventory and Assessment Division and Working Lands for
         Wildlife science team; FSA’s CRP Monitoring, Assessment and Evaluation
         Program; and USFS monitoring programs and platforms including the Climate Risk
         Viewer.

b.   Improve the coordination, compatibility, and delivery of USDA planning processes and
     programs to improve outcomes for terrestrial wildlife connectivity by:

     (1) Ensuring coordination among USDA’s public land managers, wildlife biologists,
         and private land conservation planners at the regional and state levels as they
         deliver technical and financial assistance for wildlife habitat conservation and
         restoration, wildlife damage management and other services, particularly where this
         coordination can improve habitat and conflict reduction outcomes across adjacent
         public, private, and Tribal lands within identified state and Tribal priority areas.
         This includes Regional Foresters and Forest Supervisors; Regional, State, and
         District Conservationists; and State and County Directors.

     (2) Enhancing opportunities for agricultural and forest landowners to participate in
         concurrent Farm Bill programs. This includes making appropriate regulatory or
         policy changes that would enable better compatibility or transitions between




                                                6
         programs or program components (e.g. EQIP, Grassland CRP and ACEP-
         Agricultural Land Easements).

     (3) Identifying and addressing barriers that limit Tribal access to, and participation in,
         USDA’s planning processes and conservation programs. This includes making
         appropriate improvements to program eligibility and technical assistance.

     (4) Utilizing Landscape Conservation Initiatives funding and Working Lands for
         Wildlife Frameworks for Conservation Action (including Frameworks in progress,
         such as those on Western Migratory Big Game, Southeast Aquatic Connectivity,
         Eastern Deciduous Forest, and the Southeastern Pine Ecosystems) to align NRCS
         and FSA programs to maximize habitat connectivity outcomes.

     (5) Using a science-based approach to identifying priorities, delivering programs, and
         monitoring outcomes. This includes leveraging the full suite of data from Federal,
         state, Tribal, and non-governmental partner organizations, seeking new ways to
         include traditional ecological knowledge and support the co-production of science
         with partners, maintaining science adviserships at universities to improve the
         prioritization and outcomes of this conservation, and working with communications
         teams across the Department to share outcomes with the public.

     (6) Evaluate current disaster assistance programs, such as FSA’s Emergency
         Conservation Program (ECP), to examine effectiveness and geographic
         applicability of current fence repair and replacement standards as they relate to land
         management, while exploring alternatives to better harmonize fencing standards
         with wildlife friendly practices.

     (7) Support producer, permittee, and Tribal innovation by expanding conservation
         practices, financial assistance, and other partnership opportunities to reflect modern
         technology and management, including:

         (a) Supporting grazing management techniques that improve habitat permeability,
             such as virtual fencing and wildlife-friendly fence designs.

         (b) Expanding wildlife conflict management options by building upon the WS
             Nonlethal Initiative and incorporating conflict reduction considerations further
             into EQIP practice standards and payment scenarios.

     (8) Gathering and sharing best examples of how climate change and/or climate
         adaptation is being incorporated in terrestrial connectivity planning.

c.   Improve inter-jurisdictional coordination with States, Tribes, and other Federal agencies.

     (1) With respect to States:




                                                7
    (a) Recognize state authorities to manage wildlife, and coordinate with states to
        identify priorities for terrestrial wildlife habitat connectivity and corridors.
        Focus resources to help achieve goals consistent with identified priorities.

    (b) Incorporate information provided by states that improves understanding of
        wildlife connectivity and related conservation needs, including, for example,
        state data on multi-jurisdictional big game migrations.

    (c) Provide technical and other assistance to states as available, and collaborate
        directly with states to build on existing efforts and identify new opportunities
        to conserve wildlife habitat connectivity and corridors.

(2) With respect to Tribes:

    (a) Recognize Tribal sovereignty and coordinate closely with Tribal wildlife
        agencies to identify priorities for wildlife habitat connectivity and corridors.
        Focus resources to help achieve goals consistent with identified priorities.

    (b) In accordance with Joint Secretarial Order 3403 on Fulfilling the Trust
        Responsibility to Indian Tribes in the Stewardship of Federal Lands and
        Waters, endeavor to engage in tribal co-stewardship of wildlife and wildlife
        habitat, including migration corridors, where appropriate.

    (c) Incorporate information provided by Tribes that improves understanding of
        wildlife connectivity and related conservation needs, including incorporating
        Indigenous Knowledge regarding wildlife connectivity and related stewardship
        needs whenever possible, while honoring Tribal data sovereignty.

    (d) Identify opportunities to support and partner on Tribal priorities for wildlife
        habitat connectivity and corridors as well as related conflict mitigation needs,
        including, for example, Tribal buffalo restoration and accompanying needs for
        fencing, fence permeability, and disease risk mitigation.

    (e) Provide technical and other assistance to Tribes as available, and collaborate
        directly with Tribes to build on existing efforts and identify new opportunities
        to conserve wildlife habitat connectivity and corridors.

(3) With respect to Federal Agencies:

    (a) Improve and expand direct USDA collaboration on terrestrial wildlife habitat
        connectivity and corridors with the Department of the Interior (DOI),
        Department of Transportation (DOT), Department of Defense (DoD), and other
        Federal agencies and collaboratives, particularly within identified priority areas
        across public, private and Tribal lands. Specifically:




                                          8
        1    Increase coordination with DOI on Secretarial Order 3362 and with
             DOT’s Wildlife Crossings Pilot Program, particularly where these align
             with the WLFW Migratory Big Game Initiative.

        2    Strengthen and expand coordination and partnerships with the U.S. Fish
             and Wildlife Service, particularly where consultation processes (e.g.,
             Section 7 consultation), regulatory assurances (e.g., Safe Harbor
             agreements), and shared capacity (e.g., via the Partners for Fish and
             Wildlife Program) can enhance the delivery of USDA voluntary
             conservation programs.

        3    Continue to participate in the Sentinel Landscapes Partnership, a coalition
             of Federal agencies, state and local governments, and nongovernmental
             organizations that work with private landowners to conserve landscapes
             around DoD military installations and ranges.

        4    Coordinate with the Bureau of Indian Affairs to advance tribal stewardship
             and ensure that Tribes can shape the direction of wildlife management on
             Federal lands that are their ancestral homelands.

        5    Continue to engage with relevant Joint Venture collaboratives that engage
             Federal, state, and non-governmental organizations in regional or species-
             specific wildlife connectivity efforts.

        6    Continue coordination with the National Park Service, Tribes and other
             partners to ensure brucellosis-free bison.

    (b) Ensure that USDA actively engages with the National Terrestrial Wildlife
        Habitat Connectivity and Corridors Working Group (“Working Group”)
        established by the Council on Environmental Quality.

        1    Collaborate with the Working Group to determine what connectivity
             modeling assessments are already available, for what geographies, and at
             what scale (national, regional, species-agnostic or species-specific, etc.) to
             leverage those evaluations and to avoid duplication of effort.

        2    Develop, in coordination with the Working Group, methods for how the
             Federal agencies will measure improvements to terrestrial connectivity
             (i.e., measure success).

(4) With respect to non-governmental organizations:

    (a) Collaborate with non-governmental organizations to facilitate engagement with
        and support of communities and local collaboratives.




                                         9
           (b) Foster innovation through the pursuit of partnerships to create new solutions to
               achieving positive conservation outcomes for wildlife and habitat connectivity.

           (c) Work with NGOs to jointly develop science that informs priorities for
               conservation.

           (d) Increase capacity to implement of cross-boundary conservation work through
               development of agreements and partnership arrangements.

  d.   Coordinate within USDA to implement the actions outlined in this Memorandum, with
       the goal of improved delivery of USDA programs and outcomes for terrestrial wildlife
       habitat connectivity and corridors.

       (1) Implementation of the actions in the above sections will require staff coordination
           across USDA agencies. Within 45 days of the signing of this Memorandum, the
           Chiefs of NRCS and the USFS and the Administrators of FSA and APHIS, will
           establish a USDA Terrestrial Wildlife Habitat Connectivity and Corridors
           Committee. The Committee will be charged with ensuring implementation of this
           Memorandum. The Committee will provide the Secretary with its first report on
           implementation progress by June 30, 2025, and provide subsequent reports to the
           Secretary on a biannual basis thereafter.

       (2) This Committee is to be composed of one senior agency representative from each
           signatory agency and any additional subject matter experts that are deemed
           necessary and chaired on a rotating basis by NRCS and USFS. To support the
           Committee, appropriate USDA agencies will identify regional terrestrial
           connectivity liaisons that include regional and/or state-level USFS, NRCS, FSA,
           and APHIS representatives to ensure coordination on specific regional issues.


4. EFFECTIVE DATE AND TERMINATION

  a.   This Memorandum is effective immediately and will remain in effect for 1 year, at
       which time, per Departmental Regulation (DR) 0100-001, Departmental Directives
       System, it must be codified into a DR, or until such earlier time as its provisions are
       implemented and completed or it is superseded or revoked.

  b.   This Memorandum does not create any substantive or procedural right or benefit
       enforceable by law or equity, nor does it create any private right of action.




                                                 /s/ Thomas J. Vilsack
                                                 Secretary of Agriculture


                                                 10
