                                                  :<t~ ._.~ .



                                              -                     '\
                                        ·,~
                                         -                          :.;-
                                        ,:.                         ;
                                        \~,                         :.
                                                           ~    .
                     THE OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE
                                         WASHINGTON
                                         20250-0100


                      SECRETARY'S MEMORANDUM 1078-002

                                    February 20, 2025

      ELIMINATION OF FEDERAL ADVISORY COMMITTEES WITHIN THE
                   DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE



1. PURPOSE

  On February 19, 2025, the President issued an Executive Order, Commencing the Reduction
  ofthe Federal Bureaucracy, which set forth the Administration's policy ofreducing the size
  of the Federal government in order to minimize waste, fraud, abuse, and inflation and to
  promote American freedom and innovation. To that end, the President's order directed the
  termination of several Federal Advisory Committees and ordered the identification of
  additional unnecessary Federal Advisory Committees for termination.


2. POLICY

  Consistent with the President's Executive Order and pursuant to my authority as the Secretary
  of the Department of Agriculture, 41 CFR 102-3.55(a)(2), and all other applicable authorities,
  I find that the following Federal Advisory Committees are unnecessary and accordingly
  terminate them to the maximum extent consistent with law:

  •   Advisory Committee on Agriculture Statistics
  •   Advisory Committee on Universal Cotton Standards
  •   Agricultural Technical Advisory Committee for Trade in Animal and Animal Products
  •   Agricultural Technical Advisory Committee for Trade in Fruits and Vegetables
  •   Agricultural Technical Advisory Committee for Trade in Grains, Feed, Oilseeds and
      Planting Seeds
  •   Agricultural Technical Advisory Committee for Trade in Processed Foods
  •   Agricultural Technical Advisory Committee for Trade in Sweeteners and Sweetener
      Products
  •   Agricultural Technical Advisory Committee for Trade in Tobacco, Cotton, Peanuts, and
      Hemp
  •   Black Hills National Forest Advisory Board
  •   Fruit and Vegetable Industry Advisory Committee
  •   General Conference Committee of the National Poultry Improvement Plan
  •     National Advisory Committee on Meat and Poultry Inspection
  •     National Advisory Committee on Microbiological Criteria for Foods
  •     National Animal Welfare Advisory Committee
  •     National Wildlife Services Advisory Committee
  •     Northwest Forest Plan Area Advisory Committee


3. EXISTING DIRECTIVES

      This Secretary Memorandum revokes Departmental Regulation 1043-027, dated February
      7, 2011, in its entirety due to updates to policies and Executive Orders.

      Prior delegations of authority, administrative regulations, and other directives not
      inconsistent with the provisions of this Memorandum will remain in full force and effect.


4. INCIDENTAL TRANSFERS

      The Assistant Secretary for Administration, the Chief Financial Officer, and the Director,
      Office of Budget and Program Analysis, are authorized to approve such transfers of funds,
      terminations, personnel, employment authority, space, records, property, and incidentals as
      may be necessary to implement the provisions of this Memorandum.


5. EFFECTIVE DATE AND TERMINATION

      This delegation is effective immediately and will remain in effect for 1 year from
      the effective date, or until such earlier time as the Department's published
      delegations of authority have been revised to incorporate the provisions of this
      Memorandum.




                                              Isl Brooke L. Rollins
                                              Secretary
                                              U.S. Department of Agriculture




                                                    2
