                                                      ,.,

                                                      :;i:.·
                                                       y·
                                            ""~~ ·_
                                                \



                                                               , r i,

                UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                         OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
                          WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                      SECRETARY'S MEMORANDUM 1078-016

                                      August 21, 2025

 Efficiency Screening Criteria for Proposals Concerning Power Generation on National
                                  Forest System Lands

1. PURPOSE
     Executive Order (E.O.) 14156, Declaring a National Energy Emergency (January 20,
     2025), and E.O. l 4315, Ending ,vtarket Distorting Subsidies for Unreliable, Foreign­
     Controlled Energy Sources (July 7, 2025), emphasize the importance of domestic energy
     projects' contribution to national energy security while preserving the environment. The
     United States has abundant energy resources and a great potential for power transmission
     capacity to meet our domestic energy needs. Past misguided federal policies have
     prevented full utilization of these resources and made us reliant on foreign energy. It is
     vital that USDA contribute to the immediate reversal of these policies and increase
     domestic energy production to protect our national and economic security. We can
     manage energy generation and transmission projects on national forests to better provide
     domestic energy supply, create jobs and prosperity, and decrease both project
     construction and consumer energy costs. It is therefore the policy of the USDA to:
             (a) Promote the efficient use of federally managed lands prioritizing technologies
             and designs that optimize energy output per unit of land area; and
             (b) Ensure that energy projects align with the principles of multiple use, sustained
             yield, and environmental stewardship.
     This Secretarial Memorandum details the actions I am directing the U.S. Forest Service
     to take in response to E.O. l 4156 and E.O. l 4315.
2. AUTHORITIES
     This Memorandum is issued under the authority of the Organic Administration Act of
     1897 (16 U.S.C. §§ 473-482, 55 l ); Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield Act of l 960 (l6 U.S.C.
     §§ 528-53 l ), Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of l 974, as
     amended (l6 U.S.C. §§ 1601-1614), as well as other statutory authorities governing the
     management, administration and protection of the National Forest System. Other
     authorities include, but are not limited to E.O. 14156.
3. BACKGROUND
     The USDA manages approximately 193 million acres of national forests and grasslands
     in 43 States, much of which could be a critical component for increasing domestic energy
     generation and transmission capacity development. Policies which encourage reliance
     upon foreign energy must be reconsidered .
     Equally important, USDA must do its part to ensure domestic energy production
     proposals are efficiently and effectively evaluated so that successful applications may be
     expedited. Generally, projects with higher land-use efficiency, i.e. , optimizes the amount
     of useable energy produced per acre, typically have lower environmental impacts, require
     less land disturbance, and allow more National Forest System lands to be made available
     for multiple uses, such as outdoor recreation, range, timber, watershed, and wildlife and
     fish purposes.
     Immediate action is needed to ensure USDA efficiently contributes to domestic energy
     capacity while mitigating environmental risk and supporting local and rural economies.
     We should ensure only the most efficient proposals are evaluated and thereby do more to
     contribute to American prosperity and protect our national and energy security.
     Different generation types (e.g., wind, solar, gas, etc.) require different amounts of land
     (and land parcel sizes) to generate similar amounts of power, and as a result different
     generation types have widely varying environmental impacts.
4. DIRECTIVE
     To achieve the purpose set forth above, this Memorandum directs the Forest Service to
     develop and use the necessary administrative processes to incorporate land-use efficiency
     metrics into the screening of applications for power generation on National Forest System
     lands. The agency shall promulgate screening criteria to ensure that energy-related permit
     applications optimize energy generation per unit of land area while taking into
     consideration environmental, social, and economic considerations.
     In developing screening criteria, the Forest Service shall take into consideration the
     following:
            (a) Screening Criteria for Land-Use Efficiency:
                    (i) The agency shall evaluate proposed power generation projects based
                    on their land-use efficiency, expressed as megawatts (MW) or nameplate
                    capacity (MW) per acre.
                    (ii) Projects that demonstrate higher land-use efficiency shall be
                    prioritized, provided they meet other environmental, social, and economic
                    criteria.
                    (iii) The agency shall consider the varying land use requirements and
                    related environmental impact by various power generation type when
                    evaluating any power generation project or related major federal action.
                    (iv) In considering the factors, the agency shall consider the power project
                    boundary being proposed and evaluate whether alternative generation
                    technology may deliver a similar amount of effective annual power while
                    using a smaller perimeter and therefore disrupting and/or destroying less
                    natural habit and displacing fewer species.

                                               2
5. IMPLEMENTATION
    The Under Secretary for Natural Resources and Environment is responsible for
    implementing all aspects of this Memorandum. In the absence of an Under Secretary, the
    Chief of the Forest Service will carry out the responsibilities assigned in this
    Memorandum.
6. EFFECTS OF THIS MEMORANDUM
    This Memorandum is intended to improve the internal management of the Department,
    assure implementation of the above-referenced Executive Orders, and ensure compliance
    with applicable federal laws. This Memorandum is not intended to, and does not create,
    any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity by any party
    against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities or entities, officers,
    or employees, or any other person. This Memorandum is intended to facilitate future
    decision-making and does not authorize, fund, or carry-out any natural resource or project
    decision.
    To the extent there is any inconsistency between the provisions of this Memorandum and
    any federal laws or regulations, the laws or regulations will control.
7. EFFECTIVE DATE
    This Memorandum is effective immediately.




                                           Isl Brooke L. Rollins
                                           Secretary
                                           U.S. Department of Agriculture




                                              3
