               UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                        OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
                         WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                       SECRETARY'S MEMORANDUM 1078-001

                                      February 13, 2025

   PRIORITIZING UNITY, EQUALITY, MERITOCRACY, AND COLOR-BLIND
    POLICIES, IN THE UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE



1. PURPOSE

  The purpose of this Memorandum is to establish a return to American principles and realign
  the Department’s focus towards its original objectives of maximizing and promoting
  American agriculture, ensuring a safe, nutritious and secure food supply, enhancing rural
  prosperity, and protecting our National Forests. To achieve this purpose, this memorandum
  orders the rescission of all Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Accessibility (DEIA) programs,
  including the Special Emphasis Programs (SEP), and the Department to reprioritize unity,
  equality, meritocracy, and color-blind policies.

  On the Great Seal of the United States of America lies a motto that describes the uniqueness
  of our nation, E Pluribus Unum, out of many one. It is a phrase that transcends politics,
  identities, and individualistic desires. A phrase that promotes a concept of oneness in the
  nation.

  Similarly, at the heart of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) lies the
  mission of seeing Americans fed. It is a mission that likewise transcends all identities and can
  unite every American. After all, if Americans are not fed, then no other issue matters. Our
  differences are a strength, but only to the extent that we can harness those differences into a
  united objective. At times, the goal of seeing Americans fed, has been replaced by
  prioritizing social issues that promote division, not unity. As a taxpayer-funded Department,
  it is our duty to ensure the highest quality of service, and this cannot be done when
  prioritizing politics over our mission. It is in this spirit, that recent Executive Orders
  including: Ending Radical and Wasteful Government DEI Programs and Preferencing;
  Reforming The Federal Hiring Process and Restoring Merit to Government Service; Ending
  Radical and Wasteful Government DEI Programs and Preferencing; Defending Women
  From Gender Ideology Extremism and Restoring Biological Truth to the Federal
  Government; and Eradicating Anti-Christian Bias were created.

  In that spirit, the spirit of unity, the spirit of E Pluribus Unum, and in compliance with the
  aforementioned executive orders, this Department will focus on what unites us, not on what
  divides us. Therefore, this Department and all supporting agencies and mission areas will not
  use official resources in the promotion of identity-based events. Instead, USDA’s resources
   and time will be focused on our objectives at USDA and celebrating our shared unity as
   Americans.


2. POLICY
To establish this priority, USDA will:

   1. End all Critical Race Theory, DEIA, and Gender Ideology Programs and Groups:
      There shall be no USDA resources expended, including employee time, in the creation,
      teaching, promotion, or facilitation of Critical Race Theory, DEIA, or Gender Ideology.
      Specifically, USDA will cease all Special Emphasis Programs as defined by the U.S.
      Office of Personnel Management. In addition, any committee, board, council, task force,
      or working group, not established by statute, whose work touches on the above stated
      ideologies are hereby disbanded. Further guidance shall be forthcoming regarding the
      scope of the actions ordered.

   2. Realigning Department Values Towards Unity, Equality, Meritocracy, and Color-
      Blind Policies: Because ‘equity’ is a concept at war with this nation’s founding
      principles, the Department shall prioritize meritocracy in all its actions and policies.

   3. Ceasing of Identity Month Celebrations: Effective March 1, 2025, USDA will cease
      using Departmental resources for all identity month celebrations including in the form of
      internet postings, Departmental sponsored event celebrations, and promotional materials.

   4. Prioritization of Meritocracy in all USDA Programs: Unless statutorily required by
      law, no USDA form shall require information about or base a decision, to any extent, on
      an individuals’ belonging to a particular identity group.

   5. Promoting Biological Truth of Only Two Sexes: All USDA agencies and organizations
      shall review and ensure that all forms, applications, programs, and materials distributed
      both internally and externally by USDA reflect this foundational truth, by only allowing
      for the choice of male or female.

The Office of Budget and Programs Analysis (OBPA) and Office of General Counsel (OGC)
shall assist USDA agencies and organizations properly to comply with the provisions of this.


3. EXISTING DIRECTIVES

   This Secretary Memorandum overrides Departmental Regulation 4230-002 dated June 4,
   2009, in its entirety due to updates to policies and Executive Orders.




                                                 2
4. INCIDENTAL TRANSFERS

  The Assistant Secretary for Administration, the Chief Financial Officer, and the Director,
  Office of Budget and Program Analysis, are authorized to approve such transfers of funds,
  personnel, employment authority, space, records, property, and incidentals as may be
  necessary to implement the provisions of this Memorandum.


5. EFFECTIVE DATE AND TERMINATION

  This delegation is effective immediately and will remain in effect for 1 year from the
  effective date, or until such earlier time as the Department’s published delegations of
  authority have been revised to incorporate the provisions of this Memorandum.




                                            /s/ Brooke L. Rollins
                                            Secretary of Agriculture




                                                 3
