                                               --.-r,_
                                               ~i,::
                                                    ·;...
                                                            ,_,,.
                                  (I         1)/)     I    ( f} {)/) //.
                                 ,/rn1rlo11J -/~l'or,A<' ....!. ,71ot1r11d

                  UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                           OFFICE OF THE SECRET ARY
                            WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                          SECRETARY'S MEMORANDUM 1078-011

                                              May 20, 2025

RESPONDING TO AND MITIGATING THE THREATS FROM WILDLAND FIRE AT THE
                  U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE



 1. PURPOSE

    This Secretarial Memorandum implements provisions of President Donald J. Trump's vision
    to address the threat of wildfire in the United States. The U.S. Department of Agriculture is
    the "People's Department," and since our inception, we have been called upon to provide
    direct services to the American people, including responding to and mitigating the threat of
    wildfire. It is our duty to safeguard American families, communities, infrastructure, and
    natural resources--coast to coast, every single day of the year. USDA is working to eliminate
    red tape, cut costs, and engage state, local, Tribal, and private sector partners to ensure we
    have the necessary resources to confront the national wildfire emergency. This Secretarial
    Memorandum provides clear expectations about USDA's approach to responding to
    wildfires and directs all Mission Areas to support our commitment to wildfire preparedness and
    response. It further directs the U.S. Forest Service to take several organiz.ational actions to ensure
    operational readiness.
    USDA will work across President Trump's cabinet and with our trusted state, local, and Tribal
    partners to ensure our nation's wildland firefighting system is highly coordinated and focused
    on fighting wildfires quickly and effectively. USDA stands ready to work together to ensure
    we take the necessary, immediate, and bold actions to protect people, communities, and the
    natural resources on which this country depends.


 2. AUTHORITIES

    This Memorandum is issued under the authority of the Organic Administration Act of 1897
    (16 U.S.C. §§ 472 and 551); Weeks Act of 1911 (16 U.S.C. §§ 515, 516-519, 521,552,563);
    and Healthy Forest Restoration Act (16 U.S.C. § 6501 et seq.) as well as other statutory
    authorities governing the management, administration, and protection of the National Forest
    System. Other authorities include, but are not limited to, Executive Order (EO) 14225,
    Immediate Expansion of American Timber Production, dated March 1, 2025.
3. BACKGROUND

  We have already seen significant wildfire activity across the Nation, from the devastating
  wildfires in Southern California to the ongoing fires in the Carolinas. More than one
  million acres have burned this year, significantly exceeding the ten-year average, and the
  outlook shows above normal temperatures and drier than normal conditions across the
  West. This means more people, homes, communities, and landscapes are at risk, and the
  need for firefighters and fire support personnel is clear.
  Given that we face prime conditions for large wildfires, it necessitates a response that
  engages the entire Department. Responding to wildfires will be our highest priority work,
  and the safety of the public and our brave men and women on the frontlines is paramount.
  We will deploy thousands of firefighters and fire support personnel this summer. These
  individuals will work tirelessly to respond with strength, speed, and effectiveness. As a
  Department, we must do all we can to support this effort and assure the safety of our
  personnel.

4. DIRECTIVES

  A. I hereby direct all USDA Mission Areas to assess their ability to assist with wildfire
     response within 30 days. Agency administrators should assess the following:
      •   Take all necessary steps to ensure employees who can support wildfire response have
          the ability and leadership support to secure or maintain their fireline or fire support
          qualifications (i.e., "Red Cards");
     •    Assess all business processes and support systems for contracting and purchasing and
          identify any additional capacity available to assist with wildfire response during peak
          wildfire activity; and
      •   Prioritize funding to increase opportunities for communities and private landowners to
          reduce wildfire risk.

  B. Given the U.S. Forest Service has the strongest and most prepared wildland firefighting
     force in the world, I hereby direct the Chief of the U.S. Forest Service within 30 days to:
     •    Identify the impact of the voluntary departures on the firefighting and fire support
          workforce and propose a plan and timeline to remedy critical vacancies and
          immediate changes to business practices to ensure adequate resource capability
          and mobilization; and
     •    Identify and eliminate all barriers and unnecessary procedures, and make use of all
          needed waivers, to ensure rapid resource deployment when there are imminent
          threats to life and property this summer.

   At Preparedness Level 3 and above, I hereby direct the Chief of the U.S. Forest Service
   to:
     •    Prioritize and redeploy the non-fire workforce to support wildfire response as
          wildfire activity increases. This will include a necessary adjustment to the
          agency's other program work. The agency shall provide updates every 30 days to
          the Natural Resources and Environment Mission Area on workforce capacity
          constraints and anticipated impacts; and

                                              2
     •    Exercise all available authorities, consistent with prior direction, to ensure the
          agency is using every tool and authority available to meet the Nation's wildfire
          response needs.
   Throughout wildfire season, I hereby direct the Chief of the U.S. Forest Service to:
      •   Prioritize wildfire risk reduction efforts in and around communities at risk of
          wildfire and, where possible, continue to offer timber volume consistent with EO
          14225;and
      •   Use all available emergency authorities, including those outlined in Secretarial
          Memorandum 1078-006, to prioritize post-fire hazard tree removal and salvage
          activities as appropriate.


5. IMPLEMENTATION

  The Under Secretary for Natural Resources and Environment is responsible for
  implementing all aspects of this memorandum, in coordination with the Office of the
  General Counsel. In the absence ofan Under Secretary or Deputy, the Chief of the U.S.
  Forest Service will carry out these responsibilities.


6. EFFECTS OF THE MEMORANDUM

  This memorandum is intended to improve the internal management of the Department and
  to assure implementation ofmy expectations for USDA's approach to wildfire response
  and mitigation and is therefore not a final agency action within the meaning of such term in
  chapter 5 oftitle 5. This memorandum and any resulting report or recommendations are not
  intended to, and do not create, any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable
  at law or equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies,
  instrumentalities or entities, its officers or employees, or any other person. To the extent
  there is any inconsistency between the provisions of this memorandum and any Federal
  laws or regulations, the laws or regulations will control.


7. EFFECTIVE DATE

  This memorandum is effective immediately.




                                          Isl Brooke L. Rollins
                                          Secretary
                                          U.S. Department of Agriculture




                                             3
