                                                                    ,,•~
                                                                       }
                                            . '\\'\.~: .. ,,.;n
                                                                  L'
                                                                  . ..,~



                                 THE SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE
                                          WASHINGTON , D. C.
                                             20250-0100




                                            July 24, 2025


                             Secretary Memorandum: SM 1078-015


Subject: Department of Agriculture Reorganization Plan


Section l. Purpose: This Secretary Memorandum authorizes and directs the actions necessary to
effectuate the consolidation, unification, and optimization of functions within the Department of
Agriculture (USDA) to achieve improved effectiveness and accountability, enhanced services,
reduced bureaucracy and cost savings for the American people. These actions constitute the USDA
Department Reorganization Plan.


Section 2. Authority: This Memorandum is issued under the authority of Reorganization Plan No. 2
of 1953 (5 U.S.C. app.; 7 U.S .C. 220 l note) and The Department of Agriculture Reorganization Act
of 1994 (Pub. L. I 03-354).


Section 3. Background: Since its legislated establishment in 1862, USDA has been known as "The
People's Department," a title reflecting its mission to serve farmers, ranchers, landowners, and rural
communities, and perform critical public services that benefit all Americans. The Department is
reverting to its core mission to ensure:


•   American agriculture feeds all across the United States and the world.
•   American farmers, ranchers, and producers compete on a world stage that is fair, just, and on
    terms that put America First.
•   Confidence in our programs to fight disease, feed the needy, manage our land and forests, and
    work for all of American agriculture.
•   That Make America Great Again and Make America Healthy Again exist not in opposition to
    one another, but as complements to a common mission for our country.

Section 4. Key Pillars: USDA is committed to preserving critical public safety and other public
services the American public relies upon. Reductions and impacts to wildland firefighting,
inspection, and farmer and rural community front-line facing positions will be minimized.
The USDA Reorganization Plan will be guided by four key pillars:
Principle 1: Ensure the Size of USDA's Workforce Aligns with Financial Resources and
Priorities

Over the last four years, USDA's workforce grew by approximately 8% and employees' salaries
increased by 14.5%. Many of these salaries were funded by temporary funding. As part of this
reorganization, USDA is not conducting a large-scale workforce reduction. To make certain USDA
can afford its workforce, this reorganization is another step of the Department's process ofreducing
its workforce. Much of this reduction was through voluntary retirements and the Deferred
Retirement Program (DRP), a completely voluntary tool. As of today, 15,364 individuals voluntarily
elected deferred resignation. This re-alignment will be undertaken to mitigate adverse consequences
to those agencies which rely upon temporary workforces that increase at different times of the year.
Examples include Forest Service increases during the spring and summer months due to wildland
firefighting, Agricultural Marketing Service increases due to agricultural product grading activities
during harvest time, and field-based agricultural activities involving the Fann Production and
Conservation Mission Area.

USDA has and will continue to fully leverage voluntary programs such as the Deferred Resignation
Program (DRP), Voluntary Early Retirement Authority (VERA) and Voluntary Separation Incentive
Payments (VSIPs). The Department will also leverage directed and voluntary reassignments to
ensure the workforce is aligned with mission priorities. Focused and limited Reductions in Force
will be implemented only if needed and only after approval by USDA's Deputy Secretary.

Principle 2: Bring USDA Closer to Its Customers by Relocating Resources Outside of the
National Capital Region

The Department currently employs approximately 4,600 individuals that work within the National
Capital Region (NCR). This Region has one of the highest costs of living in the country, with a
federal salary locality rate of 33.94%. To ensure USDA is located closer to the people it serves
while achieving savings to the American taxpayer, USDA will relocate much of its Agency
headquarters and NCR staff from the Washington, D.C. area to five hub locations. The selection of
these hub locations takes into consideration existing concentrations of USDA employees and the
cost of living for USDA employees. At the conclusion of implementation, it is USDA's goal to
retain no more than 2,000 employees within the NCR.

The five hub locations and current Federal locality rates are:
I)   Raleigh, North Carolina (22.24%)
2)   Kansas City, Missouri (18.97%)
3)   Indianapolis, Indiana (18.15%)
4)   Fort Collins, Colorado (30.52%)
5)   Salt Lake City, Utah (17.06%)

In addition to these five hubs, USDA will maintain two additional core administrative support
locations: Albuquerque, New Mexico and Minneapolis, Minnesota. These two locations have
substantial concentrations of human resources staff that support the delivery of critical public safety
functions. USDA will continue to maintain critical service centers and laboratories including agency
service centers in St. Louis, Missouri; Lincoln, Nebraska; and Missoula, Montana.

Regarding existing facilities within the NCR:

Whitten Building: this facility will be retained as USDA's headquarters.

Yates Building: this facility will be retained for use and USDA will fully leverage available office
space for USDA mission areas and staff offices.

National Agricultural Library: retained for use, and the Department will fully leverage available
office space for USDA mission areas and staff offices.

South Building: this facility will be vacated.

Braddock Place: this facility will be vacated.

Beltsville Agricultural Research Center (BARC): this facility will be vacated over multiple years
to avoid disruption of critical USDA research activities.

George Washington Carver Center (GWCC): this facility will be sold or transferred upon
conclusion of its use as a temporary location for USDA personnel during the re-alignment of USDA
offices and personnel

Principle 3: Eliminating Management Layers and Bureaucracy
The Department will reduce or eliminate stand-alone regional offices and other similar bureaucratic
management layers. To promote coordination across USDA, regional offices and other similar
management layers will be co-located in the hub locations to the greatest extent possible.


•   The Agriculture Research Service will eliminate its Area Offices. Residual functions will be
    perfonned by its Office of National Programs.
•   The National Agricultural Statistics Service will consolidate its 12 existing regions into five
    USDA Hubs over a multi-year period.
•   The Food and Nutrition Service will reduce its number of regions from seven to five and align
    locations with the USDA Hubs and Service Centers over a two-year period
•   The Forest Service will phase out the nine Regional Offices over the next year and
    implementation activities will take into consideration the ongoing fire season. The Forest
    Service will maintain a reduced state office in Juneau, Alaska and an eastern service center in
    Athens, Georgia. The current stand-alone Research Stations will be consolidated into a single
    location in Fort Collins, Colorado. The Forest Service will retain the Fire Sciences Lab and
    Forest Products Lab - the former, vital for protection from forest fires and the latter, critical for
    assessing market development opportunities for timber and other forest products and related
    industries.
•   The Natural Resources Conservation Service will align its regional structure with the five
    USDA hub locations.
•   Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service centers will remain at current locations as they are
    located in USDA hub locations.
Principle 4: Consolidate Support Functions
To reduce duplication and provide consistency across USDA, support functions will be
consolidated. Mission area and agency resources will be realigned to the consolidated functions.

The Department will:
• Consolidate civil rights functions into the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights,
   which will deliver all statutorily required civil rights functions .
• Consolidate Freedom of Infonnation Act and related information management functions within
   the Office of General Counsel.
• Consolidate Legislative Affairs functions into the Office of Congressional Relations.
• To the maximum extent practicable, consolidate communication and public affairs functions
   within the Office of Communication.
• Eliminate the duplication and redundancy between the Office of Budget and Program Analysis
   and the Office of the Chief Financial Officer and streamline budget and financial operations
   across USDA.
• Where possible and appropriate, complete information technology consolidation activities with
   services fully provided by the Office of the Chief Information Officer.
• Consolidate tribal relations functions within mission areas and ensure the Office of Tribal
   Relations delivers all statutorily required tribal relations functions.
• Consolidate human resources functions in the Office of the Assistant Secretary for
   Administration (ASA). Although human resources will be consolidated, agencies will still have
   focused hiring support including a dedicated team for wildland firefighting hiring.
• Consolidate contracting functions in the ASA . Although contracting resources will be
   consolidated, dedicated teams for commodity procurement and wildland firefighting incident
   support will continue to exist. The Department will transfer contracting for common goods and
   services to the General Services Administration during FY 2026. To eliminate redundancy, the
   Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business will be reduced to a single position that focuses on
   statutory requirements.
• Consolidate lease administration and management functions in the ASA.
• Consolidate grants and financial assistance to provide better controls and promote efficiency.
   This consolidation will include, where feasible, the transfer of grant making and administration
   functions from USDA offices and agencies that currently have limited capacity to perform such
   duties to other offices and agencies.
• Eliminate the redundancy in student programs in the Office of Partnerships and Public
   Engagement (OPPE) and the Agricultural Research Service (ARS) by realigning OPPE student
   programs to ARS.


Section 5. Implementation:


    a. Deputy Secretary. The Deputy Secretary will lead the implementation of the USDA
       Reorganization Plan and may make changes or adjustments to the plan as needed.
   b. The Office of the General Counsel and the ASA. The Office of the General Counsel and
      the Office of the ASA are directed to take all necessary steps to support the Deputy Secretary
      in implementation of the USDA Reorganization Plan

   c. The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Congressional Relations. The Office of the
      Assistant Secretary for Congressional Relations is directed to work with the Office of
      General Counsel on all necessary Congressional notifications.

   d. Agency Heads and Department Officials. Under Secretaries, Agency Heads, and
      Department Officials are directed to take all necessary actions to implement the USDA
      Reorganization Plan as directed by the Deputy Secretary.


Section 6. Effect of the Memorandum: The implementation of this Secretary Memorandum will
improve the internal management of the Department. This Secretary Memorandum and any
resulting actions do not confer any right or benefit (substantive or procedural) to any party. To the
extent there is any inconsistency between the provisions of this Secretary Memorandum and any
Federal law or regulation, the provisions of such law or regulation will control.


Section 7. Delegation: This Memorandum delegates to the Deputy Secretary all authorities
necessary to implement the USDA Reorganization Plan.


Section 8. Expiration Date: This Secretary Memorandum is effective immediately and will remain
in effect until the earlier of the completion of the US ~""'"'00 anization Pl or the revocation of
this memorandum.

                                                                                       •



                                                  Secretary ofAgriculture
