                     UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                              OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
                               WASHING TON, D.C. 20250

                              SECRETARY'S MEMORANDUM 1078-003

                                                 March 13, 2025

    DIRECTIVE ON CONSERVATION AND NATURAL RESOURCES PRIORITIES


 1. PURPOSE

     It is the policy of the U.S. Department of Agriculture to establish a return to American
     principles and realign the Department's focus towards its original objectives of maximizing
     and promoting American agriculture; ensuring a safe, nutritious, and secure food supply;
     enhancing rural prosperity; and managing our National Forests. This Memorandum
     prioritizes multiple use management 1; conservation of our Nation's natural resources; and a
     focus on serving the American people in furtherance of those policies. The Department's
     resources must be conserved and focused upon its original objectives, as well as its
     obligations under the Constitution and laws of the United States. The Department's
     priorities include ensuring that its grants, cooperative agreements, and other similar
     arrangements, including mutual interest agreements (collectively, "awards"), do not support
     programs or organizations that promote or take part in climate change or environmental
     justice initiatives. It is vital that the Department assess both whether all award payments are
     free from fraud, abuse, and duplication, and whether they are in the best interests of the
     United States. See, e.g., FAR 12.403, 49.101; 2 C.F.R. § 200.340(a).

 2. POLICY

     To establish and safeguard the Department's priorities, all USDA agencies and staff offices
     that issue awards must conduct an internal review of all active awards still in their period of
     performance, as well as awards selected for funding but not yet obligated or awarded to
     specific individuals or entities (e.g., under existing notices of funding opportunities).

     Such review shall be limited to ensuring that the Department does not fund programs or
     organizations that promote or take part in climate change or environmental justice initiatives
     that are either contrary to law or to the Department's policy objectives, as well as ensuring
     that all awards are free from fraud, abuse, and duplication. Awards deemed inconsistent
     with the Department's priorities shall, to the maximum extent permitted by law and in

         1
            See, e.g., Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield Act of 1960, 16 U.S.C. § 528 ("It is the policy of the Congress
that the national forests are established and shall be administered for outdoor recreation, range, timber, watershed,
and wildlife and fish purposes.").
accordance with any applicable regulations and notice and procedural requirements in the
relevant award, agreement, or other instrument, be terminated in whole or in part or
otherwise modified to minimize the scope of the Department's obligations.

This Directive shall be implemented by all Departmental personnel responsible for award­
related activities, including but not limited to those responsible for planning, budgeting,
executing, and administering awards.

Notwithstanding this Directive, any disbursements on open awards paused due to any Office
of Management and Budget memorandum or Executive Order shall be immediately released
to the extent required by law or court order.




                                        Isl Brooke L. Rollins
                                        Secretary
                                        U.S. Department ofAgriculture




                                              2
