                UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                         OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
                          WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                       SECRETARY'S MEMORANDUM 1077-012

                                     September 10, 2024

                     Delegation of Authority for the Administrator,
                    Risk Management Agency, Farm Production and
                               Conservation Mission Area
                  Under Title 7, Section 3319a of the United States Code


1. PURPOSE

  The purpose of this memorandum is to delegate authority to the Administrator of the Risk
  Management Agency (RMA) under the Farm Production and Conservation (FPAC) Mission
  Area to enter into cost-reimbursable agreements with State cooperative institutions or other
  colleges and universities without regard to any requirement for competition, for the
  acquisition of goods or services, including personal services, to carry out agricultural
  research, extension, or teaching activities of mutual interest to render support to RMA and
  the Federal Crop Insurance Program (FCIP).


2. DELEGATIONS

  a.   The Administrator of RMA is hereby delegated the authority vested in the Secretary
       under Section 1473A of the National Agricultural Research, Extension, and Teaching
       Policy Act of 1977 (7 United States Code (U.S.C.) 3319a) to enter into cost-
       reimbursable agreements with State cooperative institutions or other colleges and
       universities without regard to any requirement for competition, for the acquisition of
       goods or services, including personal services, to carry out agricultural research,
       extension, or teaching activities of mutual interest.

  b.   This delegation allows the Administrator of RMA to enter into cost-reimbursable
       agreements to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of Federal programs in
       support of the FCIP.


3. EXISTING DIRECTIVES

  Prior delegations of authority, administrative regulations, and other directives not
  inconsistent with the provisions of this Memorandum will remain in full force and effect.
4. EFFECTIVE DATE AND TERMINATION

  This delegation is effective immediately and will remain in effect for 1 year from the
  effective date, or until such earlier time as the Department’s published delegations of
  authority have been revised to incorporate the provisions of this Memorandum.




                                           /s/ Thomas J. Vilsack
                                           Secretary of Agriculture
