               UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                        OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
                         WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                       SECRETARY'S MEMORANDUM 1077-010

                                       March 1, 2024

       Renewing the U.S. Department of Agriculture Bioeconomy Council and the
                        Bioeconomy Coordination Committee



1. PURPOSE

  This Memorandum re-establishes the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Bioeconomy
  Council (BC) and the Bioeconomy Coordination Committee (BCC). This step recognizes
  the contribution of programs and efforts at USDA to expand the US bioeconomy, including
  the production and use of renewable energy and biobased products. It also serves to ensure
  a coordinated response to Executive Order (E.O.) 14081, Advancing Biotechnology and
  Biomanufacturing Innovation for a Sustainable, Safe, and Secure American Bioeconomy;
  which seeks to advance biotechnology and biomanufacturing towards innovative solutions
  in health, climate change, energy, food security, agriculture, supply chain resilience, and
  national and economic security across the Department. Finally, it seeks to expand access to
  new, more, and better markets that diversify revenue streams for farmers, ranchers, and
  foresters, especially in rural communities.


2. BACKGROUND

  Secretary Vilsack originally established the BC in 2013 to support the many bioeconomy-
  related provisions and programs set forth in the 2008 Farm Bill. These activities have
  focused on biomass, bioengineering, biobased products, and bioenergy feedstocks, along
  with the farms, forests, waste streams, infrastructure, technologies, and research and
  development employed to deliver them. More recently, the focus has also included foods and
  feeds produced via engineered biological processes, such as genetic engineering and cell-
  cultivated meat (while generally excluding conventional foods and feeds). Through these
  areas, agriculture and forestry serve as the foundation of the bioeconomy, and bioeconomy
  applications involve most USDA Mission Areas and agencies.

  In 2022, E.O. 14081 established ambitious but attainable goals designed to grow the
  domestic American bioeconomy by harnessing biotechnology and biomanufacturing to help
  make the United States more prosperous, healthier, and more secure. The E.O. broadly
  defined biotechnology as technology that applies to or is enabled by life sciences innovation,
  and biomanufacturing as the use of biological systems to develop products, tools, and
  processes at commercial scale. The E.O. directed USDA to lead on several tasks in
  biotechnology and biomanufacturing. These include a plan to ensure resilient biomass
  supply chains and the climate-smart production, manufacturing, procurement and use of
  biobased products.


3. MISSION

  The BC’s mission is to advance the contributions of agriculture and forestry to the
  bioeconomy and to promote the Nation’s energy security and economic growth by:
  facilitating communication across USDA agencies; deploying and implementing the
  Department’s energy, biobased products, and bioeconomy-related programs; and investing in
  the bioeconomy to create more and better markets for farmers, ranchers, and foresters. To
  realize this mission, the BC will promote collaboration across the Department to help ensure
  that the Department’s numerous energy and bioeconomy-related programs are
  complementary under a comprehensive energy and bioeconomy strategy that reflects
  research and development, capacity building for rural economic opportunities in rural areas,
  and market development. The strategy will also include outreach, education, and training,
  and improved efficiency and use of renewable energy and biobased products by the
  Department (and, to the extent possible, across the Federal Government). The BC will also
  provide strategic direction and guidance in developing and overseeing short- and long-term
  priorities on the bioeconomy for USDA.


4. ACTIONS ORDERED

  a.   Establishment: This Memorandum serves to reconstitute the BC with its subordinate,
       the BCC.

  b.   Functions: The BC will promote coordination and collaboration across the Department
       to help ensure that the Department’s numerous bioeconomy-related programs support
       the Department’s strategic plan, priorities, and initiatives, and that the Department
       effectively engages in implementation of bioeconomy-related interagency efforts such as
       E.O. 14081 and forthgoing Governmentwide bioeconomy initiatives.

  c.   Composition: The BC consists of the following members:

       (1) Chair: Secretary of Agriculture
       (2) Vice-Chair: Deputy Secretary of Agriculture
       (3) Assistant Secretary for Congressional Relations
       (4) Assistant Secretary for Administration
       (5) General Counsel
       (6) Director of Communications
       (7) Director, Office of Homeland Security
       (8) Under Secretary, Farm Production and Conservation
       (9) Under Secretary, Trade and Foreign Agricultural Affairs
       (10) Under Secretary, Rural Development



                                               2
       (11) Under Secretary, Research, Education, and Economics
       (12) Under Secretary, Natural Resources and Environment
       (13) Under Secretary, Marketing and Regulatory Programs
       (14) Chief Economist
       (15) Director, Office of Budget and Program Analysis
       (16) Any other members specifically designated by the Secretary of Agriculture

  d.   The BCC coordinates bioeconomy-related activities among USDA agencies and
       performs duties as assigned by the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, and the BC. It also
       serves as a forum for sharing information regarding bioeconomy-related activities that
       occur outside of USDA but that involve USDA agencies, including E.O. 14081.
       Members of the Council will ensure their agencies and Mission Areas are represented on
       the BCC by identifying and appointing staff to participate in the BCC. Council
       members may also designate BCC liaisons with other working groups to ensure
       adequate communication and coordination. The Director of the Office of Energy and
       Environmental Policy within the Office of the Chief Economist will serve as the chair of the
       BCC.


5. EXISTING DIRECTIVES

  The provisions of this Memorandum are effective immediately and will remain in effect for
  1 year or until such earlier time as applicable Departmental regulations or guidance has been
  revised to incorporate the provisions of this SM.




                                              /s/ Thomas J. Vilsack
                                              Secretary of Agriculture




                                                  3
