                               U
                                           ;rz   )))     I    ( f.' J/J //.
                              -/ec ;,,l,r l' 'I ,7) r< 01.-r ,.Z. . our h1
                UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                         OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
                          WASHINGTON, D.C. 20250

                      SECRETARY'S MEMORANDUM 1078-013

                                         JUNE 30, 2025

RESPONDING TO AND IMPLEMENTING GOLD STANDARD SCIENCE AT THE U.S.
                   DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

1. PURPOSE

     The U.S. Department of Agriculture is the "People's Department," and since our
     inception, we have been called upon to serve the American people, including a strong
     commitment to ensuring the highest level of integrity in all aspects of the Department's
     engagement in scientific and technological activities and the use of scientific information
     in policy making.

     This Secretarial Memorandum implements provisions of President Donald J. Trump's
     vision to restore a gold standard for science that ensures that federally funded research is
     transparent, rigorous, and impactful, and that Federal decisions are informed by the most
     credible, reliable, and impartial scientific evidence available as set forth in Executive
     Order (EO) 14303, Restoring Gold Standard Science, dated May 23, 2025.

     This Secretarial Memorandum provides clear expectations about USDA's approach to
     implement gold standard science and directs all Mission Areas, Agencies, and Offices to
     support our commitment to this standard.

2. BACKGROUND

     Over the last 5 years, confidence that scientists act in the best interests of the public has
     fallen significantly. A majority of researchers in science, technology, engineering, and
     mathematics believe science is facing a reproducibility crisis. The falsification of data by
     leading researchers has led to high-profile retractions of federally funded research.
     Unfortunately, the Federal Government has contributed to this loss of trust. Scientific
     integrity in the production and use of science by the Federal Government is critical to
     maintaining the trust of the American people and ensuring confidence in government
     decisions informed by science. We must restore the American people's faith in the
     scientific enterprise and institutions that create and apply scientific knowledge in service
     of the public good. Reproducibility, rigor, and unbiased peer review must be maintained.
     As a Department, we must do all that we can to support the restoration of gold standard
     science.
